

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         Castro (Removals: s.47 (as amended)) [2014] UKUT 00234(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 17 December 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                SINIA CASTRO
                               FREDDIE CASTRO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Blundell, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

   1. In s.47 of the 2006 Act as amended by  s.51  of  the  2013  Act,  sub-
      paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  subsection  (1A)(a)   refer   to   the
      application, not the decision.


   2. A decision reported in  the  Notice  of  Decision  in  the  form  "the
      Secretary of State has decided  that  you  should  be  removed"  is  a
      decision of which notice under s.47 (as amended) may be given.
   3. The amended s.47 is not drafted with reference to s.3C of the 1971 Act
      and is applicable where the decision refusing leave is made before the
      original leave expires, as well as where s.3C extends the  applicant's
      leave.


   4. When an applicant has put forward a comprehensive case  for  extension
      of leave and the application has been refused, there need be  no  more
      reasons for the removal  decision  than  those  already  expressed  as
      motivating the refusal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. When a person who has immigration leave  (as  distinct  from  a  person
    whose leave has expired) makes an application to the Secretary of State
    for a variation of his leave, then, if the leave  expires  without  the
    application for variation having been decided, s.3C of the  Immigration
    Act 1971 extends the leave.  The extension  is  for  three  potentially
    successive periods.  The first is a period until  the  application  for
    variation is decided (or earlier withdrawn):  this  is  the  effect  of
    s.3C(2)(a).  The second period  extends  the  leave  after  a  negative
    decision during the period of time in which an appeal could be brought,
    if the subject of the decision has a right of appeal  from  within  the
    United Kingdom (ignoring any possibility of an  appeal  out  of  time):
    s.3C(2)(b).  The third period applies if an appeal is  brought  by  the
    appellant from within the United Kingdom and extends while  the  appeal
    is pending: s.3C(2)(c).

 2. If the Secretary of State's  decision  on  the  application  is  indeed
    negative, it follows that the leave will expire at the end of the  last
    of the applicable periods, following which, if the applicant remains in
    the United Kingdom, he will be remaining without leave.   He  ought  to
    depart; and, because he is remaining without leave, he is  amenable  to
    removal under s.10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    decision to remove a  person  under  s.10  is  itself  an  "immigration
    decision" within the meaning of s.82(2) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, and in principle carries a right of appeal.  Thus,
    the decision to refuse leave, albeit often appealable, may not  be  the
    end of the matter: if a person is to be removed  a  further  appealable
    decision will be necessary.   And, because of the  effect  of  s.3C,  a
    s.10 decision cannot be given at the same time as the  refusal  of  the
    variation, because at that time  s.3C  operates  to  prevent  a  person
    having no leave.

 3. Section 47 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2006  was
    introduced in order to attempt to make  decision-making  in  this  area
    more effective.  It enabled a decision to remove the person to be  made
    during his s.3C leave; but the terms of the section expressly permitted
    such a decision  to  be  made  only  during  the  period  specified  by
    s.3C(2)(b).  That is to say, the period when the new  type  of  removal
    decision could be made began on the expiry of the s.3C(2)(a) period and
    ended when the time allowed for bringing an appeal  ended,  or  on  the
    earlier date on which a person actually gave notice of appeal.  But, as
    the Tribunal decided in Ahmadi v SSHD [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC), endorsed
    on appeal [2013] EWCA (Civ) 512, the notice of the s.47 decision  could
    not be given at the same time as the notice of the  variation,  because
    the period of leave  granted  by  s.3C(2)(a)  did  not  end  until  the
    individual had notice of the decision, so that a  purported  notice  of
    removal made contemporaneously with the  variation  decision  would  be
    made during the s.3C(2)(a) period, rather than the  s.3C(2)(b)  period.
    For that reason, a very large number of purported s.47  decisions  were
    invalid.  In Adamally & Jaferi v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT  00414  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal decided that those decisions were  essentially  separate,  and
    that the Tribunal should treat the s.47 decision as unlawful  but  deal
    on the merits with any appeal against the refusal of variation.

 4. Parliament responded to the decision in Ahmadi in s.51 of the Crime and
    Courts Act 2013.  When it took effect  on  8  May  2013  s.51  replaced
    s.47(1) of the 2006 Act with the following:

        "(1) Where the Secretary of State gives written notice  of  a  pre-
             removal decision to the person affected, the Secretary of State
             may -
                 (a)  in the document containing that notice,
                 (b)  in a document enclosed in the same  envelope  as  that
                 document,
                 (c)  otherwise on the occasion when that notice is given to
                 the person, or
                 (d) at any time after that occasion but  before  an  appeal
                    against  the  pre-removal  decision  is  brought   under
                    section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
                    Act 2002,
             also give the person written notice that the person  is  to  be
             removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  this   section   in
             accordance with directions given by an immigration  officer  if
             and when the person's leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom expires.


        (1A)  In subsection (1) "pre-removal decision" means -
                 (a)  a decision on an application -
                        (i)  for variation of limited leave to enter or
                           remain in the United Kingdom, and
                        (ii) made before the leave expires,
                 (b) a decision to revoke  a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
                    remain in the United Kingdom, or
                 (c) a decision to vary a persons leave to enter  or  remain
                    in the United Kingdom where the variation will result in
                    the person having no leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
                    United Kingdom."

 5. In the present case, the appellants,  who  are  husband  and  wife  and
    nationals of the Philippines, arrived in the United Kingdom separately,
    but  both  had  leave.   Before  their  leave  expired  they  sought  a
    variation, extending it so that the first appellant, Mrs Castro,  could
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  work,  her  husband,  Mr  Castro,
    remaining as her dependant, but also hoping to work.  They  made  their
    application on the basis of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and Appendix FM to the Statement of Changes in Immigration
    Rules, HC 395.  They claimed that they had been in the  United  Kingdom
    for a sufficient length of time to make their removal disproportionate.



 6. On 21 May 2013 the Secretary of State refused those applications.   The
    appellants were served with notices headed Refusal  to  Vary  Leave  to
    Remain and Decision to Remove.  The operative part of the notices  read
    as follows:

          "Decision to Refuse to Vary Leave to Enter or Remain


          Malik Law Chambers Solicitors applied on your behalf on  06  March
          2013 for variation of your leave to remain.  That application  has
          been refused.  Full details for this decision are provided in  the
          attached letter.


          Decision to Remove


          Consideration has also been given to your position in  the  United
          Kingdom.  The Secretary of State has decided that  you  should  be
          removed from the country by way of  directions  under  Section  47
          (Removal:  Person  with  statutorily  extended   leave)   of   the
          Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006".


    The accompanying letter gives full  reasons  for  the  refusal  of  the
    appellants' applications.

 7. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  I  Howard
    considered their appeals on the merits by reference to  Article  8  and
    concluded that they had no proper  basis  for  staying  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He thus dismissed their appeals against the refusal  to  vary
    their leave.  No further issue is taken on that  decision.   The  judge
    also referred briefly to s.51 of the 2013 Act and  stated  its  effect.
    He said:

          "As a consequence  the  removal  direction  given  under  the  new
          legislation is lawful and having dismissed the substantive appeals
          I similarly dismiss the section 47 appeals."

    Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was given  on  grounds  asserting
    that the decisions to remove the appellants are not lawful for  failure
    to comply with the terms of  s.47  (as  amended)  and  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003.  In his grounds and in his oral submissions
    Mr Malik makes four points, and we will deal with them in turn.

 8. First, Mr Malik draws attention to the phrase  in  s.47(1)  "where  the
    Secretary of State gives written notice of a  pre-removal  decision  to
    the person affected".  As Mr Malik correctly  points  out,  the  phrase
    "pre-removal decision" is  exclusively  defined  in  s.47(1A).   Unless
    there is a pre-removal decision as defined, there is no power to give a
    notice of removal under s.47.  Clearly in the present  case  paras  (b)
    and (c) of subsection (1A) are not applicable.   If  there  is  a  pre-
    removal decision it must be one within para (a).  Mr Malik's submission
    is that in the present case there was no  pre-removal  decision  within
    the meaning of para (a), because the decision was not "made before  the
    leave expires".  In Mr Malik's submission, the "leave" referred to must
    be that originally granted, not the leave as extended by s.3C.  In  the
    present case that leave expired on 23 March 2013, but the decision  was
    not made until 21 May 2013.  Thus, Mr Malik argues, there was no  "pre-
    removal decision" in the present case.

 9. We are confident that that interpretation of the section is  incorrect.
    There are several reasons.  The first and  most  obvious  is  that  the
    arrangement of the various parts of s.47(1A) makes it clear  that  sub-
    paras (1) and (2) are requirements of the application, not requirements
    of the decision.  That is apparent from the two  sub-paras'  appearance
    in parallel, connected by  the  word  "and".   The  two  sub-paras  are
    clearly intended to qualify the same noun;  and  that  noun  cannot  be
    "decision", because, although sub-para (ii) might grammatically  follow
    either "decision" or "application", sub-para (i) is phrased in  such  a
    way that it can only relate to the application.

10. The second reason is that if the decision were indeed made  before  the
    leave expired, it would be, unlike the decision specified in paras  (b)
    and (c), a decision which carried no statutorily extended  leave.   The
    types of decision specified in s.47(1A)(b) and (c) benefit  from  leave
    extended by s.3D of the 1971 Act,  which  is  analogous  to  s.3C,  but
    reflects the fact that  decisions  of  this  nature  are  not  made  on
    application by an individual.  But, as is apparent from the analysis of
    s.3C which we have already given, where the variation decision is  made
    before the original leave expires, s.3C has no  application:  even  the
    s.3C(2)(a) period does not begin.  Both the comparison with  the  other
    parts of the section and the legislative history of  s.47(1A)  make  it
    unlikely that para  (a)  is  intended  to  deal  with  a  decision  not
    previously covered by s.47, and to fail  to  deal  with  precisely  the
    situation which the original s.47 was supposed to cover, and in respect
    of which the amendment was  supposed  to  remedy  the  defects  of  the
    earlier version.

11. The third reason is slightly more complex.  At first sight it looks  as
    though the phrase "made before the leave expires" cannot refer  to  the
    application, because on the assumption that para  (a)  is  intended  to
    deal with leave extended by s.3C, there only ever is such leave if  the
    application was made before the "original" leave  expired.   It  looks,
    therefore, as though if sub-para (ii) applies to the application, it is
    entirely  unnecessary.   That,  however,  is  not  quite  right.    The
    difficulties arising  from  the  original  s.47  were  because  of  its
    specific reference to the terms of s.3C.   The  new  version  makes  no
    specific reference to s.3C.  It therefore needs to include, as part  of
    its own terms, the condition which causes s.3C leave to run.

12. It is for those reasons that we reject Mr Malik's first  ground.   Sub-
    para (ii)  of  s.47(1A)(a)  qualifies  the  word  "application".   That
    conclusion has another important consequence.  It is that  s.47(1)  now
    applies not only to cases where leave is extended by s.3C, but also  to
    those cases where a decision on an in-time application for variation is
    made before the (original) leave expires.  Those cases are, as we  have
    explained, not within s.3C; and, as  we  have  also  explained,  it  is
    inconceivable that only they were intended to be included now.  But the
    present wording of s.47(1) and 1(A) does not rely  on  s.3C,  does  not
    exclude them, and clearly includes them.

13. Mr Malik's second point is that s.47 gives power to  the  Secretary  of
    State to give written notice that the person "is to  be  removed...  if
    and when the person's leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    expires", as he points out, that is a power to give  a  decision  which
    takes effect in the future.  The wording of s.47 is paralleled by  that
    specifying  the   equivalent   appealable   immigration   decision   in
    s.82(2)(ha), "a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
    Kingdom".  Mr Malik draws attention to the wording of the  decision  in
    the present case, which is that "The Secretary  of  State  has  decided
    that you should be removed".  Mr  Malik  argues  that  that  is  not  a
    decision to take effect in the future, but what he calls a contemporary
    decision.

14. We disagree.  The word "should" has a considerable number of  meanings.
    The meaning here is not  a  statement  of  what  is  desirable  in  the
    present,  but  an  injunction  for  the  future,  in  the   appropriate
    grammatical mood for the direct  speech  indicated  by  the  proceeding
    "that".  The Secretary of State's decision "he  shall  be  removed"  is
    reported as "the Secretary of State has  decided  that  you  should  be
    removed".  The words "if and when your leave expires" are in  our  view
    unnecessary to validate the decision; the decision itself does not have
    the defect identified by Mr Malik.  It is, in form and in substance,  a
    decision of precisely the sort envisaged by s.47(1).

15. Mr Malik's third point is that the decision to  remove  is  ineffective
    for failure to give  reasons.   Regulation  (5)(1)(a)  of  the  Notices
    Regulations requires the notice of an immigration decision to  "include
    or be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for   the  decision  to
    which it relates".  Here the accompanying notice gave full reasons  for
    the decision to refuse the variation which the appellants  had  sought,
    but gave no  additional  reasons  for  the  decision  to  remove.   The
    question then must be whether the reasons given were adequate for  both
    decisions.   In  our  judgment,  they  are   adequate   to   meet   the
    circumstances of a case like this one.  The appellants have  put  their
    case in full in the context of their application.  The application  has
    been refused.  The necessary consequence is that at the expiry of their
    s.3C leave the appellants will, if they remain in the  United  Kingdom,
    be doing so without leave, which they are not entitled  to  do.   Their
    application gives their own view on their right to remain in the Untied
    Kingdom.  In the circumstances the reasons for the decision flow, in an
    obvious sense, from the application and its refusal, and so the reasons
    for the refusal of the variation, coupled with the application for  the
    variation and the fact that it has  been  refused  (all  of  which  are
    specified in the reasons letter) are  adequate  reasons  for  the  s.47
    decision.

16. No authorities were cited to us on the necessary content of reasons for
    a decision; but if either party had relied on the well-known passage of
    the speech of Lord Brown in  South  Bucks  District  Council  v  Porter
    (No.2) [2004] UKHL 33 at [36], we should  have  reached  precisely  the
    same view as a matter of law that we were able to reach applying common
    sense to the facts of the present case.

17.  In  his  grounds  Mr  Malik  raised  another  issue  on  the   Notices
    Regulations, which was that regulation 5(1)(b) requires a notice  of  a
    removal decision to specify the intended removal destination.  There is
    no doubt that the notice complies with  this  requirement,  because  it
    specifies that removal will be to the Philippines.

18. Mr Malik's fourth point was that a  clear  interpretation  of  s.47  is
    necessary because after a  s.47  notice  has  been  given,  the  person
    affected may be faced with detention pending  his  removal.   In  those
    circumstances, Mr  Malik  argued  that  s.47  should  be  construed  as
    narrowly as possible.

19. We would agree if there were any room for ambiguity, but there is  not.
    The meaning of the elements of s.47 identified in this appeal is clear.
     The s.47 decisions served on the appellants were lawful  ones.   Their
    appeals are dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                            Date: 7 May 2014
