
[pic]


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R(on the application of Tawakoli) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00235(IAC)


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                       Monday, 28 April 2014

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE allen

                                   Between

                               ahmad tawakoli

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms R Chapman, instructed by Bindmans LLP appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Ms N Patel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.









                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE ALLEN:  The  applicant  seeks  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decision of 22 July 2013 in which it  was  not  accepted  that  further
    submissions made by the applicant amounted to a fresh claim.

Background

2.   The applicant, who was born  in  December  1991,  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in December 2007.  He was reunited with his brother  Jawad  who
    was subsequently granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The applicant's asylum claim was refused in May 2009  but  he
    was granted discretionary leave until June of that year.  A  subsequent
    application for further leave to remain was refused  and  he  appealed.
    His appeal was dismissed and he became appeal rights  exhausted  on  12
    July 2010.

3.   He was encountered  while  working  illegally  in  June  2013  and  was
    arrested and detained.  On 4 July  2013  he  was  served  with  removal
    directions for 23 July 2013.  Detailed representations were made on  11
    July  concerning  his   conversion   to   Christianity,   and   further
    representations were made on 16th, 18th,  and  19th,  the  most  recent
    being in respect of his fianc�e Mihaela Manaila, a  Romanian  national.
    An application for judicial review was lodged with the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 22 July.  On the  same  day  the  respondent  served  her  decision.
    Amended grounds  of  challenge  were  lodged.   Later  that  day  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan refused an application for a stay of removal, and
    still later that day the respondent provided a further decision  letter
    addressing the applicant's letter of earlier in the day.  The applicant
    was removed to Afghanistan at 1:10am on 23 July by  way  of  a  charter
    flight.

4.    Subsequently  the  applicant's  representatives  passed  on   to   the
    respondent information as to problems he was said to  have  experienced
    after his return to Afghanistan.  These matters were set out in letters
    in August and September 2013.  In the meantime  the  respondent  served
    her Acknowledgment of Service and summary  grounds  of  defence  on  29
    August.  Permission to apply for judicial review was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins on 24 October 2013.  Amended grounds were lodged
    on 6 March 2014 and summary grounds of defence were lodged on 10  April
    2014.  It is relevant to note also that subsequent to the  problems  he
    says he experienced in Afghanistan,  the  applicant  made  his  way  to
    Bulgaria where he subsequently claimed asylum and which as I understand
    it was to lead to the Bulgarian authorities making  a  request  to  the
    United Kingdom on the day of the hearing to accept him under the Dublin
    111 Regulation.

5.   Ms Chapman's case is put first on the basis that  the  material  before
    the Secretary of State on 22 July 2013 was such that  she  should  have
    accepted that that, together with the previously  considered  material,
    amounted to a fresh claim and erred in law  as  a  consequence  of  her
    failure to do so.  In  the  alternative  Ms  Chapman  argues  that  the
    evidence of what befell the applicant after his return  to  Afghanistan
    amounts to foreseeable consequences of the respondent's decision and as
    a consequence the decision  falls  to  be  challenged  in  addition  in
    respect of that evidence.

6.   It seemed to me to be appropriate to hear arguments from both sides  on
    the issues raised as a whole rather than dealing with the issue of  the
    post-decision evidence as a preliminary matter.  For  the  purposes  of
    this decision I will consider first of all whether  the  evidence  that
    was available to the Secretary of State at the  time  of  her  decision
    taken with the previously considered material was such that  she  erred
    in law in not accepting that this was a fresh claim, and then go on  to
    address the position with regard to the  subsequent  material  and  its
    relationship to that decision.

7.   It is appropriate to start first with  the  applicant's  asylum  claim.
    His appeal against the refusal to grant further leave was heard  by  an
    Immigration Judge on 4 January 2010.

8.   He claimed that when he was about 7 years old the Taliban attacked  his
    village and he did not know what had happened to his  family.   He  and
    his cousin were taken by a man to Kabul where he  went  to  school  for
    some time but subsequently was made by this man to work  in  his  store
    and the man made him dance for other men and allowed them to  take  him
    to their houses and sexually abuse him.  Some time around the middle of
    2007 he came into contact with a person who by chance was able  to  put
    him in touch with his brother Jawad in England, and Jawad sent money to
    organise his journey to the United Kingdom.

9.   The applicant's claim was found  to  be  credible  by  the  Immigration
    Judge apart from one matter which is set out at paragraph  26(viii)  of
    his determination where he said he  found  implausible  claims  by  the
    applicant that his brother had not mentioned to him contact with  their
    family nor had they discussed the basis of his brother's asylum  claim.
    The judge made the point that this did  not  go  to  the  core  of  the
    applicant's claim.  Otherwise the claim was found to be credible.   The
    appeal was dismissed essentially on the basis that he would  no  longer
    face risk  of  the  kind  of  ill-treatment  that  he  had  experienced
    previously.  The judge thought he  would  probably  live  in  Kabul  on
    return and would not face persecution or serious harm on return  there.
    Indeed the judge also found that he did not face a  real  risk  in  his
    home area either.

10.  The first set of representations  made  to  the  respondent  after  the
    applicant's arrest on 27 June 2013 was made on 11 July 2013.  There was
    first a witness statement from Mihaela Manaila.  She said that she  had
    been in a relationship with the applicant since January 2013  and  they
    planned to get married.  She said that about three to four months  into
    their relationship he had started asking questions about  her  religion
    and  she  had  told  him  what  Christians  believed  and  after  those
    conversations he had admitted to her that he was Christian.  He said he
    had not been baptised but had been to  church  on  his  own.   She  had
    bought him a crucifix to wear about two months previously and he had it
    at home but could not wear it outside.  She said that he had  not  told
    anyone other than her that he was Christian and he was scared as to how
    people would react and on return to Afghanistan people would  find  out
    and would kill him.  She said that he did not pray as a Muslim  anymore
    and did not fast during  Ramadan  and  the  way  he  viewed  Islam  had
    changed.

11.  There was also a short letter from Ms Manaila's  brother  referring  to
    the fact that his sister and the applicant planned to get  married  and
    speaking positively of the applicant.  There was also  an  e-mail  from
    Shima Pourmokhtar who said that she had met the applicant about a  year
    ago and they had had Bible study  from  January  2013  and  also  Alpha
    course since April before he went  to  the  detention  centre  and  she
    referred to friends who had attended the courses  with  them.   In  the
    covering letter it was asserted that the applicant should be treated as
    an extended family member of an  EEA  national  on  the  basis  of  his
    durable relationship with Ms Manaila who  is  a  national  of  Romania.
    Reference was  also  made  to  the  country  guidance  decision  in  NM
    (Christian converts) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00045,  where  it  had
    been held that an Afghan Christian convert who could  demonstrate  that
    he had genuinely converted to Christianity from Islam was likely to  be
    able to show that he  would  be  at  real  risk  of  serious  treatment
    amounting to persecution if returned.

12.  Further representations were sent on 16 July 2013.  This  included  the
    same e-mail from Shima Pourmokhtar which was now signed by her as  well
    as two further friends of  the  applicant,  Imam  Rahimi  and  Ruhullah
    Sultani.  There was a statement from the applicant referring  first  to
    the extreme closeness he says he has to  his  brother  Jawad,  speaking
    also of his relationship with Ms Manaila including the fact  that  they
    are committed to getting married, and also addressing the issue of  the
    claimed conversion.  He describes the change in his views  about  Islam
    and his interest in Christianity which  led  him  since  meeting  Shima
    Pourmokhtar to spend time with her and other friends studying the Bible
    together.  He said that they had read the Bible in  Farsi  and  he  had
    attended an Alpha course.  He said he had attended the local church but
    stopped doing this as he became anxious about other  Afghan  people  in
    Bristol spotting him going into the church.  He says that he  was  very
    worried about telling Jawad  about  his  conversion  but  he  had  been
    supportive.  He refers to concerns he has as to what  would  happen  on
    return to Afghanistan as he would not want to  dress  in  a  particular
    way, attend prayers and fast during Ramadan.  There is also a statement
    from his brother Jawad who refers to the fact that he had had  an  idea
    that the applicant was reading about Christianity as  he  had  borrowed
    his phone, saw he had a couple of apps to do with Christian beliefs and
    subsequently the applicant had told him he believed in Christianity and
    Javad stood by his change of faith.  He refers to  their  closeness  as
    brothers and the responsibility he feels for the applicant and also the
    seriousness of the applicant's relationship with Ms Manaila.

13.  Subsequently, on 19 July 2013 the applicant's  solicitors  wrote  again
    enclosing a copy of Ms Manaila's passport  as  evidence  that  she  was
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

14.  This, then, was the evidence before the respondent when she  wrote  the
    two decision letters of 22 July 2013.  In the first letter of that date
    the respondent noted that the representations as to a fresh application
    for asylum were based on the applicant's religious views as a Christian
    convert and family and private life in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    noted that he claimed  he  was  in  a  relationship  with  an  Orthodox
    Christian from Romania and that he  had  been  attending  weekly  Bible
    studies in  a  church  in  Bristol.   It  also  noted  his  claim  that
    conversion  from  Islam  to  Christianity  was  punishable  by   death.
    Reference is made to the Home Office's own guidance which conceded that
    a Christian convert was  at  risk  of  persecution/Article  3  harm  in
    Afghanistan, and citing the case of NM.  The respondent then went on to
    say that in considering the  representations  it  was  noted  that  the
    applicant had supplied no evidence at all to support the claims that he
    had been attending Bible classes or church.  As regards the claim  that
    his partner was an Orthodox Christian from Romania  it  was  said  that
    significantly she had supplied no information in support of  his  claim
    to have converted to Christianity and his submissions on this issue did
    not  begin  to  demonstrate  that  he  had   genuinely   converted   to
    Christianity and as such it was not accepted that he would be  at  risk
    on return to Afghanistan on the basis of religious conversion.

15.  As regards his relationship with Ms Manaila, reference was made to  her
    witness statement and a copy of the bio data page from her passport and
    a copy of a council tax bill of 2 March 2013 that  had  been  provided.
    Reference was also made to the contents of her statement including  the
    duration  of  the  relationship  and  the  applicant's  conversion   to
    Christianity.

16.  The respondent commented on this that the applicant could  not  benefit
    from his relationship with Ms  Manaila  as  the  relationship  had  not
    existed for two  years  as  required  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    therefore he did not qualify for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of that relationship.  The decision-maker then went on  to
    quote from the Immigration Judge's determination where it had not  been
    accepted that the decision would interfere with either  his  family  or
    private life.  It had not been  accepted  that  the  applicant  enjoyed
    family life with Jawad.   It  was  said  that  no  new  or  significant
    evidence  had  been  submitted  that  would  justify  the  Home  Office
    departing from this decision.  The decision-maker then went on to refer
    to paragraph 353B of the Immigration  Rules,  noting  that  he  was  an
    illegal entrant who had failed to comply with the reporting process and
    absconded from immigration control for three years, that he had  failed
    to show that the length of time he had remained in the  United  Kingdom
    following the initial refusal of  his  asylum  claim  was  for  reasons
    beyond his control and that it was not considered that there  were  any
    circumstances within his immigration history  that  were  significantly
    compelling so as to make  the  grant  of  leave  under  paragraph  353B
    appropriate.  The respondent went on to refer to the paragraph 353 test
    and noted the requirements as set out in WM (DRC) v SSHD &  SSHD  v  AR
    (Afghanistan) [2006] EWCA Civ 1495. It had  been  determined  that  the
    submissions did not amount to a fresh claim  and  hence  there  was  no
    right of appeal against the decision.

17.   Detailed  further  representations  were  promptly  submitted  by  the
    applicant to the respondent, rehearsing  the  relevant  facts  and  the
    relevant law, and arguing that on the basis  of  such  matters  as  the
    conversion of the applicant to Christianity, the  country  guidance  in
    NM, the decision of the Supreme Court in HJ & HT [2010]  UKSC  31,  the
    fact of his engagement to Ms Manaila and his private  and  family  life
    with her and his relationship with his brother Jawad, that the material
    submitted was sufficiently different from the previous  claim  such  as
    arguably to create a realistic prospect of success.  It was also argued
    that it was clear from  the  asylum  process  guidance  in  respect  of
    further submissions that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  respondent  to
    consider whether or not to grant the applicant leave to remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  if  not,  to  go  on  and  consider  whether  the
    representations and evidence amounted to a fresh claim  and  if  so  to
    make an immigration decision which  would  give  rise  to  a  right  of
    appeal.  The point was also made that the guidance makes it clear  that
    if there is any uncertainty about whether to grant any form of leave it
    may be appropriate to invite the applicant to attend an interview.   It
    was noted that the applicant had not been interviewed to date.

18.  The respondent, as noted above, then sent the further  decision  letter
    of 22 July 2013.  Reference is made  there  to  the  evidence  supplied
    consisting of witness statements from Ms Manaila,  the  statement  from
    the applicant, the signed and dated letter from Ms Pourmokhtar and  the
    other two signatories and the statement from the  applicant's  brother.
    It was said that there was no reason why the uncorroborated comments in
    those statements should be accepted as they were  clearly  self-serving
    and subjective in their content and in those circumstances it  was  not
    accepted that he would be at risk on return to Afghanistan on the basis
    of religious conversion.

19.  In the meantime, and noting that  there  is  reference  to  it  in  the
    second letter of the respondent of 22 July 2013, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan had refused, earlier that day as referred to above, to  order  a
    stay on removal.  In his order Judge  Jordan  saw  nothing  to  require
    interim relief in relation to the claim to have formed  a  relationship
    with a Union Citizen as that could be processed in the normal way as an
    out-of-country application.  He commented that Article 8 did not  enter
    into consideration and that either the applicant had a right to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules or the Regulations or he did not and if  he
    did not it was not clear how Article 8 could  establish  a  substantive
    right not to be removed given the fact that  he  was  a  failed  asylum
    seeker who had failed to leave at the conclusion of the appeal process,
    remained and worked illegally.  He considered that  the  applicant  had
    waited for an  unnecessarily  long  period  to  take  legal  action  in
    relation to the proposed flight due  to  depart  at  ten  minutes  past
    midnight on 23 July.

20.  Judge Jordan also noted that the claimed conversion was  based  on  the
    submission that the applicant was "largely self-taught  in  matters  of
    faith" which he took to mean that there was no one from  a  church  who
    was able to vouch for his conversion.   He  noted  that  there  was  no
    suggestion that he was baptised or had been confirmed  or  received  in
    any particular church.  It was said  that  he  had  attended  an  Alpha
    course at his local church, there was nothing from the  church  however
    to verify this and that in  any  event  attending  a  course  was  very
    different from being committed to a religion that was so central to his
    own perception of self that he could not be removed.  He  regarded  all
    this as being far too vague to make out an arguable fresh claim case.

21.  Having received a  further  bundle  by  fax  subsequent  to  the  above
    remarks, he considered  that  the  respondent  had  plainly  not  acted
    irrationally in attaching little or no weight  to  statements  from  Ms
    Manaila and  the  applicant's  brother.   Whilst  the  amended  grounds
    asserted that other statements had been submitted to the respondent  as
    part of the fresh submissions, to which the respondent's letter made no
    reference, the respondent could not reasonably be challenged as  acting
    irrationally  in  attaching  little  or  no  weight  to  them  when  no
    explanation had been provided as to why a church leader could not  have
    vouched for his conversion.  He considered that no First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge would be likely to attach any significant weight to such material
    when there was or might be an unimpeachable source.

22.  Subsequently, on 24 October 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  granted
    permission to apply for judicial  review  on  the  basis  that  he  was
    particularly concerned that  the  respondent  might  have  reached  her
    decision without considering evidence that  supported  the  applicant's
    case.

23.  It is not entirely clear what the evidence to which  he  referred  was.
    It may be that it was a reference to the other statements  referred  to
    at paragraph 9 of Judge Jordan's order, which of course was made before
    the respondent's second letter of 22  July  2013  which  addressed  the
    subsequent statements.  In the alternative it is possible that it was a
    reference to further evidence that was put  in  after  the  applicant's
    removal and prior to  the  application  coming  before  Judge  Perkins,
    though it is not clear whether the matters referred to at paragraphs 13
    to 15 of Ms Chapman's skeleton argument concerning information provided
    to the applicant's brother and to  his  solicitors  and  communications
    from the applicant's solicitors to  the  respondent's  solicitors  were
    before the judge at the time when he granted permission.

24.  As set out above, I propose  to  consider  first  whether  the  matters
    before the respondent on 22 July were such that  she  can  properly  be
    said to have erred in law in her assessment of  whether  or  not  taken
    with the previously considered material the new material amounted to  a
    fresh claim.  The test is clearly set out at paragraph 353  of  HC  395
    and  clarified  in  the  UKBA's  Asylum  Process  Guidance  on  Further
    Submissions and as assessed in WM (DRC) v SSHD and  other  authorities.
    A point made by Ms Chapman with  reference  to  paragraph  4.1  of  the
    Asylum Process Guidance is that it is said there that all evidence must
    be considered when deciding whether the applicant qualifies  for  leave
    and that this will include all information or evidence put  forward  by
    him as well as new country information, new case  law  including  Upper
    Tribunal country guidance or a new policy.  It is  also  said  that  if
    there is any uncertainty about whether to grant any form of  leave,  it
    may be appropriate to invite the applicant to attend an  interview  and
    if so the usual interview process applies.

25.  On the first of those points, it was argued  by  Ms  Chapman  that  the
    respondent had not considered the background evidence against which the
    fresh claim application fell to be assessed.

26.  As regards the argument that  the  respondent  failed  to  address  the
    background evidence which shows risk on return to  an  Afghan  who  has
    converted to Christianity, the respondent referred at  paragraph  3  of
    the first decision letter of 22 July  2013  to  the  reference  in  the
    applicant's letter to the respondent's own guidance  conceding  that  a
    Christian  convert  was  at  risk  of  persecution/Article  3  harm  in
    Afghanistan, citing NM.  In my  view  that  demonstrates  a  sufficient
    awareness of and taking into account of the  background  against  which
    the claimed conversion had to be considered.  The respondent went on to
    reject the claimed conversion and I shall come on to the quality of the
    reasoning in this regard in a moment, but  in  my  view  there  was  no
    failure to set out the background evidence against which the claim  had
    to be considered.

27.  As regards the need to take  into  account  the  previously  considered
    material, the previously rejected asylum claim was of no real relevance
    to the situation the applicant now claimed to face.  The decision-maker
    referred at paragraph 5 of  that  letter  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    conclusions in respect of family and private life.   Ms  Chapman  makes
    the  point  that  the  applicant  was  found  to  be  credible  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  That is right, subject to the one paragraph that Ms
    Patel identified where there was  doubt  as  to  credibility.   I  have
    referred to that above, and in my view the judge was clearly  right  to
    regard it as not going to the core of the claim.   I  do  not  consider
    that the absence of any express reference to the  previous  credibility
    findings can be said to show any  error  of  law  in  the  respondent's
    reasoning in the decision letters.  The material put  forward  had  not
    already been considered, and the fact that the applicant had been found
    to be essentially credible by the Immigration Judge while  clearly  not
    irrelevant, was not at the forefront of the necessary consideration  as
    to whether or not a fresh claim was made out.

28.  Although there are deficiencies in the first letter which no  doubt  is
    what led to the applicant's quick response to  it,  in  my  view  those
    deficiencies were effectively cured in  what  was  said  in  the  third
    paragraph of the second letter of 22 July 2013.   There  the  decision-
    maker referred to all the evidence that had been put  in  but  did  not
    accept that the uncorroborated comments in those statements  should  be
    accepted as they were said to be clearly self-serving and subjective in
    their content.  The remarks of Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan that I  have
    quoted above may lend some extra support to the conclusions reached  in
    that regard as to why  the  evidence  put  forward  could  properly  be
    regarded as not giving rise to a fresh claim, although clearly one must
    concentrate on what  was  actually  said  by  the  decision-maker.   Ms
    Chapman attached particular weight to what was said by  Ms  Pourmokhtar
    as not being a family member of the applicant.  What was  said  by  her
    and endorsed by the two other signatories is however relatively  brief,
    and  the  remark  of  the  decision-maker  that  the  comments  in  the
    statements are  uncorroborated  can,  I  think,  properly  be  said  to
    encompass the fuller reasoning in Judge Jordan's  decision  (which  was
    noted in the second decision letter of 22 July 2013) that there was not
    the kind of substantiation that could  reasonably  have  been  expected
    from church figures or others as to the claimed conversion.

29.  Accordingly I consider that on the basis of  the  material  before  the
    respondent as at 22 July 2013, it was open to her to  conclude  as  she
    did that the fresh claims test was not satisfied and accordingly I find
    no error of law in her approach.

30.  The further point  is  set  out  in  essence  at  paragraph  43  of  Ms
    Chapman's skeleton and developed by her  in  oral  argument,  that  the
    evidence subsequently submitted showing that the applicant was arrested
    and detained on return to Afghanistan on account of his conversion from
    Islam to Christianity was required to be taken into account as being  a
    foreseeable consequence of the respondent's decisions of 22 July  2013.
    It is relevant,  in  passing,  to  note  that  the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 353 of HC 395 makes it clear  that  the  paragraph  does  not
    apply to claims made overseas.  Ms Chapman's argument is that  this  is
    not a claim made overseas since all this evidence  is  required  to  be
    taken into account in assessing the legality of  the  decisions  of  22
    July 2013.  In this regard she argued that  an  Article  3  breach  has
    occurred, and that that breach is a consequence  of  an  insufficiently
    rigorous consideration by the respondent given  that  it  was  entirely
    foreseeable from the evidence and the statements in  the  grounds  that
    the applicant would be at risk if returned to Afghanistan, particularly
    as a Christian convert during Ramadan.

31.  With respect to these submissions, Ms Patel argues  first  that  it  is
    clear from what was said by the Grand Chamber in Saadi v  Italy  [2009]
    49 EHRR 30 that the challenge can only be on the basis of alleged flaws
    in assessing the evidence as it was before the  decision-maker  at  the
    date of decision, and that it is artificial to  consider  the  position
    had the material been before the respondent as she  did  not  base  her
    decision on the situation in Afghanistan in light of  the  requirements
    of Article 3  because  she  did  not  accept  that  the  applicant  had
    genuinely   converted   to   Christianity.    She   also   points    to
    inconsistencies in the evidence which she says in any event do not show
    that an Article 3 breach has occurred.

32.  The point as it seems to me of particular relevance in this  regard  is
    the Saadi point.  Ms Chapman  pointed  to  paragraphs  128  to  133  in
    particular as identifying the relevant test,  including  paragraph  128
    that in determining whether substantial  grounds  had  been  shown  for
    believing there is a real risk of treatment incompatible  with  Article
    3, the court will take as its basis all the material placed  before  it
    or, if necessary, material obtained  proprio  motu.   Where  there  was
    evidence  capable  of  proving  there  were  substantial  grounds   for
    believing that the applicant would be exposed to a real risk of Article
    3 ill-treatment it was for the government to dispel any doubts about it
    and the court was required to examine the foreseeable  consequences  of
    sending the applicant to the receiving country and relevant  background
    evidence was clearly of significance in this regard.

33.  However the point upon which Ms Patel particularly relies  is  set  out
    at paragraph 133.  The relevant parts of this state as follows:-

         "133.    With regard to the material date,  the  existence  of  the
               risk must be assessed  primarily  with  reference  to  those
               facts which were known or ought to have been  known  to  the
               Contracting State at the time of expulsion. However, if  the
               applicant has not yet been extradited or deported  when  the
               Court examines the case, the relevant time will be  that  of
               the proceedings before the Court...".

34.  Ms Chapman referred to various paragraphs in the decision of the  Grand
    Chamber in MSS v Belgium and Greece (Application No.  30696/09)  but  I
    see nothing in those paragraphs to go against the  point  at  paragraph
    133 in Saadi set out above.  For example, it is said at  paragraph  359
    in MSS that it was up to the Belgian authorities not merely  to  assume
    that the applicant would be treated in conformity with  the  Convention
    standards but first to verify how the Greek authorities  applied  their
    legislation on asylum in practice and had they done so they would  have
    seen that the risks the applicant faced were real and individual enough
    to fall within the scope of Article 3.  These  paragraphs  have  to  be
    seen in the context of the conclusion to  which,  as  I  have  set  out
    above, I consider the respondent was entitled to come on  the  evidence
    before her on 22 July that the fresh  claim  test  was  not  satisfied.
    Accordingly, the evidence as to how the applicant would be  treated  if
    he were a convert, though it was noted in the decision letter, did  not
    give rise to an obligation to have factored into that decision evidence
    subsequently arising.   Accordingly,  I  do  not  accept  Ms  Chapman's
    argument which is put on the basis that it would be artificial for  the
    Secretary of State to pretend that nothing had happened.  The Secretary
    of State made her decision on the basis  of  the  evidence  as  it  was
    before her at the date of that decision, and I read Saadi as  authority
    for the proposition that that was all she was required to do  and  that
    the fact that subsequently evidence has emerged which would be relevant
    to be taken into account if a further decision fell to be  taken,  does
    not ipso facto preclude the legality of the decision that was made when
    it was made.

35.  As was common ground, the  position  now  is  somewhat  uncertain.   It
    seems that the Bulgarian authorities were at the date of hearing on the
    point of making a Dublin 111 request to the United Kingdom.   What  the
    outcome of such communication would be is unclear and  that  may  be  a
    matter for other proceedings should it arise.  On  the  basis  set  out
    above, I have concluded that it has not been shown that the  respondent
    committed any public law error in her decisions of 22  July  2013,  and
    therefore I decline to grant judicial review of those decisions.

36.  I will hear the parties on costs and any other outstanding issues  when
    this decision is handed down.  ~~~~0~~~~
