
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Arturas (child's best interests: NI appeals) [2021] UKUT 00237 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft Teams      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2021                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                               vaicys arturas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr E Peters, instructed by Wilson Nesbitt Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Under the laws of England and Wales and the law of Scotland,  a  failure
by the Secretary of State to comply with her duties under section  55(1)  or
(3) of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is highly  unlikely
to prevent the Tribunal from reaching a lawful decision in  a  human  rights
appeal involving a child: AJ (India) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1191; ZG  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2021] CSIH 16.

(2) Under the law of Northern Ireland,  the  position  is  different:  JG  v
Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber [2019] NICA 27.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The basic question in this case can be succinctly framed:  how,  if  at
    all, does a breach of  the  duty  in  section  55(3)  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act") to have regard to
    guidance given by the Secretary of State for  the  purpose  of  section
    55(1), impact upon the determination by the First-tier Tribunal  of  an
    appeal against the refusal of an individual's human rights claim?   The
    brevity of this question stands in stark contrast to the extent of  the
    analysis needed to produce an answer. Furthermore,  as  we  shall  see,
    that answer may itself depend on the part  of  the  United  Kingdom  by
    reference to whose law the question is posed.



A.   PRIMARY LEGISLATION

 2. For our purposes, the relevant provisions of section 55 of the 2009 Act
    are as follows:-

         "Duty regarding the welfare of children

         (1)  The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
             that -

             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.

         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-

             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;

             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer;

             (c)  any general customs function of the Secretary of State;

             (d)  any customs function conferred on  a  designated  customs
                  official.

         (3)  A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising
             the function, have regard to any guidance given to the  person
             by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1).

         ...

         (6)  In this section -

             "children" means persons who are under the age of 18;

         ..."

 3. The present provisions concerning an appeal against the  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim are as follows:-

         "82.     Right of appeal to the Tribunal

         (1)  A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -

         ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P, or

         ...

         84.  Grounds of appeal

         ...

         (2)  An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         ...

         113  Interpretation

         (1)  In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears-

         ...

         'human rights claim' means a claim made by a person that to  remove
         him from or require him to leave the United Kingdom  or  to  refuse
         him entry into the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6
         of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not  to  act
         contrary to Convention).

         ..."



B.   THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL AND ITS AFTERMATH

 4. The appellant, born in June 2000, is a citizen of Lithuania.  In  April
    2006, he moved from Lithuania to the Republic of Ireland  in  order  to
    join his mother.  She gave birth to a step-brother of the appellant  in
    July 2010.  In 2014, the appellant moved  to  Northern  Ireland,  along
    with his mother  and  step-brother.   In  December  2015,  following  a
    domestic conflict, the appellant was removed from the family  home  and
    housed by Social Services.

 5. At the time of his hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimes  in
    February 2020, the appellant  had  received  some  41  convictions  for
    criminal offences.  The appellant told Judge Grimes that he  was  in  a
    stable relationship with a girlfriend.  He said he  had  re-established
    good relations with his mother's husband and enjoyed spending time with
    his 9 year old step-brother.  He also referred to having a  baby  step-
    sister.

 6. Much of the decision of Judge Grimes is, understandably, taken up  with
    an analysis of the position of the appellant  as  a  foreign  criminal.
    Having turned specifically to Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  her  decision
    continued as follows:-

         "40. Mr Peters submitted that the strongest aspect to  this  appeal
             is the best interests of the appellant's younger brother.   In
             his submission there is a duty on the Secretary  of  State  to
             have regard to and act in the best interests of the child.  In
             his skeleton argument he set out extracts from the Home Office
             guidance entitled "Every Child Matters".   In  his  submission
             the Home Office decision-maker in this case failed to  mention
             the guidance and failed to discharge  the  relevant  statutory
             duty.  In his skeleton argument he submitted that  failure  to
             have regard to this guidance is a defect of such gravity  that
             this alone is almost always sufficient for a  decision  to  be
             quashed by way of a judicial review challenge  or  on  appeal.
             Mr Peters relied on the decisions in JO and Others (section 55
             duty) Nigeria {2014] UKUT 00517  (IAC)  and  JG  v  the  Upper
             Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber [2019] NICA 27.

         41.  I note that in the appellant's solicitors' representations  of
             27 March 2019 references made to section 55 and the  interests
             of the appellant's  stepbrother.   However,  no  evidence  was
             submitted  to  the  Home  Office  as  to  the  effect  of  the
             appellant's removal upon his brother.  In my view  it  is  not
             enough without more to assert that there will  be  a  negative
             impact on the appellant's brother.  In any event the Secretary
             of State did give consideration to the best interests  of  the
             appellant's brother at page 13  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
             letter.

         42.  As set out above there is little evidence before me as to  the
             child's opinions or as to the effect upon  the  child  of  the
             appellant's  deportation.   The  only  evidence  is  that  the
             appellant sometimes picks the child up from school.  In  fact,
             it may be the case  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant
             removes a disruptive and negative  influence  on  the  child's
             life.  On the basis of the evidence before me it is  difficult
             to reach a conclusion on the best interests of the appellant's
             brother.  Even if it  were  established  that  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests that the appellant  remain  in  the  UK
             this is  not  determinative  of  the  proportionality  of  the
             interference with the appellant's family life."

 7. At paragraph 48, having weighed all relevant factors, Judge Grimes  was
    satisfied that the deportation of the appellant  was  proportionate  to
    the respondent's legitimate aim of maintaining an effective  system  of
    immigration control.  Accordingly, she dismissed the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  As he had before Judge Grimes, Mr Peters submitted  in
    the application for permission that the  respondent  had  not  complied
    with her duty under section 55(3) of the 2009 Act to have regard to the
    relevant guidance; namely, "Every Child Matters: statutory guidance  to
    the UK Border Agency on making arrangements to  safeguard  and  promote
    the welfare  of  children"  (November  2009)  (hereafter  "Every  Child
    Matters" or "the guidance").  Attention  was  drawn  to  the  following
    passage in the respondent's decision to make  a  deportation  order  in
    respect of the appellant:-

         "Consideration has been given to whether you meet the private  life
         exception to deportation which is set out in paragraph 399A of  the
         Immigration Rules.  This exception applies where:

         (a)  the foreign criminal has been lawfully resident in the UK  for
             most of his life, and

         (b)  the foreign criminal is socially and culturally integrated  in
             the UK, and

         (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  foreign
             criminal's  integration  into  the  country  to  which  he  is
             proposed to be deported.

         All three limbs of the exception must  be  met  in  order  for  the
         public interest in deportation to be outweighed.

         It is not accepted that you have  been  lawfully  resident  in  the
         United Kingdom for  most  of  your  life.   This  is  because  your
         representations claim that you entered the UK in 2014, only 5 years
         ago, when you would have been 12 or 13 years old.

         It is not accepted that you are socially and culturally  integrated
         in the United Kingdom.  This is because you have chosen  to  commit
         41 offences whilst living here.  These actions are  not  indicative
         of someone who has integrated socially and culturally in the UK.

         It is not accepted that there would be very  significant  obstacles
         to your integration into the country to which  it  is  proposed  to
         deport you.  This is because  you  are  a  young  fit  and  healthy
         individual who has been training to be a barber in the UK.   It  is
         considered that you  could  use  these  skills  to  help  you  find
         employment in Lithuania.  Additionally, despite the fact  you  have
         no adequate family support in Lithuania because of the  health  and
         financial situation of your grandparents,  it  is  considered  that
         they will still be in a position to provide an  adequate  level  of
         support to  you  until  you  are  fully  integrated  into  life  in
         Lithuania.

         Consideration has been given to the best interests  of  your  step-
         brother, [Egor] under Section 55 of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009.  It is considered that Egor's best  interests
         will continue to be served by him being cared for  by  his  mother.
         There is no evidence to suggest that even if you were removed,  the
         level [of] care and support he  would  receive  would  be  anything
         other than safe and effective.  As stated above, you state in  your
         representations that you were removed from the family home in  2015
         and were housed in social  services.   You  were  not  returned  to
         [your] mother's address until August 2016.  In September  2016  she
         reported you to the police as you were offending despite  being  on
         bail.  You state you have been  looked  after  by  social  services
         since then.  You therefore do not reside with your mother or  step-
         brother and there is no indication that you are either dependant on
         them or them on you.  It is considered that you could  continue  to
         maintain your relationship with your family  via  modern  means  of
         communication and by way of visits outwith of the United Kingdom."

 9. Mr Peters placed reliance upon the judgment of McCloskey J, giving  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Northern  Ireland,  in  JG  v  Upper
    Tribunal, Immigration Asylum Chamber [2019] NICA  27.   We  shall  have
    occasion to consider that judgment in detail.

10.  Somewhat  problematically,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who   refused
    permission to appeal began her decision by stating that  "judgments  of
    the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland are not binding on decisions of
    the Upper Tribunal (IAC)". They are, of course, binding if and  to  the
    extent that the appeal is governed by the law of Northern Ireland.  The
    refusing judge said that the Court of Appeal in England and  Wales  had
    held in AJ (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1012; [2017]  Imm  AR  442
    that "the best interests of children  will  only  rarely  outweigh  the
    state's interests".  The grounds failed to explain  what  evidence  was
    before the respondent at the date of the respondent's decision.  In any
    event, in the refusing judge's view, Judge Grimes  had  considered  the
    submission that the respondent's decision was  "worthless  because  she
    had not considered the best  interests  of  the  appellant's  brother".
    Judge  Grimes  had  been  unarguably  correct  to  conclude  that  this
    submission was misconceived "because  the  Tribunal  has  the  duty  to
    consider the best interests of children".  There had not, in fact, been
    any evidence other than oral to show that the claimed siblings actually
    existed.  In any event, the oral evidence was that the appellant helped
    at home with the baby and sometimes picked up his younger brother  from
    school.  There was  no  evidence  of  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
    deportation on the younger brother.  Given the evidence  regarding  the
    periods of time spent by the  appellant  in  care,  together  with  his
    extensive criminal offending, it was difficult to see  how  an  ongoing
    relationship with the appellant  was  in  the  best  interests  of  his
    siblings.

11. The appellant sought judicial  review  in  the  Northern  Ireland  High
    Court, seeking to quash the Upper Tribunal's refusal of  permission  to
    appeal.  Amongst the grounds of challenge was that the refusal  ignored
    the respondent's "failure to comply with statutory guidance pursuant to
    section 55(3) of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and
    to assess the child's best  interests  without  the  relevant  evidence
    which the [respondent] had a duty to obtain  in  compliance  with  that
    statutory guidance".

12.  McAlinden J quashed the  refusal  of  permission,  following  which  a
    hearing  took  place  before  this  Chamber's  Vice  President  of  the
    outstanding application for permission to appeal.  In  his  ex  tempore
    decision, the Vice President  referred  to  the  section  55  issue  as
    follows:-

         "8.  The next question arises from the  judge's  disinclination  to
             make the findings she was invited to make on the  relationship
             of the five people who the appellant said lived at his  house.
             Those are the people to whom  I  have  already  referred:  his
             mother, her husband, her two other children and  himself.   As
             the judge said, there is  little  evidence  on  that.   It  is
             remarkable  that  there  was  no  evidence  at  all  from  the
             appellant's mother's husband; indeed, I am told by  Mr  Peters
             today that it was regarded as "impractical to  catch  up  with
             him" in order to obtain a witness statement from him, although
             the appellant regards him as living at home with him.  Be that
             as it may, the position is certainly that  the  appellant  and
             his younger brother do live together: there is no  real  doubt
             about that, I think.  I have called him "his younger brother",
             whatever the relationship precisely  is;  this  is  two  young
             boys, if I may so call them, living in  the  same  house  with
             their mother.

         9.   I regard the failure  to  reach  conclusive  findings  on  the
             precise relationships between  the  family  members  as  again
             irrelevant because the real issue is the extent to  which  any
             damage to the  brothers'  wellbeing  by  the  removal  of  the
             appellant should have been noticed  by  the  judge.   On  this
             point Mr Peters cites an earlier decision of this Tribunal  JO
             [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) decided at a time  when  there  was  a
             right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds that
             the decision against which the appellant appealed was "not  in
             accordance with the law".  That, as is well established over a
             series of decisions going back well into the 1980s, includes a
             quasi-judicial review function within the Tribunal system.  It
             was abolished by the modifications brought into the  2002  Act
             by the Immigration Act 2014.  As was said in  the  refusal  of
             permission, the ground now has to be [that]  rights  protected
             by the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 would be disproportionately infringed  by  the
             action proposed.  That leaves the appellant with the  task  of
             establishing what damage there would be to  himself  or  other
             family members such that it would be disproportionate in  this
             case to remove him.

         10.  As the judge pointed  out,  there  is  no  evidence  of  that.
             "There is no evidence as to  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
             deportation on his younger brothers" was the way she  put  it.
             Mr Peters' ground of appeal against that is that on the  basis
             either of JO or of other subsequent authority, there  is  some
             ground for saying, in Northern Ireland if not in the  rest  of
             the United Kingdom, that the appellant is entitled  to  remain
             silent on the impact on other young members of his  family  in
             circumstances in which he claims that the Secretary  of  State
             has failed to carry out  the  duty  imposed  by  s  55.   That
             strikes me, I have to say, as  an  extremely  frail  argument.
             But insofar as there may be a difference between the views  of
             the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland and the  rest  of  the
             United Kingdom, it is a point on which, although I  regard  it
             as having very little prospect of success, I  must,  I  think,
             grant  permission  for  the  matter  to  be   elaborated   and
             investigated by the Tribunal, which of course  is  a  Tribunal
             for the United Kingdom.

         11.  I therefore give permission only on the  grounds  set  out  in
             paragraphs 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30  of  Mr  Peters'  grounds  of
             appeal, as follows:

                  "26. Finally, the judge did not attach any weight  to  the
                      failure on the  part  of  the  Home  Office  decision
                      makers to discharge (or even consider) statutory duty
                      under  s  55(3)  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
                      Immigration Act 2009 (to have regard to any  guidance
                      given to Secretary of State).  The relevant  guidance
                      in the 2009 UKBA document 'Every Child Matters'.

                  27.  In JO and Others (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
                      UKUT 00517 (IAC)  "cursory,  casual  or  superficial"
                      engagement with the guidance was said "not to  be  in
                      accordance with the specific duty imposed by  section
                      55(3) or the overwhelming duty to have regard to  the
                      need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  of  any
                      children involved in  or  affected  by  the  relevant
                      factual matrix" - (para 12)

                  28.  At para 42 the Judge accepts that  "there  is  little
                      evidence before [her] as to the child's  opinions  or
                      as to the effect upon the child  of  the  appellant's
                      deportation."

                  29.  However the judge fails to acknowledge that this lack
                      of evidence is a result of the non-compliance of  the
                      Home Office caseworkers  with  the  SSHD's  guidance.
                      Such  non-compliance  amounts  to  grave  breach   of
                      statutory duty under s  55(3)  and  is  sufficient  -
                      without more - to undermine the Home Office decision.

                  30.  JO is a solid authority behind the  proposition  that
                      failure on the part of the FtT  to  consider  whether
                      the  Secretary  of  State  had  complied   with   the
                      statutory duty imposed by section 55 - namely to have
                      regard  to  the  statutory   guidance   -   "is   the
                      fundamental  error  of  law   infecting   the   FtT's
                      decision." - (paras 16-17).""




C.   GUIDANCE AND CASE LAW

13. At paragraph 3 above, we have set out the  current  relevant  statutory
    provisions regarding an appeal against the refusal by the respondent of
    a human rights claim. These provisions stand in strong contrast to  the
    previous regime. Until its wholesale amendment by the  Immigration  Act
    2014, section 82 of the 2002 Act enabled a  person  to  appeal  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  against  "an  immigration  decision",  which  was
    defined  by  section  82(2).    Amongst   the   refusals,   variations,
    revocations and other decisions set out in section 82(2)  were  certain
    kinds of removal decision.  Section 84(1) set out  seven  grounds  upon
    which an appeal against  an  immigration  decision  could  be  brought.
    Amongst them was:-

         "(e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;
             ..."

14. Section 84(1)(e) provided a "catch-all" for such  decisions,  alongside
    the  particular  forms  of  unlawful  decisions  described  in  section
    84(1)(a) to (d).  As established in Abdi v SSHD [1995] EWCA Civ 27, the
    ground in section 84(1)(e) conferred upon the First-tier Tribunal  (and
    its predecessor) a public  law  power  of  review,  whereby  an  appeal
    against a decision which was not in accordance with the law fell to  be
    allowed, with the result that the respondent had then to make a  fresh,
    lawful decision.



(i)  "Every Child Matters"

15. Before considering the  case  law,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the
    statutory guidance in "Every Child Matters".  As will be seen, some  of
    the ensuing cases appear, with respect,  to  misconstrue  or  at  least
    gloss over what the guidance actually says.

16. Paragraph 5 describes the guidance as setting out "the key arrangements
    for safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children".  The  guidance
    is said to be modelled  on  that  which  supports  section  11  of  the
    Children Act 2004.  Part 1 of the guidance is intended  to  make  clear
    how the work of (what was then) the UK  Border  Agency  fits  into  the
    wider arrangements, although not all of Part 1 is said to be  "directly
    relevant to" the UKBA.  Part 2 sets out how  the  general  arrangements
    apply specifically to the UKBA.  Paragraph 6 reads as follows:-

         "6.  This guidance is issued under section 55 (3) and 55 (5)  which
             requires   any   person   exercising   immigration,    asylum,
             nationality and  customs  functions  to  have  regard  to  the
             guidance given to them for the purpose  by  the  Secretary  of
             State.  This means they must take this guidance  into  account
             and, if they decide to depart from it, have clear reasons  for
             doing so."  (original emphasis)

17. Paragraph 1.2 explains that, since the UKBA operates across the  United
    Kingdom, it was considered necessary to place the duty to safeguard and
    promote the welfare of children, as it concerns the  UKBA,  in  an  Act
    dealing directly with the UKBA's work; namely, the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Paragraph 1.3 provides that the  section  55
    duty "does not give the UK Border Agency any new functions, nor does it
    over-ride its existing functions".  Rather, it  requires  the  UKBA  to
    "carry out its existing functions in a way that takes into account  the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children".

18. Paragraph 1.4 refers to the definition of  safeguarding  and  promoting
    the welfare of children, as found in the guidance to section 11 of  the
    2004 Act.  It means protecting children from  maltreatment;  preventing
    impairment of children's health or development; ensuring that  children
    grow up in circumstances consistent with  the  provision  of  safe  and
    effective care; and  undertaking  that  role  so  as  to  enable  those
    children  "to  have  optimum  life  chances  and  to  enter   adulthood
    successfully".

19. Paragraph 1.6 describes each agency as having  different  contributions
    to make towards safeguarding and promoting  the  welfare  of  children,
    depending on the  functions  for  which  the  agency  in  question  has
    responsibility.  The UKBA's main contribution is to identify and act on
    their concerns about the welfare of children with whom they  come  into
    contact.

20. In similar vein, paragraph 1.13 states that the way in  which  agencies
    work with or have contact with individual children and  their  families
    will differ, depending on the functions of each agency.  Paragraph 1.14
    describes the key features of an  effective  system  as  ensuring  that
    children and young people are listened to and what they have to say  is
    taken seriously and acted on; and that:-

         ".   Where possible the wishes and feelings of the particular child
             are obtained and taken into account when deciding on action to
             be undertaken in relation to him  or  her.   Communication  is
             according to his or  her  preferred  communication  method  or
             language;

         ..."

21. Paragraph 1.15 introduces the principles, set out  in  paragraph  1.16,
    that underpin work with children and their families  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of  children.   The  principles  "are  relevant  to
    varying degrees depending on the functions and level of involvement  of
    the particular agency and the individual practitioner  concerned.   The
    UK Border Agency should seek to reflect them as appropriate"  (original
    emphasis).

22. Among the principles in paragraph 1.16 are that work with children  and
    families should be:-

         ".   child centred

         ...

         .    supporting the achievement of the best possible  outcomes  for
             children and improving their well-being;

         .    holistic in approach

         ...

         .    designed to identify and provide the  services  required,  and
             monitor  the  impact  their  provision  has   on   a   child's
             developmental progress;

         ...

         .    informed by evidence."

23. At paragraph 1.17(b), detail is given about the involvement of children
    and families:-

         "b.  In order to appreciate the child's needs  and  how  they  make
             sense of their circumstances it is  important  to  listen  and
             take account  of  their  wishes  and  feelings.   It  is  also
             important  to  develop  a  co-operative  constructive  working
             relationship with parents or caregivers so that they recognise
             that they are being respected and  are  being  kept  informed.
             Where there is respect and honesty in relating to parents they
             are likely  to  feel  more  confident  about  providing  vital
             information  about   their   child,   themselves   and   their
             circumstances."

24. Part 2 of Every Child Matters is entitled "The Role of  the  UK  Border
    Agency in  Relation  to  Safeguarding  and  Promoting  the  Welfare  of
    Children".  Paragraph 2.1 describes the nature  of  the  UKBA  and  its
    primary duties, which are "to maintain a secure border, to  detect  and
    prevent border tax fraud,  smuggling  and  immigration  crime,  and  to
    ensure controlled, fair immigration that protects the public  and  that
    contributes to economic growth and benefits the country".

25. Paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 read as follows:-

         "2.4 The UK Border Agency's main contributions to safeguarding  and
             promoting the welfare of children include:

             .     Ensuring  good  treatment  and  good  interactions  with
                  children throughout the immigration and customs process.

             .    Applying laws and policies that prevent the  exploitation
                  of children throughout and following  facilitated  illegal
                  entry and trafficking.

             .    Detecting at the border  any  material  linked  to  child
                  exploitation through pornography.

         2.5. Other parts of the UK Border Agency's contribution include:

             .    Exercising vigilance when dealing with children with whom
                  staff come into contact and identifying children  who  may
                  be at risk of harm.

             .    Making timely and appropriate referrals to agencies  that
                  provide ongoing care and support to children."

26. Paragraphs 2.7 and 2.8 read as follows:-

         "2.7 The UK Border Agency must also act according to the  following
             principles:

             .    Every child matters even if they are someone  subject  to
                  immigration control.

             .    In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the
                  Child the best interests of the child will  be  a  primary
                  consideration   (although   not   necessarily   the   only
                  consideration) when making decisions affecting children.

             .    Ethnic identity, language, religion,  faith,  gender  and
                  disability are taken into  account  when  working  with  a
                  child and their family.

             .    Children should be consulted and the wishes and  feelings
                  of children taken into account wherever  practicable  when
                  decisions affecting them are made, even though it will not
                  always be possible to reach decisions with which the child
                  will agree.  In instances where  parents  and  carers  are
                  present they will  have  primary  responsibility  for  the
                  children's concerns. (Our emphasis)

              .   Children should have their applications dealt with  in  a
                  timely way and that minimises the  uncertainty  that  they
                  may experience.

         2.8  When speaking to a child or  dealing  with  a  case  involving
             their welfare, staff must be sensitive to each child's  needs.
             Staff must respond to them in a way that communicates respect,
             taking into account their needs, and their responsibilities to
             safeguard and promote their welfare."

27. Under the  heading  "Work  with  Individual  Children"  paragraph  2.18
    provides:-

         "2.18    This guidance cannot cover all the different situations in
                which  the  UK  Border  Agency  comes  in  to  contact  with
                children.  Staff need to be ready to use their judgement  in
                how to apply the duty in particular situations and to  refer
                to the detailed operational guidance which applies to  their
                specific area of work.  In general, staff should seek to  be
                as responsive as they reasonably can be to the needs of  the
                children with whom they  deal,  whilst  still  carrying  out
                their core functions."

28. At paragraph 2.19, examples are given  of  where  the  UKBA  must  take
    action, upon encountering a child.  Where there  is  doubt  on  arrival
    about who is caring for the child, staff must seek  evidence  that  the
    particular named adult is  caring  for  the  child  with  the  parent's
    consent.  Special care must be taken when  dealing  with  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking children, for instance by checking with them  that  they
    understand the process when making or  resolving  their  asylum  claim.
    Families who have no right  to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  "must  be
    encouraged to leave voluntarily and detention should be used only as  a
    last resort and for  the  shortest  possible  time",  family  detention
    arrangements respecting as fully as possible  the  principle  that  the
    primary responsibility for a child during any period of detention still
    rests with the parents.

29. Paragraph 2.22 reads as follows:-

         "2.22    The UK Border Agency must always  make  a  referral  to  a
                statutory agency responsible for child protection  or  child
                welfare such as the  police,  the  Health  Service,  or  the
                Children's Department of a Local Authority in the  following
                circumstances:

                .   When  a  potential   indicator   of   harm   (the   most
                    comprehensive such list is found in Working Together  to
                    Safeguard Children who have been  Trafficked  and  their
                    application is wider than trafficking cases  alone)  has
                    been identified.

                .  When a child appears to have no adult to  care  for  them
                    and the Local Authority has not been notified.

                .  When the child appears to be cared for by a person who is
                    not a close relative (i.e.  where  a  private  fostering
                    arrangement has been identified). The Children Act  1989
                    (Part  IX,  section  66)  defines   privately   fostered
                    children.  All professionals and agencies that work with
                    children must establish  the  relationship  that  exists
                    between any child and those who care for him or her.  If
                    that relationship appears  to  be  a  private  fostering
                    relationship  -  or  if  the  relationship   cannot   be
                    established - a referral to the relevant Local Authority
                    must be made."

30. It is worthwhile at this point to make the following observations about
    Every Child Matters. The respondent's border officials have,  as  their
    primary duties, the maintenance  of  the  United  Kingdom's  system  of
    immigration controls.  The nature of the duties of those  officials  is
    such that the  main  contribution  they  can  make  to  the  principles
    enshrined in the guidance is "to identify and  act  on  their  concerns
    about the welfare of children with whom they come into contact",  as  a
    result of the  discharge  of  their  immigration  functions.   In  that
    regard, the main situations in which the guidance is relevant  will  be
    where the immigration officials first encounter a child who has arrived
    in the United Kingdom, whether with or without those who  contend  that
    they have responsibility for that  child;  and  when  arrangements  are
    underway for the removal of the child from the United Kingdom.

31. The principle in paragraph 2.7 that children should  be  consulted  and
    their wishes and feelings taken into account is qualified by the  words
    "wherever practicable".  Importantly, "Where  parents  and  carers  are
    present they  will  have  primary  responsibility  for  the  children's
    concerns".   There  is  nothing  in  the  guidance  which  states  that
    immigration officials have an obligation to obtain (or even to consider
    obtaining) expert evidence, such as psychological  reports  or  reports
    from social workers, concerning what may, or may not, be in the child's
    best interests, irrespective of the child's own wishes and feelings.

32. We can now turn to the case law concerning section 55 of the 2009  Act.





(ii) Case law

33. The leading authority on section 55 continues to  be  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4; [2011] Imm AR
    395.  In her judgment, Lady Hale described the  "overarching  issue  in
    this case" as being "the weight to be given to the  best  interests  of
    children who are affected by the decision to remove or  deport  one  or
    both of their parents from  this  country".   She  traced  the  growing
    emphasis placed by the European Court of Human Rights on the  interests
    of children, in the  context  of  removal  decisions,  identifying  the
    connection with general principles of international law; in particular,
    Article 3(1) of the United Nations Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the
    Child:-

         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken  by  public
         or  private   social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

34. Lady Hale's judgment proceeded as follows:-


         "23. This is a binding obligation in  international  law,  and  the
             spirit, if not the precise language, has also been  translated
             into our national law.   Section 11 of the Children  Act  2004
             places a duty upon a wide range of public bodies to carry  out
             their functions having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and
             promote the welfare of children.  The immigration  authorities
             were at first excused  from  this  duty,  because  the  United
             Kingdom  had  entered  a  general  reservation  to  the  UNCRC
             concerning immigration  matters.   But  that  reservation  was
             lifted in 2008 and, as a result, section 55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  now  provides  that,  in
             relation  among  other  things  to  immigration,   asylum   or
             nationality, the Secretary of State must make arrangements for
             ensuring that those functions "are discharged having regard to
             the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who
             are in the United Kingdom".

         24.  Miss Carss-Frisk acknowledges that this duty applies, not only
             to how  children  are  looked  after  in  this  country  while
             decisions about immigration, asylum,  deportation  or  removal
             are being made, but also to the  decisions  themselves.   This
             means that any decision which is taken without  having  regard
             to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of  any
             children involved will not be "in accordance with the law" for
             the purpose of article 8(2).  Both the Secretary of State  and
             the tribunal will therefore have  to  address  this  in  their
             decisions."

35. At paragraph 25, Lady Hale noted that it  was  clear  from  the  recent
    jurisprudence  that  the  Strasbourg  Court   would   expect   national
    authorities to apply article 3(1) and threat the best  interests  of  a
    child as "a primary consideration", which, she emphasised, was not  the
    same  as  "the  primary  consideration",  still  less  "the   paramount
    consideration".

36. Drawing on the UNHCR Guidelines on determining the  best  interests  of
    the child (May 2008), Lady Hale emphasised the distinction to be  drawn
    between decisions "which directly affect the child's  upbringing,  such
    as the parent or other person with whom she is to live,  and  decisions
    which may affect her more indirectly, such as decisions about where one
    or both of her parents would live".  Even in the latter case,  however,
    the best interests of the child must be a  primary  consideration.   In
    this regard, Lady Hale cited with approval the judgment of the  Federal
    Court of Australia in Wan v Minister for Immigration and Multi-Cultural
    Affairs [2001] FCA 568.  She then said:-

         "Provided that the Tribunal did not treat any  other  consideration
         as inherently more significant  than  the  best  interests  of  the
         children,  it  could  conclude  that  the  strength  of  the  other
         considerations outweighed them.  The important thing, therefore, is
         to consider those best interests first".  (paragraph 26)

37. At paragraph 29, Lady Hale held that the "best interests of the  child"
    ... "broadly means the well-being of the child".  Having  examined  the
    relevance of the child's nationality, Lady Hale stated at paragraph  33
    that "in making the proportionality assessment  under  article  8,  the
    best interests of the child must  be  a  primary  consideration.   This
    means they must be considered first".

38. The concluding paragraphs 34 to 37 of Lady Hale's judgment  are  headed
    "Consulting the Children".  Although they are not invoked by courts and
    tribunals as frequently as the passages we have  just  referenced,  for
    reasons that will become plain they possess significance  in  this  and
    other cases, where the focus is on the effect of an alleged failure  by
    the respondent to comply with the duty in section  55(3)  of  the  2009
    Act.  Accordingly, the paragraphs merit citation in full:-


         "34. Acknowledging that the best interests of the child must  be  a
             primary consideration in these cases  immediately  raises  the
             question of how these are to be discovered. An important  part
             of this is discovering the child's own views.  Article  12  of
             UNCRC provides:

             "1.  States Parties shall assure to the child who  is  capable
                   of forming his or her own  views  the  right  to  express
                   those views freely in all matters  affecting  the  child,
                   the  views  of  the  child  being  given  due  weight  in
                   accordance with the age and maturity of the child.

             2.   For this  purpose,  the  child  shall  in  particular  be
                   provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial  and
                   administrative proceedings affecting  the  child,  either
                   directly, or through a representative or  an  appropriate
                   body, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of
                   national law."

         35.  There are circumstances in which separate representation of  a
             child in legal proceedings about her future is  essential:  in
             this country, this is so when a child  is  to  be  permanently
             removed from her family in her own best interests.  There  are
             other circumstances in which it may be desirable, as  in  some
             disputes between parents about a child's residence or contact.
             In most cases, however, it will  be  possible  to  obtain  the
             necessary information about the child's welfare and  views  in
             other ways. As I said in EM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for
             the Home Department [2008] UKHL 64, [2009] 1 AC 1198, at  para
             49:

                  "Separate consideration and separate  representation  are,
                  however, two different things.  Questions may have  to  be
                  asked  about  the  situation  of  other  family   members,
                  especially children, and about their views.  It cannot  be
                  assumed that the interests of all the family  members  are
                  identical.  In particular, a  child  is  not  to  be  held
                  responsible for  the  moral  failures  of  either  of  his
                  parents.  Sometimes, further information may be  required.
                  If the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
                  or, more probably, the local children's services authority
                  can be persuaded to help in difficult cases, then so  much
                  the better.  But in most  immigration  situations,  unlike
                  many ordinary abduction cases, the interests of  different
                  family members are unlikely to be  in  conflict  with  one
                  another. Separate legal  (or  other)  representation  will
                  rarely be called for."

         36.  The important thing is  that  those  conducting  and  deciding
             these cases should be alive to the point and prepared  to  ask
             the right questions.  We have been told about a  pilot  scheme
             in the Midlands  known  as  the  Early  Legal  Advice  Project
             (ELAP). This is designed to improve the quality of the initial
             decision, because the  legal  representative  can  assist  the
             "caseowner" in establishing all the facts of the claim  before
             a decision is made.   Thus  cases  including  those  involving
             children  will  be  offered  an  appointment  with   a   legal
             representative, who has had time to  collect  evidence  before
             the interview.  The Secretary of State tells us that the pilot
             is limited to asylum claims and does not apply to pure article
             8 claims.  However, the two will often go hand in  hand.   The
             point, however, is that it is one way of  enabling  the  right
             questions to be asked and answered at the right time.

         37.  In this case, the mother's representatives did obtain a letter
             from the children's school and a report from a youth worker in
             the Refugee and Migrant Forum of East London  (Ramfel),  which
             runs a Children's Participation Forum and other activities  in
             which  the  children  had  taken  part.  But  the  immigration
             authorities must be prepared  at  least  to  consider  hearing
             directly from a child who wishes to express a view and is  old
             enough to do so. While their interests  may  be  the  same  as
             their parents' this should not be taken for granted  in  every
             case. As the Committee on the Rights of  the  Child  said,  in
             General Comment No 12 (2009) on the Right of the Child  to  be
             Heard, at para 36:

                  "in many cases . . . there are  risks  of  a  conflict  of
                  interest  between  the  child  and  their   most   obvious
                  representative (parent(s)). If the hearing of the child is
                  undertaken through  a  representative,  it  is  of  utmost
                  importance  that  the  child's   views   are   transmitted
                  correctly to the decision-maker by the representative."

             Children can sometimes surprise one."

39. Lord Brown and Lord Mance agreed with Lady Hale, as did Lord Hope,  who
    added some observations of his own.  So too did Lord Kerr.

40. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74;
    [2014] Imm AR 479, Lord Hodge, at paragraph 10, paraphrased  the  legal
    principles deriving from ZH (Tanzania), H v  Lord  Advocate  [2012]  SC
    (UKSC) 308 and H (H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2013]
    1 AC 338 as follows:-

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

41. We now come to the cases where section 55 has been  considered  in  the
    wake of the Supreme Court's judgments.  In  Tinizaray  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011]  EWHC  1850  (Admin)  HHJ  Anthony
    Thornton QC quashed decisions to grant indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the basis that  the  decisions  about  the  family  were  not  properly
    informed  about  what  might  be  the  best  interests  of  the   first
    applicant's 9 year old daughter, Angeles.  At paragraph 24,  the  Judge
    said this:-

         "24. As the guidance makes clear, it  is  not  sufficient  for  the
             decision-maker to rely solely on information volunteered by  a
             child's  parent,  particularly  if  it  is  clear  that   that
             information is either incomplete or potentially  slanted.   In
             such cases, further information must be sought by the decision-
             maker including,  in  appropriate  cases,  interviews  of  the
             applicant and separate interviews of the child, questionnaires
             and seeking or soliciting the views, assessments  and  reports
             of other agencies such as  local  authority  social  services,
             CAFCAS or local children's welfare groups."

42. At paragraph 25, he held that it was "difficult to see how  [Angeles's]
    views could be objectively and fairly obtained  without  someone  other
    than [her mother] speaking to her and exploring with her in  depth  her
    feelings, attitudes and preferences".  It was also difficult to see how
    the decision-maker  could  proceed  "without  first  commissioning,  or
    seeking from [the mother] an appropriate assessment or report from that
    third party source".


43. Tinizaray was considered by the Court  of  Appeal  in  SS  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550;  [2013]
    Imm AR 1106.  SS was an appeal against the decision of the decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal to dismiss an appeal against deportation,  where  it
    was asserted that deportation would breach the Article 8 rights of  the
    proposed deportee and his child.  Beginning at paragraph  33,  Laws  LJ
    said this:-


         "33. A principal focus of Mr Mahmood's  argument,  consistent  with
             the grant of permission by Elias LJ, was the need for a proper
             "evaluation, discovery or ascertainment of the best  interests
             of the child".  The means of achieving this necessity was,  he
             submitted, through the imperatives of s.55 of the 2009 Act and
             in particular the guidance - "Every Child Matters - Change for
             Children" - issued in November 2009 under s.55(3).  It will be
             recalled that  HHJ  Thornton  referred  to  this  document  in
             Tinizaray.  Much of the guidance is, with great respect,  cast
             in  relatively  general  terms.   Mr   Mahmood   referred   in
             particular to paragraphs 1.16 and 2.7.  The former contains  a
             list of prescriptions for "work with  children  and  families"
             which, among other  things,  should  be  "child  centred"  and
             "holistic in approach".  The latter sets out principles  which
             the UKBA should follow.  The first of these  is  "Every  child
             matters even if they (sic) are someone subject to  immigration
             control".  The second, citing the  UNCRC  and  reflecting  the
             decision in ZH, states that "the best interests of  the  child
             will be a primary consideration".

         34.  The concrete proposition which I think Mr Mahmood  draws  from
             the guidance, and some of the learning, is that in determining
             an Article 8 claim where a child's rights  are  affected,  the
             child's best interests must be properly gone into: that is  to
             say they must be treated as a primary consideration,  and  the
             court or tribunal must be armed -  if  necessary  by  its  own
             initiative - with the facts required for a careful examination
             of those interests, and where in truth they lie.   Mr  Mahmood
             submits that was not done in this case.

         35.  While in very general terms I  would  not  quarrel  with  this
             proposition (though I consider that the circumstances in which
             the tribunal should exercise an inquisitorial function on  its
             own initiative will be extremely  rare),  its  practical  bite
             must plainly depend on the nature of the case in hand.  It  is
             necessary to consider the deportation of foreign criminals  as
             a particular class of case; and, of course, the  circumstances
             of this case itself."

44. Agreeing with Laws LJ, Mann J added the following:-

         "62. In this appeal counsel for the appellant  placed  considerable
             emphasis on the need for the Tribunal to satisfy itself as  to
             the interests of the child in  such  a  way  as  suggested  an
             inquisitorial procedure.   I  agree  with  Laws  LJ  that  the
             circumstances in  which  the  Tribunal  will  require  further
             inquiries to be made, or evidence to be obtained,  are  likely
             to be extremely rare.  In  the  vast  majority  of  cases  the
             Tribunal will expect the relevant interests of the child to be
             drawn to the attention of the decision-maker by the individual
             concerned.  The decision-maker would then make such additional
             inquiries as might appear to him or her to be appropriate. The
             scope for the Tribunal  to  require,  much  less  indulge  in,
             further inquiries of its own  seems  to  me  to  be  extremely
             limited, almost to the extent that I find it hard  to  imagine
             when, or how, it could do so."

45.  Both  Tinizaray  and  SS  (Nigeria)  fell  for  consideration  in   AN
    (Afghanistan) and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1189. Underhill LJ held that the  judge  concerned  had
    misunderstood that the child's educational opportunities would be  "far
    poorer if she were returned to Afghanistan than if she remained in  the
    UK". Underhill LJ doubted "whether further detailed findings about  the
    kind of education that she might have hoped to  pursue  here  or  about
    what was available in Afghanistan would have contributed  much  to  the
    overall assessment",  which  the  judge  had  to  make.   Underhill  LJ
    continued:-


         "21. It is at this stage of the  argument  that  Mr  Kadri  invokes
             Tinizaray.  That was a case in which a mother and daughter had
             entered the UK illegally from Ecuador in  2001;  the  daughter
             had herself given birth  to  a  daughter  shortly  afterwards.
             They had not come to the attention of  the  authorities  until
             2008.  At that point they  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
             remain and were refused.  The Judge quashed the  Secretary  of
             State's decision on the basis that she had not  had,  and  had
             not sought to acquire, sufficient information about the  child
             in order properly to discharge her duty under  section  55  of
             the 2009 Act.  At para. 25 of his judgment  he  specified  the
             detailed information which she  would  need,  both  about  the
             child's life and education in England and about the  life  she
             would lead, including the educational opportunities that would
             be open to her, if she were returned to Ecuador.  He also said
             that the child's views needed to be ascertained but that  that
             could not satisfactorily be done via her  mother  and  that  a
             "third party source" might have to be commissioned to  provide
             "an appropriate assessment or report".  In the absence of such
             information the decision was held to  be  fatally  flawed.  Mr
             Kadri submitted that the Judge's decision in the present  case
             was flawed in the same way.

         22.  In SS (Nigeria) (above) Laws LJ warned  against  treating  HHJ
             Thornton's observations in Tinizaray as  enunciating  anything
             in the nature of general principle (see para. 55); and Mann  J
             with the concurrence of Black LJ, observed at  para.  62  that
             the circumstances in which a tribunal should  require  further
             inquiries to be  made,  or  evidence  obtained,  in  order  to
             satisfy itself as to the best interests of the child would  be
             "extremely rare", saying

                  "In the vast majority of cases the  Tribunal  will  expect
                  the relevant interests of the child to  be  drawn  to  the
                  attention  of  the  decision-maker   by   the   individual
                  concerned."

             In R (Toufighy) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2012] EWHC 3004 (Admin) Beatson J also  emphasised  that  the
             approach in Tinizaray was peculiar to the facts of  that  case
             (see paras. 103-4).

         23.  I do not believe that the Tribunal in  the  present  case  was
             under an obligation to require information to be obtained,  or
             inquiries made, of the kind identified in Tinizaray.  I  would
             make two points in particular:

             (1)  Masooma was aged 16 at the time of the impugned  decision
                  and the hearing before the First Tier Tribunal.   She  was
                  well able to express her own  views  and  did  so  to  the
                  Tribunal both in her witness statement  and  in  her  oral
                  evidence.  She was represented by solicitors and  counsel.
                  (She was not represented separately from her parents,  but
                  there  was  no  conflict  in  their  interests   requiring
                  separate representation.)  Her situation  was  thus  quite
                  different from that of the child  in  Tinizaray,  who  was
                  aged between seven and nine at the relevant dates.

             (2)  Masooma's case under article 8 was inherently  much  less
                  compelling than that of the child in  Tinizaray,  who  had
                  lived in this country all her life, and  had  never  known
                  anywhere else; she did not even speak Spanish.  For her to
                  be removed to Ecuador, at the age of nine, would have been
                  a most  drastic  disruption  of  every  aspect  her  life.
                  Although I would not necessarily endorse every  aspect  of
                  Judge Thornton's reasoning, it is not surprising  that  he
                  should have taken the view that such a step ought  not  to
                  be taken without very  full  information.   But  Masooma's
                  connection with this country was slender.   She  had  been
                  here for barely a year and had little more connection with
                  the UK than she had with Afghanistan (where she had family
                  and had visited).  The Judge had  already  found,  in  her
                  favour, that it was in her interests to remain in the  UK,
                  not least because of the better educational opportunities;
                  but in addressing what  was  the  determinative  question,
                  namely whether those interests should prevail  over  those
                  of firm and fair immigration control,  I  do  not  believe
                  that he required the same kind of detailed information  as
                  may have been appropriate in the Tinizaray."

46. About a month later, the Court of Appeal returned to  Tinizaray  in  AA
    (Iran) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  and  Another
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1523:-

         "16. There is another aspect of the case to  which  I  should  make
             brief reference.  The original grounds of appeal and  skeleton
             argument on behalf of the appellant (to which Mr  Drabble  was
             not  party)  would  have  required  us  to  consider   whether
             consideration of the appellant's Article 8 case by the  FTT  -
             in particular the consideration of section  55  and  the  best
             interests of a child as a primary consideration -  was  flawed
             because of the  failure  of  the  FTT  to  consider  his  best
             interests by express reference to the  checklist  set  out  in
             section  1  of  the  Children  Act.   The  basis  for  such  a
             submission was said to reside in R(Tinizaray)  v  SSHD  [2011]
             EWHC 1850 and the approach there taken to ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
             (2011) 2 AC 166 SC. In the event, Mr  Drabble  did  not  press
             that ground of appeal.  He was right  not  to  do  so.  In  SS
             (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  Laws  LJ  said  (at
             paragraph  55)  that  Tinizaray  should  not  be  regarded  as
             "establishing anything in the nature of a  general  principle"
             about section 1 of the Children Act. I respectfully agree.  Mr
             Sheldon tells us that, notwithstanding what Laws LJ said, some
             tribunals continue to adopt the Tinizaray approach. In my view
             they should not do so. Tinizaray should receive its  quietus."
             (Maurice Kay LJ)

47. In AJ (India) and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1191; [2012] Imm AR 10, the Court of  Appeal  addressed
    the submission:-

         "...that the decision taken by the Secretary of State was wrong  in
         law because section 55 was not considered.  It is  immaterial  that
         the Secretary of State was not and could not have been aware of the
         birth of the child, D.  The tribunal, which  became  aware,  should
         have allowed the appeal and remitted the case to the  Secretary  of
         State, the  primary  decision-maker,  for  further  consideration."
         (paragraph 18).

48. At paragraph 20, Pill LJ, giving the leading judgment, noted  that,  in
    this regard, reliance  was  placed  on  Lady  Hale's  statement  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) that any decision taken without having regard to the need to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved would not be
    "in accordance with the law" for the purposes of Article  8(2)  of  the
    ECHR.  In considering the subsequent case law, the following paragraphs
    of the judgment of Pill LJ are of crucial significance:-

         "21. I do not accept Mr Malik's submissions  on  this  issue.   The
             decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  complained  of  was  a
             decision refusing leave to remain.  The duty of  the  tribunal
             under section 86(3) is to determine the appeal.  It must allow
             the appeal insofar as it thinks that the Secretary of  State's
             decision "was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (including
             immigration rules)".

         22.  The tribunal has power to hear evidence, make findings of fact
             and decide points of law.  On  the  material  before  it,  the
             tribunal was entitled to conclude that  the  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State  refusing  leave  to  remain  was,  on  the
             material before the tribunal, one on which  the  tribunal  was
             able to make a judgment.  What the tribunal could find on  the
             merits in this case  is  for  further  consideration  in  this
             appeal, but I have no doubt  that  the  tribunal  was  in  law
             entitled to proceed.

         23.  In Huang v The Secretary of State [2007] 2 AC 167 Lord Bingham
             of Cornhill stated at paragraph 11:

                  "These provisions, read purposively and in  context,  make
                  it plain  that  the  task  of  the  appellate  immigration
                  authority, on an appeal on a Convention ground  against  a
                  decision of the primary official  decision-maker  refusing
                  leave to enter or remain in this  country,  is  to  decide
                  whether   the   challenged   decision   is   unlawful   as
                  incompatible with a Convention right or compatible and  so
                  lawful.   It  is  not  a  secondary,  reviewing,  function
                  dependent on establishing that the primary  decision-maker
                  misdirected himself or acted irrationally or was guilty of
                  procedural   impropriety.    The   appellate   immigration
                  authority must decide  for  itself  whether  the  impugned
                  decision is lawful and, if not, but only if  not,  reverse
                  it."

         24.  Paragraph 24 of ZH does not assist  the  appellant.   Baroness
             Hale plainly contemplated  that  the  tribunal  must  consider
             Section 55.  If Baroness Hale had been of the  view  that  the
             tribunal was excluded from doing so because  its  only  option
             was to remit to the Secretary of State, I  am  confident  that
             Baroness Hale would have said so.  Further, paragraph 71 of DS
             (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 305 does not  assist  the
             appellant. Section 55 had not been mentioned at  the  tribunal
             hearing in that case. Lloyd LJ stated at paragraph 71:

                  "Nevertheless, it seems to me that the tribunal  ought  to
                  have borne this  obligation  in  mind  when  deciding  the
                  appeal, because of the Tribunal's role as  decision-maker:
                  see R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 1 AC  368  at
                  paragraph 15.  The position might have been  different  if
                  the role of the Tribunal were not that of being a part  of
                  the  decision-making  process.   If  its   function   were
                  equivalent to that of deciding a conventional appeal or  a
                  conventional judicial review application, then the process
                  might be limited by reference to material which  had  been
                  before the decision-maker and to the law as  it  stood  at
                  the time of that decision.  But it  has  long  been  clear
                  that the role of the tribunal, now the First-Tier Tribunal
                  or the  Upper  Tribunal,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  not
                  constrained in this way""

49. Having made that finding, with which Etherton LJ and  Sir  Mark  Potter
    agreed, Pill LJ turned to the merits of the appeal.  This concerned  an
    analysis of the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the best interests of
    the children.  At paragraph 25, Pill LJ  noted  the  submission  of  Mr
    Malik (counsel  for  AJ)  that,  taking  account  of  the  respondent's
    guidance Every Child Matters, an attempt  should  be  made  to  consult
    children even if they are  very  young.   If  there  were  no  specific
    reference in the Tribunal's decision  to  section  55,  the  Tribunal's
    decision can stand only if it is very clear that the substance  of  the
    obligation has been taken into account.

50. Having considered what Lady Hale had to say in ZH (Tanzania),  Pill  LJ
    made, at paragraph 43, what he  described  as  "the  following  general
    comments":-

         "(a) As Baroness Hale stated at paragraph 33 in  ZH,  consideration
             of the welfare of the children is  an  integral  part  of  the
             Article 8 assessment.  It is not something apart from it.   In
             making that assessment a primary  consideration  is  the  best
             interests of the child.

         (b)  The absence of a reference to section 55(1) is not fatal to  a
             decision.  What matters is  the  substance  of  the  attention
             given to the "overall wellbeing" (Baroness Hale) of the child.



         (c)  The welfare of children was a factor in  Article  8  decisions
             prior to the enactment of section 55.  What section 55 and the
             guidelines do, following Article 3 of UNCRC, is  to  highlight
             the need to have  regard  to  the  welfare  and  interests  of
             children when taking decisions such  as  the  present.  In  an
             overall assessment the best  interests  of  the  child  are  a
             primary consideration.

         (d)  The primacy  of  the  interests  of  the  child  falls  to  be
             considered  in  the   context   of   the   particular   family
             circumstances, as well as the  need  to  maintain  immigration
             control."

51. At paragraph 45, Pill LJ held that, in the case at issue,  the  failure
    of the Immigration Judge to refer in terms to section 55 "was not fatal
    and its requirements were in substance met".  The birth  of  the  child
    had been brought to the attention of  the  Immigration  Judge  and  his
    determination plainly established  that  appropriate  weight  had  been
    given to  the  welfare  and  interests  of  the  child,  as  a  primary
    consideration.  At paragraph  46,  Pill  LJ  concluded  that,  whatever
    primacy had been given to the interests of the child, D, he  could  not
    see that, on the  evidence,  any  other  result  than  dismissal  could
    properly be achieved.

52. We now turn to the way  in  which  the  section  55  duties  have  been
    addressed in the Upper Tribunal.

53. In JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC),
    McCloskey J, President of the Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber, was concerned with an appeal against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal made under the appellate provisions of the 2002  Act,  as
    they were before amendment by the Immigration Act 2014 (see  paragraphs
    13 and 14 above).  This meant that one  of  the  grounds  on  which  an
    appeal would be allowed was where the respondent's decision was not  in
    accordance with the law.  The President set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and re-made the decision by allowing the appeal  on
    the basis that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the
    law.  This was for two reasons.  The First-tier Tribunal had failed  to
    recognise that the oldest child of the family was capable of succeeding
    under the Immigration  Rules.   The  second  reason  is  the  one  that
    concerns us.  This was that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  "failed  to
    consider whether the Secretary of State had  complied  with"  her  duty
    under section 55(3) to have regard to the relevant guidance.  This  was
    a "fundamental error of law infecting the  FtT's  decision"  (paragraph
    17).

54. The President  reached  that  conclusion  in  the  following  way.   At
    paragraph 8, he drew particular attention to paragraphs 35 to 37 of the
    judgment of Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania), concluding that the "thrust
    of these passages is that the initial decision-maker must  be  properly
    informed".  At paragraph 9, the President cited  the  seven  principles
    articulated by Lord Hodge in Zoumbas, highlighting  sub-paragraphs  (5)
    and (6), concerning the importance of having a "clear idea of a child's
    circumstances" and there being "no substitute for a careful examination
    of all relevant factors when the interests of a child are  involved  in
    an article 8 assessment".

55. From this, the President derived, at paragraph 10, the proposition that
    "in order to discharge the two fold  inter-related  duties  imposed  by
    section 55 (i) to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the
    welfare of any children involved in the factual matrix in question  and
    (ii) to have regard to the Secretary of State's guidance, the decision-
    maker must be properly informed".  Having cited the Secretary of  State
    for Education and Science v Metropolitan Borough  Council  of  Tameside
    [1977] AC 1014 and Padfield v Minister of  Agriculture,  Fisheries  and
    Food [1968] AC 997, the President held that the  "duties  enshrined  in
    section 55 cannot  be  properly  performed  by  decision-makers  in  an
    uninformed vacuum.  Rather the decision-maker must be properly equipped
    by possession of a sufficiency of relevant information".

56. At paragraph 11, the President held that being adequately informed  and
    "conducting a scrupulous analysis are elementary pre-requisites to  the
    inter-related tasks of identifying the child's best interests and  then
    balancing them with other material considerations".  This could not  be
    done "unless and until the scales are properly prepared".

57. At paragraph 12, the President concentrated on  section  55(3),  noting
    that the decision-maker "must" have regard to the guidance:  "there  is
    no element of choice or discretion".  The President  then  referred  to
    paragraph 2.7 of Every Child Matters, noting the  three  principles  of
    "particular note":-

         "(a)  Ethnic  identity,  language,  religion,  faith,  gender   and
             disability are taken into account when working  with  a  child
             and their family.

         (b)  Children should be consulted and the wishes  and  feelings  of
             children  taken  into  account   wherever   practicable   when
             decisions affecting them are made.

         (c)  Children should have their applications dealt with in a timely
             way which minimises uncertainty."

58. It is to be noted that sub-paragraph (b) above does not  refer  to  the
    concluding sentence in the guidance that "In  instances  where  parents
    and carers are present they will have primary  responsibility  for  the
    children's concerns".

59. At paragraph 13, the President held that whether the duties imposed  by
    section 55 have been duly performed in any given case would "invariably
    be an intensely fact-sensitive and contextual one.  In the  real  world
    of litigation, the tools available to the court or tribunal considering
    this question will frequently, as in the present case, be  confined  to
    the application or submission made to the Secretary of  State  and  the
    ultimate letter of decision".

60. At paragraph 14, the President highlighted some  "intriguing  questions
    thrown up by section  55".   One  was  whether  it  has  a  "procedural
    dimension in  certain  cases".   Another  was  whether  it  imposed  "a
    proactive duty of inquiry on the Secretary of State's officials in some
    cases".  The third was  whether  "a  failure  to  conduct  meetings  or
    interviews with an affected child  and/or  its  parents  or  others,  a
    course specifically envisaged by the statutory guidance, will give rise
    to a breach of section 55".

61. The President considered, however, that it was not necessary to  answer
    those questions "mainly because the existence  of  the  three  children
    concerned was disclosed and a not insubstantial  quantity  of  evidence
    relating to them was included in the application to  the  Secretary  of
    State and  having  regard  to  what  I  consider  to  be  the  manifest
    infirmities in the impugned decision".

62. Those "manifest infirmities" were highlighted  at  paragraph  15  as  a
    failure to engage with the witness statement  of  the  child's  mother,
    describing "family problems back  home  in  Nigeria"  and  not  knowing
    whether her family there were alive or dead; the  educational  progress
    and prowess of the oldest child;  the  integration  of  the  family  in
    United Kingdom life and culture; and the absence of any links with  the
    mother's country of origin. None of these issues was addressed:   "They
    are effectively airbrushed."  Furthermore, no mention was made  of  two
    of the three children and the consideration given to the  oldest  child
    "was at best cursory".  The suggestion that the mother would be able to
    support her children while they became used to living  in  Nigeria  was
    "neither  contained  in  nor  supported  by  the  information  in   the
    application  to  the  Secretary  of  State  or  any  other  source   of
    information".  Furthermore, that suggestion had  been  "belied  by  the
    evidence given to both Tribunals".

63. At paragraph 15(e) the President noted that the purported consideration
    of the best interests of the children "makes no reference  whatever  to
    the statutory guidance, explicitly or implicitly".

64. The President returned to these issues in MK  (section  55  -  tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC).  This too  concerned  an
    appeal under the previous appeal regime.

65. At paragraph 19, the President held that, having regard to the judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in AJ (India), the respondent's decision did not
    have to make specific refence to the statutory guidance,  in  order  to
    comply with section 55(3).  At  paragraphs  20  and  21,  however,  the
    President held that, on the facts of the case, it could not be properly
    inferred that the decision-maker had had regard to  material  parts  of
    the  statutory  guidance.   In  particular  "none  of  the   obligatory
    principles enshrined in paragraph 2.7 guidance is given expression".

66. At paragraph 23, the President noted the submission of  Mr  Jarvis,  on
    behalf of the respondent, that where there had been a  "total  failure"
    to consider the best interests of the child, the Tribunal should  allow
    the appeal on the basis that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law "to the extent that it awaits a lawful decision
    by the SSHD acting as the  primary  decision-maker".   Where,  however,
    there had been engagement, albeit flawed, Mr Jarvis submitted that  the
    Tribunal should make its own  findings  on  what  section  55  required
    "through Article 8 ECHR".  At paragraph 25, the  President  noted  that
    the Upper Tribunal in the  present  case  had  already  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and had not ordered  remittal.   In
    those circumstances, he considered that three options arose:-

         "The first is to re-make the decision of the FtT.  The second is to
         remit the case to the FtT for the same purpose.  The  third  is  to
         allow the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision was not in accordance with the law thereby  requiring  the
         Secretary of State, as primary decision  maker,  to  make  a  fresh
         decision giving effect to the assessment  and  conclusions  of  the
         Upper Tribunal."

67. We pause here to observe that the third alternative was, in  our  view,
    merely an aspect of the  first.   Section  12(2(b)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 provides that, where the Upper Tribunal
    sets aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal it  must  re-make  the
    decision in the appeal or remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Deciding the appeal on the basis that the respondent's decision was not
    in accordance with the law was one way  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
    could re-make the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  That, in  fact,
    is what happened in MK.  We respectfully disagree with  the  conclusion
    in paragraph  26  of  MK  that,  following  set  aside,  "re-making  is
    discretionary, not obligatory".  It is a statutory obligation.

68. Having set out passages from SS (Nigeria), (see  above)  the  President
    continued as follows:-

         "30. We consider that from the perspective of  section  55  of  the
             2009 Act, the main principle to be distilled from SS (Nigeria)
             is that in cases where the  Tribunal  is  assessing  the  best
             interests of an affected child it should normally do so on the
             basis of the available evidence without  more.   The  decision
             strongly  discourages  the   Tribunal   from   conducting   an
             inquisitorial exercise.  But Laws LJ stated that the  Tribunal
             must be "armed ... with  the  facts  required  for  a  careful
             examination" of the affected  child's  best  interests.   This
             invites the following question:  in cases where  the  Tribunal
             does not consider itself sufficiently equipped to  conduct  an
             adequate best interests assessment, what are its options?   In
             particular, is one of the available  alternatives  a  disposal
             order the effect whereof is that the Secretary of  State  must
             make a fresh,  lawful  decision,  rectifying  the  failure  to
             perform  the  section  55   duties   in   the   first   place?
             Furthermore, if an order of this kind is an available  option,
             what is the test or criterion to be applied by the Tribunal in
             deciding whether to invoke it?

         31.  We consider that the unspoken  premise  in  the  SS  (Nigeria)
             principle is in truth something of an assumption, namely, that
             in the typical case the Tribunal will  be  sufficiently  armed
             and equipped to properly assess the  child's  best  interests.
             This is expressed most strongly in the judgment  of  Mann  LJ.
             It entails an expectation  that,  in  the  great  majority  of
             appeals, the Tribunal will have sufficient evidence to  enable
             it to conduct this exercise properly.  The most obvious source
             of this evidence, in the usual case, will be the material laid
             before the decision maker by the Appellant. There  is  a  very
             broad spectrum in  this  respect.   At  one  end  thereof  the
             Appellant, who may have no representation, composes some brief
             and possibly  confusing  or  incoherent  sentences  which  are
             transmitted to the decision maker for consideration  and  form
             part of the evidence before the Tribunal.  At the other end of
             the spectrum, the Appellant's case is  compiled  by  competent
             and experienced practitioners and  consists  of  coherent  and
             impressively   composed   representations,   supplemented   by
             materials  such  as   birth  certificates,   school   records,
             character testimonials and expert reports, whether medical  or
             otherwise. Between these two extremes there may,  potentially,
             be many different permutations.  Furthermore, in  some  cases,
             the evidence will be clarified and amplified by  well  planned
             and presented oral testimony. We suggest that the SS (Nigeria)
             principle must be considered in this light.

         32.  The SS (Nigeria) principle must also be balanced with what the
             Supreme Court has pronounced in  its  two  landmark  decisions
             and, indeed, what the Court of Appeal said in SS  itself.   As
             we have highlighted, one  of  the  striking  features  of  the
             decision in SS is the Court's acceptance of the argument  that
             the child's best interests "must be properly  gone  into"  and
             the Court or Tribunal must be "... armed ...  with  the  facts
             required for a careful examination of  those  interests  ...":
             see [34].   We  consider  that  this  chimes  with  what  this
             Tribunal said more recently in JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT  00517
             (IAC).  First, it distilled from the opinion of Baroness  Hale
             in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 the principle that the decision
             maker must be properly informed (see  [8]),  highlighting  the
             importance accorded to "the quality of the  initial  decision"
             at [36].  Second, this Tribunal  acknowledged  the  stress  in
             Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 3690 on the importance  of  having
             "a clear idea of a child's circumstances"  and  the  necessity
             for "a careful examination of all relevant  factors  when  the
             interests of a child are involved in an Article 8 assessment":
             per Lord Hodge, at [10].  Third, this Tribunal drew  attention
             to the Tameside principle and the Padfield principle, at [10].
             It stated:

                  "These principles also give sustenance to the  proposition
                  that the duties enshrined in section 55 cannot be properly
                  performed by decision  makers  in  an  uninformed  vacuum.
                  Rather, the decision maker must be  properly  equipped  by
                  possession of a sufficiency of relevant information."

             Continuing, this Tribunal identified two  guiding  principles,
             each rooted in duty, at [11]:

                  "The first is that the decision  maker  must  be  properly
                  informed.  The second is that, thus equipped, the decision
                  maker must conduct a careful examination of  all  relevant
                  information and factors.  These principles have  a  simple
                  logical attraction, since it is difficult to conceive  how
                  a decision maker could properly have regard to the need to
                  safeguard and promote the welfare of the child or children
                  concerned  otherwise.   Furthermore,  they  reflect   long
                  recognised standards  of  public  law.   Being  adequately
                  informed  and  conducting  a   scrupulous   analysis   are
                  elementary pre-requisites to the  inter-related  tasks  of
                  identifying the child's best interests and then  balancing
                  them with other material considerations."

             We consider that there is no disharmony between  the  decision
             of the Tribunal in JO (Nigeria) and the relevant decisions  of
             the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal.   Furthermore,  the
             contrary was not argued.

         33.  The full context within which  these  issues  arise  must,  of
             course, be appreciated.  In this respect, the central theme of
             SS (Nigeria) is the powerful weight to be  attributed  to  the
             factor of Parliamentary  intervention  in  the  field  of  the
             deportation  of  foreign  national   offenders   through   the
             provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  These provisions  must
             now be considered in conjunction with the new Part 5A  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  inserted  by
             section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 (the "2014  Act"),  the
             effect whereof  is  that  the  public  interest  expressed  by
             Parliament is probably stronger than before.   In SS (Nigeria)
             Laws LJ, summarising, stated in [55]:

                  "Proportionality, the absence of an 'exceptionality'  rule
                  and the meaning of 'a primary consideration' are all, when
                  properly  understood,  consonant  with  the  force  to  be
                  attached in cases of the present kind to the  two  drivers
                  of the decision maker's margin of discretion: the policies
                  source and the policies nature and in  particular  to  the
                  great  weight  which  the  2007  Act  attributes  to   the
                  deportation of foreign criminals."

                  [Our emphasis.]

             In a later passage, Laws LJ refers to "the extremely  pressing
             public interest in the  Appellant's  deportation":  see  [58].
             Accordingly, in cases of this  kind,  in  the  proportionality
             scales, the factor of  the  best  interests  of  any  affected
             child, while a matter  of  undeniable  importance,  is  to  be
             balanced with a public interest of unmistakable potency.  This
             must be borne in mind in every  case  where,  having  found  a
             breach of either of the two duties imposed by  section  55  of
             the 2009 Act, the  Tribunal  is  considering  the  appropriate
             consequential course.

         34.  We consider that there are four significant aspects of section
             55 of the 2009 Act which do not feature with any prominence in
             the jurisprudence of the Court of Appeal.  The first  is  that
             the Secretary of State is the  primary  decision  maker.   The
             second is that the two duties  enshrined  in  section  55  are
             imposed on the Secretary of State and no one else.  The  third
             is the guidance made  under  section  55(3)  and  the  related
             statutory duty imposed  on  decision  makers  to  have  regard
             thereto: this has received at best  scant  attention,  coupled
             with the fact  that  there  is  no  meaningful  way  in  which
             tribunals can give effect to  certain  aspects  thereof.   The
             fourth, as we have highlighted above, is that in  the  trilogy
             of decisions examined, the Court of Appeal has not decided the
             question of whether  one  of  the  options  available  to  the
             Tribunal, where a breach of  either  or  both  of  the  duties
             imposed by section 55 is found, is to make an order the effect
             whereof is to require the Secretary of State  to  make  fresh,
             lawful decision. Thus the fetters imposed on this Tribunal  by
             binding precedent are limited.

         35.  We would highlight that where either  the  FtT  or  the  Upper
             Tribunal finds that there has been a breach by  the  Secretary
             of State of either, or both, of the duties imposed by  section
             55 of the 2009 Act,  a  further  assessment  of  and  decision
             concerning the best interests of any affected  child  must  be
             made.  The author of such decision will be either the relevant
             Tribunal or  the  Secretary  of  State.   There  is  no  other
             candidate decision maker.  We have raised the question of what
             test or criterion the Tribunal should apply in deciding  which
             of the two candidate agencies should make the fresh  decision.
             We turn to consider this discrete issue further."

69. At paragraph 37,  the  President  noted  that  there  was  a  power  of
    adjournment or postponement provided  for  by  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and that this might be  invoked  where  the
    Tribunal found itself without relevant evidence  concerning  a  child's
    best interests, in circumstances where  the  respondent  "has  breached
    either of  the  duties  enshrined  in  section  55  of  the  2000  Act"
    (paragraph  37).   Nevertheless,  at  paragraph   38,   the   President
    considered "that there can be no objection in principle to an order  of
    the Tribunal the effect whereof is to require the Secretary  of  State,
    rather than the Tribunal, to perform the two duties imposed by  section
    55".  The Tribunal, at both levels, had power to allow an appeal on the
    basis that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    "thereby obliging the Secretary of State, as primary  decision  -maker,
    to re-make the decision, giving effect to and educated  and  guided  by
    such correction and guidance as may  be  contained  in  the  Tribunal's
    determination".

70. At paragraph 39, the President concluded his  survey  of  the  relevant
    jurisprudence, governing principles and statutory framework as yielding
    the following conclusions:-


         "(a) Where either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal decides that  there
             has been a breach by the Secretary of State of either  of  the
             duties imposed by section 55 of the 2009 Act,  both  Tribunals
             are empowered, in their final determination of the appeal,  to
             assess the best interests of any affected child and  determine
             the appeal accordingly.  This exercise will be appropriate  in
             cases where the evidence is sufficient to enable the  Tribunal
             to conduct a properly informed assessment of the child's  best
             interests.

         (b)  However, there may be cases where the Tribunal forms the  view
             that the assembled evidence is insufficient for this  purpose.
             In such cases, two options arise.  The first  is  to  consider
             such further relevant evidence as  the  Appellant  can  muster
             and/or to exercise case management powers  in  an  attempt  to
             augment the available evidence.  The second  is  to  determine
             the appeal in a manner which requires the Secretary  of  State
             to make a fresh decision.  While  eschewing  prescription,  we
             observe that this course may  well  be  appropriate  in  cases
             where it appears to the appellate  tribunal  that  a  thorough
             best interests assessment may require interview of an affected
             child or children in accordance with Part 2 of  the  Secretary
             of State's statutory guidance.

         (c)  In choosing between the two options identified  above,  Judges
             will be guided by their assessment of  the  realities  of  the
             litigation in the particular case and the basis on  which  the
             Secretary of State has been found to have acted in  breach  of
             either or both of the section 55  duties.   It  will  also  be
             appropriate to take into account the desirability of  finality
             and the undesirability of undue delay."

71. At paragraph 40, having taken into account the fact that  the  Tribunal
    "has been strongly discouraged by the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Nigeria)
    from undertaking its own "inquisition", the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded
    "not without some misgivings, ... that this Tribunal should proceed  to
    make its assessment of the best interests of the  children  concerned".
    In paragraph 41, it then proceeded  to  do  so  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before it.

72. At paragraph 41, the Upper Tribunal concluded that the appellant's  two
    children were at a critical stage of their development.  It  took  into
    account  the  highly  positive  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    regarding the appellant's conduct and lifestyle since the commission of
    the index offences some thirteen years ago, as well as his  youth  when
    he committed them.  The Tribunal concluded that the best  interests  of
    the children "will undoubtedly be served and promoted if the status quo
    is preserved".  Having applied section 117C of the 2002 Act, the  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that "in a case which is undoubtedly challenging and
    marginal, unusual and highly fact specific,  the  deportation  of  this
    Appellant would  interfere  disproportionately  with  the  family  life
    rights of the four persons concerned" (paragraph  43).   The  Tribunal,
    accordingly, allowed the appellant's appeal.

73. We now move to the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland.  In  JG  v  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  [2019]  NICA   27,
    McCloskey J delivered the court's judgment in an application for  leave
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, which had upheld the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision on 11 July 2017 to refuse the appellant's human rights  claim.
    As a result of the changes made by the Immigration Act 2014,  the  sole
    ground of appeal was that the appellant's  removal  would  be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority  not  to
    act contrary to Human Rights Convention).   The  appellant  was  to  be
    deported as a foreign criminal.  The First-tier Tribunal had before  it
    a report of an educational psychologist  regarding  the  elder  of  the
    appellant's two children.  The two children were British citizens, aged
    respectively (at the time of the Court of Appeal judgment)  11  and  2
    years.

74. Beginning at  paragraph  10,  McCloskey  J  considered  the  ground  of
    challenge to the way in which the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal had applied the test of undue harshness in  paragraph  399  of
    the Immigration Rules.  What the Court of Appeal  considered  relevant,
    however, was the second ground of appeal.  This concerned section 55 of
    the 2009 Act.  At paragraph 19, McCloskey J referred to  his  decisions
    in JO and MK concerning the "two quite  separate  though  intra-related
    duties" in subsections (1) and (3) (paragraph 19).  He also referred to
    the judgments he had handed down in the High Court in Northern Ireland,
    including Re EFE's Application [2018] NIQB 89, in  which  he  described
    the section 55(3) duty as the "servant, or handmaiden,  of  sub-section
    (1)".  Compliance with section 55(3) "will have the  further  merit  of
    increasing the prospects of  exposing  cases  in  which,  for  whatever
    reason, there has not been sufficient focus  or  concentration  on  the
    child ...".  Later in EFE, McCloskey J  said  he  had  found  it  "very
    difficult indeed to conceive of a case in which a  failure  to  perform
    the simple, uncomplicated exercise which is required  as  a  matter  of
    obligation  by  section  55(3)  could  in  some  way  be   excused   or
    substituted" (paragraph 22).

75. The judgment in JG continued as follows:-


         "[23]    The nexus between the separate duties contained in Section
             55(1) and (3) is undeniable.  In every case where a breach  of
             the Section 55(3) duty occurs the protection afforded  to  the
             child by Section 55(1) is  weakened  and  undermined.  Section
             55(3) exists to promote and ensure the due fulfilment  of  the
             substantive obligation under Section 55 (1).  The former  duty
             is to have regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
             welfare  of  potentially  affected  children  in  the   United
             Kingdom.  As the relevant  decisions  of  the  United  Kingdom
             Supreme Court demonstrate, the welfare of a child and its best
             interests have been treated as synonymous: ZH Tanzania  [2011]
             UKSC 4 at [26], [43] and [46]  (per  Baroness  Hale  and  Lord
             Kerr) and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2013] UKSC at [10] (per Lord Hodge).

         [24] Every breach of the  Section  55(3)  duty  exposes  the  child
             concerned to the real risk that his or her best interests will
             simply be disregarded.  Absent a conscious  and  conscientious
             assessment of the  child's  best  interests  by  the  decision
             maker, those  interests  are  likely  to  be  ignored  in  the
             decision making  process.   The  scales  will  not  have  been
             properly prepared.  The child's entitlement  is  to  have  its
             best interests balanced with the other facts  and  factors  in
             play,  in  particular  the  public  interest  engaged  by  the
             immigration function  being  performed:  most  frequently  the
             public  interest  in  maintaining  firm  immigration  control,
             stemming from the ancient right of  states  to  control  their
             borders, and the public  interest  in  deporting  the  certain
             foreign offenders.  Every member of this  vulnerable  societal
             cohort is exposed to the risk of being denied this entitlement
             where the section 55(3) duty is breached. This is not  diluted
             by any counter-balance or remedial mechanism.

         [25] Furthermore, every breach of the Section 55(3) duty defies the
             will of Parliament.  Such  breaches  are  exposed  only  where
             resort is had to the court or tribunal.  It is well-known that
             legal challenges do not occur in large numbers of cases for  a
             variety of reasons - mostly human, financial  and  prosaic  in
             nature.  The result is that  large  numbers  of  children  are
             being denied the protection which Parliament deemed  necessary
             for them."

76. At paragraph 28, McCloskey J noted  the  guidance  stated  that  "where
    possible the wishes and feelings of the particular child  are  obtained
    and taken into account when deciding on  action  to  be  undertaken  in
    relation to him or her".  In the instant case, McCloskey  J  held  that
    there was nothing to suggest that communication with  the  older  child
    could not have been possible and that, in any event, the decision-maker
    "clearly  ignored  the  statutory  guidance  outright",  so   that   no
    consideration was given to that particular passage.  He continued:-

         "[30]    Any temptation to underplay  the  importance  of  the  two
                duties enshrined in Section 55  of  the  2009  Act  must  be
                resisted.  As the present case illustrates graphically,  the
                decision making in cases of this kind has profound and  long
                term consequences for the lives of children.  In theory,  in
                a given case a breach  of  Section  55(3)  might  be  of  no
                material  moment,  for   example   a   mere   technical   or
                inconsequential  or  trivial  breach.   However,  when   one
                examines the detailed checklist in the statutory guidance it
                seems likely that such cases, if they arise at all, will  be
                rare.  The necessity of making an  assessment  of  the  best
                interests of every potentially affected child present in the
                United Kingdom is a necessary  pre-requisite  to  performing
                the section 55(1) duty namely to have regard to the need  to
                safeguard  and  promote  those  interests.    Section  55(3)
                equips the decision maker with the means with which to  make
                the requisite assessment by stipulating the obligatory  step
                of having regard to the statutory guidance.  The latter,  in
                turn provides a range of tools to be employed in appropriate
                cases."

77. At paragraph 33, McCloskey J held that:-

         "Fundamentally, the enquiry for the court or tribunal in every case
         will be whether the decision maker (i) conducted an  assessment  of
         the child's best interests and  next,  having  done  so,  (ii)  had
         regard to the need to safeguard and promote those interests.   This
         will be the central focus  of  judicial  attention  in  every  case
         involving a possible breach of  the  section  55(3)  duty.   It  is
         appropriate to add that where a decision maker does comply with the
         section 55(3) duty, this will betoken no guarantee of the court  or
         tribunal concluding that the section 55(1) duty was discharged."

78. At paragraph 35, he said:-

         "The section 55(3) duty to have regard to  the  statutory  guidance
         raises the possibility of a range of further enquiries and  actions
         outlined in such guidance including taking steps to ensure that the
         child's views are ascertained and fully taken into  account.   This
         court cannot discount the possibility  that  consideration  of  the
         statutory guidance would have prompted certain actions on the  part
         of the decision maker giving rise to a  fuller  and  more  thorough
         assessment of the older child's best interests, as  a  prerequisite
         to discharging the related statutory obligation to have  regard  to
         the need to safeguard and promote those interests.   Realistically,
         this could have resulted in a different outcome for  the  Applicant
         and, in consequence the child concerned.  ..."

79. McCloskey J then addressed  the  consequences  of  the  change  in  the
    appellate regime effected by the Immigration Act 2014:-

       "[36]   Giving  effect  to  the  foregoing  analysis,   the   court's
             conclusion is that a material breach of Section 55(3)  of  the
             2009 Act has been established.  Mindful of the heavily reduced
             statutory grounds of appeal surviving the  reforms  introduced
             by the Immigration Act 2104, reflected  in  the  substantially
             amended section 82(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, we consider that this gives rise to a  breach
             of the Article 8 ECHR rights of the Appellant  and  the  other
             family members concerned.  The violation of the section  55(3)
             duty engages, and contravenes,  the  procedural  dimension  of
             Article 8, elaborated in decisions such as R (MK) v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 231 (IAC) at [27]
             especially, in contravention of section 6 of the Human  Rights
             Act 1998.  From this  it  follows  that  leave  to  appeal  is
             granted and the substantive appeal succeeds.

         [37[ The court has given consideration to what the  consequence  of
             its  overarching  conclusion  should  be.   This   issue   was
             considered by the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra  Leone)  (ante)
             at [26] - [39].  The approach of the Upper Tribunal  in  these
             passages was considered by the Court of  Appeal  subsequently,
             without disapproval: see especially R (on the  application  of
             MA (Pakistan) & Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber) & Another [ 2016] ECWA Civ 705  at  [59]  (per
             Elias  LJ).   The  feasibility  of  the  court   or   tribunal
             concerned, in the wake of a demonstrated breach of the section
             55(3) duty, actually pursuing any of the  enquiries  or  steps
             specified in SSHD's statutory guidance appears to  this  court
             to be largely theoretical.  Steps could of course be taken  to
             ensure  that  the  affected   child's/children's   views   are
             considered  via  separate  representation,  reception  of  new
             evidence  and  a  further  hearing.   But  this  course  would
             inevitably  generate  much  litigation  delay  and   increased
             expense.  Furthermore, why this  burden  should  fall  on  the
             court or tribunal rather  than  the  primary  decision  maker,
             SSHD, is unclear.   It  is  far  from  surprising  that  these
             considerations did not feature in the earlier English Court of
             Appeal decisions preceding, and considered in, MA (Pakistan) -
             and indeed in MA (Pakistan) itself  -given  that  the  section
             55(3) duty was not in play.

         [38] Furthermore, every breach of  the  section  55(3)  duty  is  a
             failure on the part of the primary decision maker, SSHD.   The
             proposition that SSHD, rather  than  the  court  or  tribunal,
             should deal with the consequences of  a  judicially  diagnosed
             breach of the section 55(3) duty is harmonious with section 55
             itself and  consistent  with  the  distinctive  roles  of  the
             executive and the  judiciary  generally.   In  addition,  this
             court is obliged to operate  within  the  constraints  of  the
             overriding objective enshrined in Order  1,  Rule  1A  of  the
             Rules of the Court of Judicature.  This  involves  inter  alia
             distributing its  finite  judicial  resources  proportionately
             among all the cases in its system.  The UT  and  the  FtT  are
             subject to the same duty.

         [39] While we consider that the preferable course would be for this
             court to make an order remitting the  case  to  SSHD,  thereby
             requiring a fresh decision making process and ensuing decision
             this, regrettably, is not an available course.  Under  section
             14 of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007,  our
             options are to  exercise  our  discretion  to  set  aside  the
             decision of the UT and, if we do so, to re-make  the  decision
             or to remit to  either  the  UT  or  the  FtT.   This  may  be
             considered unsatisfactory  given  that  SSHD  is  the  primary
             decision maker and the agency best equipped to have regard  to
             the section 55 guidance, which is  nothing  if  not  intensely
             prosaic in its nature and operation.   Furthermore,  SSHD  has
             not yet discharged  the  section  55(3)  duty  in  this  case.
             However, by statute remittal by this  court  to  SSHD  is  not
             possible."

80. The decision of the Court of Appeal in JG was to allow the  appellant's
    appeal and  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the
    following basis:-

         "[41]    ... Previously in a certain class of appeals the  tribunal
                opted to make a final order the effect whereof is to require
                SSHD to consider the case afresh and make  a  new  decision.
                This arose in  cases  where  the  tribunal  found  that  the
                decision under challenge was "not  in  accordance  with  the
                law" (the previous  statutory  formulation  of  one  of  the
                permitted grounds of appeal): see for example AG (Kosovo)  v
                Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] Imm. A. R.
                19 and Patel v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
                [2011] UKUT 00211(IAC).  If this course is, as a  matter  of
                jurisdiction, available then whether to adopt it will  be  a
                matter for the FtT and, in the event  of  a  further  appeal
                ensuing, the UT.   Having received no argument on the  issue
                we venture no further."

81. JG was followed by Scoffield J in the High Court in  Northern  Ireland,
    in granting permission in a judicial review of the refusal of the Upper
    Tribunal to grant permission to appeal against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal: In the matter of application by JR137 for leave to apply
    for judicial review [2021] NIQB 13.  The applicant was  a  national  of
    Nepal, residing in Northern Ireland with her United Kingdom-born  child
    and her husband.  Abandoning her claim to international protection, she
    pursued, on appeal,  a  human  rights  claim  based  upon  her  child's
    residence and circumstances in the United Kingdom.

82. Having recited the relevant legislation, guidance and the case  law  of
    JO and JG, Scoffield J ventured "this short (and, no doubt, inadequate)
    summary of the main points emerging from the Court of Appeal's decision
    in JG and the case law considered by it":-

         "(i) There are two separate duties within section 55: the  duty  to
             have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare
             of children within the United Kingdom ('the  principal  duty')
             and the duty to have regard to the section 55  guidance  ('the
             section 55(3) duty').   See JG, at paragraph [19].

         (ii) The  section  55(3)  duty  is  designed  to  ensure  that  the
             principal duty, to properly consider a relevant  child's  best
             interests (this being synonymous with the child's welfare), is
             faithfully discharged.  The importance of  the  section  55(3)
             duty  should  not  be  underplayed,  merely  because   it   is
             subservient to the principal duty.   They  go  hand  in  hand,
             since having regard to the section 55 guidance (and  complying
             with it in the absence of good reason to depart  from  it)  is
             the means by which the  decision-maker  equips  themselves  to
             make the requisite assessment of the child's  best  interests,
             which must be taken into account pursuant  to  section  55(1).
             See JG, at paragraphs [20]-[21], [23] and [30].

         (iii)    Having regard to the section 55 guidance achieves this aim
             by increasing the prospect of there being the requisite  focus
             on the child in the case at  hand  which  the  principal  duty
             requires  in  order  to  be  properly  discharged.   There  is
             accordingly  a  close  nexus  between  compliance   with   the
             principal duty and the section 55(3) duty, with breach of  the
             latter  necessarily  weakening  the   protection   which   the
             principal duty is designed to afford to children.  See JG,  at
             paragraphs [20] and [23]-[24].

         (iv) Separate focus should therefore be brought to bear on  whether
             there has been a breach of the section 55(3) duty, in addition
             to the question of whether there has  been  a  breach  of  the
             principal duty.  To determine whether the section  55(3)  duty
             has been complied with, the court or tribunal considering this
             issue should carefully consider  on  the  one  hand  what  the
             section  55  guidance  envisages  and,  on  the  other,   what
             information was available to the decision-maker and how it was
             taken into account.  See JG, at paragraph [21].  I  would  add
             that an important consideration in this regard is whether  the
             section 55 guidance  has  been  cited  by  the  decision-maker
             (although that is plainly not determinative, as the case of MK
             (Section 55 - Tribunal Options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  223,
             relied upon by the interested  party,  confirms  at  paragraph
             [19]).

         (v)  The key principles, or critical  requirements,  are  that  the
             child be listened to in order to hear what they  have  to  say
             and, relatedly, that their wishes and feelings are ascertained
             and taken into account.  The section  55(3)  guidance  is  not
             inflexibly prescriptive as to how  this  should  be  achieved,
             provided these key principles  are  observed  where  possible.
             The guidance  does,  however,  refer  to  the  possibility  of
             certain steps being taken by the caseworker or decision-maker,
             each of which is designed to ensure  that  the  decision-maker
             properly discharges  the  principal  duty.   This  might  well
             require direct consultation with the child, depending  on  the
             circumstances of the case; and  the  feasibility  of  directly
             consulting an affected child  should  be  considered  in  each
             case.  The terms of the section 55 guidance  certainly  appear
             to suggest such direct  engagement  (see,  for  instance,  the
             enjoinder that the communication  should  be  in  the  child's
             preferred method or language).  Where a simple,  uncomplicated
             exercise is required by  virtue  of  the  obligation  to  have
             regard to the section  55(3)  guidance,  it  is  difficult  to
             conceive of a case where the failure to perform this  will  be
             excused. See JG, at paragraphs [21], [28] and [35];  and  also
             ED, at paragraphs [17]-[19].

         (vi) Regrettably, lack of careful and conscientious compliance with
             section  55(3)  appears  to  have  been  a  feature  of   many
             immigration  decisions  and  challenges   in   recent   times,
             notwithstanding the provision's now well-established pedigree.
              See JG, at paragraph [22].

         (vii)    Where the section 55(3) duty has not been  complied  with,
             this will usually result in the decision at  issue  being  set
             aside unless, exceptionally, the court can conclude  that  the
             duty was complied with in substance (perhaps fortuitously); or
             that the decision would have been the same  if  the  statutory
             guidance had been conscientiously taken into account, so  that
             the failure to have regard to the guidance  demonstrably  made
             no material difference.  This reflects the importance  of  the
             duty, the possible life-long consequences for the child of the
             decision at issue, and that the section 55(3) duty is part  of
             the protection for children deemed  necessary  by  Parliament.
             See JG, at paragraphs [21], [24]-[25] and [31]-[34].

         (viii)   Proper compliance with the section 55(3) duty is, however,
             no guarantee that  the  principal  duty  has  then  also  been
             properly discharged.  See JG, at paragraph [33].  So, save  in
             the exceptional cases mentioned  at  (vii)  above,  compliance
             with the section 55(3) duty will be a necessary, although  not
             sufficient, condition of compliance with the principal duty."

83. At paragraph 30, Scoffield J held that the appellant's  complaint  was,
    the contention that the consideration of the best interest of the child
    -

         "was undertaken  in  a  defective  manner  because  it  necessarily
         involves  (in  the  absence  of  good  reason  otherwise   in   the
         circumstances of the case) direct contact with the child  concerned
         in order to ascertain their wishes and  feelings  and,  indeed  any
         first-hand evidence they can  provide  which  is  relevant  to  the
         determination of the issues before the decision-maker."

84. Beginning at paragraph 31, Scoffield J set out the consideration  given
    in the Secretary of State's decision to the section  55(1)  duty.   The
    Secretary of State took the view that the family  could  return,  as  a
    unit, to Nepal, where  there  are  opportunities  for  the  appellant's
    daughter to continue her studies.  At paragraph 33, however,  Scoffield
    J noted that no mention was made in the decision letter "of the section
    55 guidance, much less any detailed analysis of what it  might  require
    in the circumstances of  this  case;  nor  is  there  any  evidence  of
    consideration being given to any direct contact  with  the  applicant's
    daughter in order to seek her first-hand input".

85. At paragraph 34, Scoffield J noted that at the time of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing the focus was  "squarely  on  the  interests  of  [the
    appellant's] daughter".  The appellant's solicitor had provided a range
    of additional information regarding the daughter,  including  that  she
    had spent all her time in the United Kingdom, had never lived any  time
    in Nepal, communicated in English as her first language, had  developed
    friendships  at  school  and  was  involved  in  many  extra-curricular
    activities.  Documentary evidence included school reports, photographs,
    and a variety of certificates and awards.

86. At paragraph 37, Scoffield J noted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    expressly considered the best interests of the  child,  addressing  her
    schooling, friendships, health and extra-curricular activities.  So far
    as  the  child's  linguistic  ability  was  concerned,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found as a fact that the appellant and her  husband  had
    significantly downplayed the child's ability to speak Nepali  and  that
    she had grown up in a household where the primary language  was  Nepali
    (paragraph 38).

87. The striking effect of the Court of Appeal's judgment in JG can be seen
    from what follows:-

         "[39]    I am satisfied that the  FtT  judge  did  clearly  address
                herself to the applicant's daughter's best interests and  no
                doubt did so conscientiously.  But that is not the issue. In
                light of the case-law discussed above - and, in  particular,
                the case  of  JG  which  is  binding  on  this  court  -  an
                additional question is whether the FtT judge also adequately
                addressed the requirements of the section  55(3)  duty.   In
                the FtT decision, there was no consideration of the  section
                55  guidance  or  what  it  might  have  required   in   the
                circumstances of this  case  as  regards  listening  to  the
                applicant's  daughter  and  ascertaining  her   wishes   and
                feelings.  There was a good deal of information  before  the
                FtT  judge  about  the  child's  current  life  in  Northern
                Ireland; and  it  seems  to  have  been  assumed  (no  doubt
                correctly) that the  child  wished  to  remain  in  Northern
                Ireland with her family and pursue her education and private
                life here.  I consider that there is  force  in  Mr  Peters'
                submission, however, that no consideration appears  to  have
                been given at any point by the SSHD to  any  direct  contact
                with the child which might have shed  more  light  on  these
                issues; and that,  on  the  important  issue  of  contention
                between the parties as to the level of the child's knowledge
                of  Nepalese  (or  ability  to  pick  the  language  up),  a
                potentially important strand of evidence was missing.

         [40] In the applicant's grounds of appeal against the FtT decision,
                specific attention was then drawn to section  55(3)  of  the
                2009  Act,  the  authorities  relating  to  the  obligations
                arising under it and to the section 55  guidance.   Only  at
                this point was major reliance placed on the failure  of  the
                part of the Home Office decision-maker to discharge or  even
                consider their statutory duty under  section  55(3)  of  the
                2009 Act, with the cases of JO  and  JG  being  quoted  from
                extensively.

         [41] The  FtT's  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  contains  the
                following summary:

                    "It is clear that the respondent had given consideration
                    to the best interests of the child,  because  the  Judge
                    mentioned in paragraph 6 of her  decision.   The  appeal
                    was advanced on the basis that the appellant  could  not
                    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, although
                    the Judge was careful to point out  that  this  was  not
                    being  held  against  child.   The  Judge  gave  primary
                    consideration to the child's  best  interests.   It  was
                    accepted that she was a qualifying child.   However,  it
                    was open to the Judge to find that  her  best  interests
                    were served by remaining with her parents.  She had  not
                    reached a critical point in  her  education,  which  she
                    could continue on return,  and  there  were  no  medical
                    factors.   There  was  a  conflict   in   the   evidence
                    concerning the language spoken at home.  The  Judge  was
                    therefore entitled to conclude  that  the  child  had  a
                    knowledge of the Nepali language, or that she  would  be
                    able to develop, the  family  participated  in  Nepalese
                    cultural events and there were family members in Nepal."

         [42] The further refusal of permission to appeal by the  UT  itself
                is in rather  more  terse  terms,  with  the  material  part
                reading as follows:

                  "2.  The grounds complain of  the  "scale  and  volume  of
                      errors of law" in the decision, but that is rhetoric.

                  3.    The  grounds  do  not  arguably  rise  above   vague
                      insistence and disagreement.   They  specify  nothing
                      whereby the decision might be set aside for error  on
                      a point of law,  or  whereby  another  outcome  might
                      realistically be achieved."

         [43] Both the SSHD and  the  FtT  Judge  obviously  considered  the
                applicant's daughter's welfare and  best  interests.   There
                was,  however,  no  detailed  engagement  with  what   might
                separately be required by the section  55(3)  obligation  at
                any point.  The FtT decision refusing permission  to  appeal
                did not grapple  with  this  issue.   In  my  view,  the  UT
                decision on permission to appeal also  too  readily  brushed
                aside the applicant's detailed submissions on section 55(3),
                particularly in light of the authorities (including the UT's
                own decision in JO and a decision of the Court of Appeal  in
                Northern Ireland in JG) which were relied upon and cited  in
                the course of those submissions.  Rather, the section  55(3)
                duty appears to have been treated as adding nothing material
                to, or being  subsumed  within,  the  principal  duty  under
                section 55(1).  On my reading of the authorities,  including
                the decision in JG  in  particular,  that  is  an  incorrect
                analysis in law - and, at least, strongly arguably so".

88. At paragraph 46, Scoffield J held that:-

         "A failure to identify a clear breach of the section 55(3) duty  on
         the part of a decision-maker is, indeed, a significant error of law
         and one which ought, in an audit of legality of  the  decision,  to
         result in it being quashed".

89. For the purposes of the judicial review proceedings, however, Scoffield
    J had to decide whether the error of law was  sufficiently  "important"
    to justify the grant of permission or leave.  At paragraphs 52 and  53,
    he found that the point of law was not important,  in  the  sense  that
    there was any "new aspect to it which would warrant the grant of  leave
    on this basis".  The failure on the part of the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Upper Tribunal to identify and correct the failure on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State to comply with her  requirements  under  section
    55(3) were, rather, "an alleged failure to apply an established, albeit
    important, obligation".  He  held,  nevertheless,  that  there  was  an
    "other compelling reason" to grant permission; namely, "the variety  of
    interlocking features".

90. The case of JG fell to be considered by the Inner House of the Court of
    Session in ZG v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021]  CSIH
    16.  The appellant was a citizen of China,  "convicted  of  assault  to
    severe injury" in  September  2016  and  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.  Accordingly, the appellant became a foreign criminal and
    proceedings were commenced to effect  his  deportation.   He  contended
    that his child, born in 2009, would find it unduly  harsh  to  live  in
    China; and that it would also be unduly harsh for her to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without the appellant.

91. The respondent accepted the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his daughter but  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for her to live in China; alternatively, that it would not
    be unduly harsh for  her  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    appellant were deported.  On appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant submitted a report by a clinical psychologist  regarding  the
    daughter.  The psychologist had interviewed the daughter and  also  the
    deputy head teacher at her primary school.  He found that the  daughter
    was well integrated into life in Glasgow.  She  told  the  psychologist
    that she wanted to live with both her parents.  She would feel very sad
    if she had to live in China  because  she  liked  her  school  and  her
    friends in Scotland.  The psychologist concluded that there would be  a
    significant negative impact on  the  daughter's  emotional  educational
    well-being if the appellant were removed from the United Kingdom.   She
    would be susceptible to developing psychological  difficulties  if  she
    were separated from him and/or had to leave her life in Glasgow.

92. Neither before the First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper  Tribunal  was  it
    contended that the Secretary of State had been  in  breach  of  section
    55(1) or (3) of the 2009 Act.  In the proposed grounds of appeal to the
    Court of Session, however, for the  first  time  the  appellant  raised
    these issues.  Reliance was placed on the case of JG in  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Northern Ireland.

93. It is instructive to note the submissions made to the  Inner  House  by
    the respondent:-


         "[25]     Section  55(1)  and  section   55(3)   impose   statutory
                obligations upon the respondent  and  those  exercising  her
                authority.  In the present case the respondent had  complied
                with her duties under both subsections.   She had had regard
                to the best interests  of  N  as  a  primary  consideration.
                There had been no need to record and deal with  every  piece
                of evidence in her decision letter (Zoumbas v  Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department 2014 SC (UKSC) 75, Lord  Hodge
                JSC at paragraph 23).  It had not been necessary for her  to
                make specific reference in the letter to the guidance  which
                had been issued under section 55(3).  The issue was  one  of
                substance and not form (MK  (Section  55  Tribunal  Options)
                Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC),  [2015]  INLR  563,
                McCloskey J at paragraph 19).

         [26] Section 55 imposes obligations on  the  respondent  and  those
                acting on her behalf.  It does not impose  obligations  upon
                the FtT, or the UT, or  the  court.  When  carrying  out  an
                assessment of proportionality under  Article  8  in  a  case
                where a child is involved, the FtT, the UT,  and  the  court
                must have regard to the best interests of  the  child  as  a
                primary consideration.  The source  of  that  obligation  is
                section 6(1) of the HRA 1988 not section 55 of the 2009 Act.



         [27] Where the respondent has decided to refuse  a  person's  human
                rights claim, that person may  appeal  to  the  FtT  on  the
                ground that the  respondent's  decision  is  unlawful  under
                section 6 of the HRA  1998  (section  82(1)(b)  and  section
                84(2) of the 2002 Act).  It is settled law that, in  hearing
                such an appeal, the FtT's jurisdiction  is  not  a  judicial
                review  jurisdiction.   Nor  is  it  merely   an   appellate
                jurisdiction which is limited to  considering  the  evidence
                which was before the decision-maker.  Typically the evidence
                before the FtT is more extensive than the material which the
                respondent had.  Usually the FtT will have  the  benefit  of
                written witness statements and oral  evidence,  as  well  as
                additional documents. The FtT requires to  consider  all  of
                the evidence put before it and to come to its  own  decision
                on the merits (Huang v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department [2007] 2 AC 167, Lord Bingham  at  paragraph  11;
                Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  1
                WLR 4340, Ryder LJ at paragraphs 28 to 34).  If, as  counsel
                for the appellant seemed to suggest, JG  v  Upper  Tribunal,
                supra, indicated that whenever the respondent  has  breached
                section 55 the FtT must  allow  the  appeal,  that  was  not
                correct.  In  JG  the  court  seems  to  have  been  heavily
                influenced by judicial review cases.  It  was  important  to
                remember that the FtT's jurisdiction was wider than that.

         [28] Even if the respondent had breached one or both of her section
                55 duties, that would not have the  consequences  which  the
                appellant suggested.  At the end of the day any such  breach
                would not have been material because the FtT had  been  able
                to assess the best  interests  of  N  properly  and  it  had
                treated those interests as a primary consideration.  It  had
                the benefit of all of the evidence before it relating to  N,
                including statements from the appellant and L, oral evidence
                from the appellant, and Dr Ul-Hassan's report.  It conducted
                a careful analysis of N's  circumstances.   The  grounds  of
                appeal do not contend that the FtT had insufficient material
                before it to assess N's best interests and to determine  for
                itself whether or not deportation  of  the  appellant  would
                breach her Article 8 right to family life.  The position was
                clearly distinguishable from that in  JG,  where  the  court
                found  (i)  that  the  evidence  before  the  FtT  was   not
                materially  different  from  the  information   before   the
                respondent, and (ii) that the FtT had substantially  adopted
                the respondent's decision and reasoning.  The  FtT  had  not
                erred in law in determining that  it  would  not  be  unduly
                harsh for N to live in China, and that  deportation  of  the
                appellant was a justified interference with  N's  Article  8
                right to family life."

94. The Inner House began its substantive consideration at paragraph 29  of
    the judgment (delivered by Lord Doherty).  At paragraph 32,  the  Inner
    House held that although there was no  specific  reference  to  section
    55(3) in the Secretary of State's decision "it was not  essential  that
    there should be.  What was important was whether there  was  compliance
    with the substance of the section  55  duties.   What  such  compliance
    requires in a particular case is intensely fact sensitive".   Referring
    to JO, Lord Doherty held that  sometimes "there may be  nothing  in  an
    applicant's representations which suggest a need for the respondent  to
    obtain further information about a child, or that there is  a  need  to
    ascertain a child's views independently of the child's  parents".   The
    information before the Secretary of State, however, was "far from up-to-
    date", which inclined the Inner House "to the view that  she  ought  to
    have sought more recent information and that failing  to  do  so  would
    have been a breach of section 55".

95. Lord Doherty continued:-


         "[33]    What would be the consequences of  that  breach?   If  the
                FtT's jurisdiction had been a judicial  review  jurisdiction
                the issue would have been whether the  breach  was  material
                and ought to lead to the  respondent's  decision  being  set
                aside.  However, as we discuss below, it was not a  judicial
                review jurisdiction and that was not the issue.

         [34] Where the respondent has refused an applicant's  human  rights
                claim against a deportation order, the applicant may  appeal
                to the FtT in terms of section  82(1)(b)  of  the  2002  Act
                against the refusal.  The only  relevant  ground  of  appeal
                (section 84(2) of the 2002 Act)  is  that  the  decision  is
                unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998.  It  is  important
                to bear that in mind.  Until the amendment of  sections  82,
                84 and 86 by the Immigration Act 2014 (with effect  from  20
                October 2014) there were more  extensive  rights  of  appeal
                from a decision of the  respondent,  and  the  grounds  upon
                which an appeal could be advanced were  considerably  wider.
                In particular, the former version of section 84  included  a
                ground that the respondent's decision "is otherwise  not  in
                accordance with the law" (section 84(2) (e)), and  in  terms
                of the former section 86(3)(a) an appeal could be determined
                on the basis that the decision appealed against "was not  in
                accordance with the law". That is no longer the position.

         [35] In a section 82(1)(b) appeal the  FtT's  jurisdiction  is  not
                limited to a judicial review  jurisdiction  or  an  ordinary
                appellate jurisdiction (Huang v Secretary of State  for  the
                Home Department, supra, Lord Bingham at  paragraphs  11,  13
                and 15; Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
                [2016] 1 WLR 4799, Lord Reed JSC at paragraphs  8,  42,  43,
                and 50; R (MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
                Department [2017] 1 WLR 771, Baroness Hale of  Richmond  JSC
                at paragraph 64; Singh v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
                Department, supra, Ryder LJ at paragraphs 28  to  34).   The
                FtT is an extension of the decision-making process in  human
                rights cases (cf Singh v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
                Department, supra, Ryder LJ at paragraph 30).  The FtT  will
                accord respect to the respondent's decision and give  weight
                to her policies (Ali v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department, supra, Lord Reed JSC at paragraphs  44-50),  but
                it is not restricted to considering the material  which  was
                before her.  It is entitled to hear evidence (section  85(4)
                of the 2002 Act) and it usually does so.  It has  to  decide
                for itself on the basis of the evidence  before  it  whether
                the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  HRA  1998.
                Whatever the defects of the respondent's decision, it is the
                duty of the FtT to ensure that the ultimate disposal of  the
                human rights claim is consistent with the Convention (R  (MM
                (Lebanon)) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,
                supra, Baroness Hale  of  Richmond  JSC  at  paragraph  59).
                (original emphasis)

         [36] Generally in a case where the Article 8 right to  family  life
                of a child is founded upon the critical question for the FtT
                will not be whether the respondent has breached one or  both
                of her section 55 duties.  Usually the crucial  issues  will
                be  whether  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration   Rules
                applies; and, if it does not, whether the interference  with
                the Article 8 right  is  justified.   In  some  cases,  even
                though the respondent may  have  breached  section  55,  the
                evidence before the FtT enables  it  to  identify  and  have
                proper regard to the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a
                primary  consideration.  In  that   connection   we   remind
                ourselves of the observations of McCloskey J in MK  (Section
                55  Tribunal Options: Sierra Leone), supra  ,  at  paragraph
                [9]:

                    "9.     Our  survey  of  the   relevant   jurisprudence,
                        governing principles and statutory framework yields
                        the following conclusions:

                        (a)    Where either the FtT or the  Upper  Tribunal
                             decides that there has been  a  breach  by  the
                             Secretary of State  of  either  of  the  duties
                             imposed by Section 55 of  the  2009  Act,  both
                             Tribunals  are  empowered,   in   their   final
                             determination of the appeal, to assess the best
                             interests of any affected child  and  determine
                             the appeal accordingly.  This exercise will  be
                             appropriate in  cases  where  the  evidence  is
                             sufficient to enable the Tribunal to conduct  a
                             properly informed  assessment  of  the  child's
                             best interests.

                        (b)     However,  there  may  be  cases  where  the
                             Tribunal forms  the  view  that  the  assembled
                             evidence is insufficient for this purpose.   In
                             such cases, two options arise.  The first is to
                             consider such further relevant evidence as  the
                             Appellant can muster and/or  to  exercise  case
                             management powers in an attempt to augment  the
                             available evidence.  The second is to determine
                             the appeal  in  a  manner  which  requires  the
                             Secretary of State to make  a  fresh  decision.
                             While eschewing prescription, we  observe  that
                             this course may well be  appropriate  in  cases
                             where it appears to the appellate tribunal that
                             a  thorough  best  interests   assessment   may
                             require  interview  of  an  affected  child  or
                             children in  accordance  with  Part  2  of  the
                             Secretary of State's statutory guidance.

                        (c)     In  choosing  between   the   two   options
                             identified above,  Judges  will  be  guided  by
                             their  assessment  of  the  realities  of   the
                             litigation in the particular case and the basis
                             on which the Secretary of State has been  found
                             to have acted in breach of either  or  both  of
                             the  Section  55  duties.   It  will  also   be
                             appropriate   to   take   into   account    the
                             desirability of finality and the undesirability
                             of undue delay.""

96. At paragraph 37, the Inner House held that, properly read, the judgment
    of McCloskey J in JG did not suggest a different approach was required.
     It agreed with the emphasis placed by the Court of Appeal of  Northern
    Ireland on the  importance  of  the  section  55  obligations  and  the
    undesirability of undermining them.  In  JG,  however,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not been provided with a proper basis to identify the best
    interests of the elder of the appellant's two children.   A  psychology
    report which the appellant had submitted to the First-tier Tribunal was
    dismissed as not having addressed the material issues  and  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  had  not  had  the  benefit  of  materially   different
    information from the information which had been before the respondent.

97. By contrast, in the case before the Inner House, Lord Doherty  was  not
    persuaded that a similar  analysis  was  appropriate.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had considerably more material relating to the  daughter  than
    the respondent had possessed at the time of her decision.  The material
    was up-to-date.  The daughter's views were adequately  ascertained  and
    ventilated before the First-tier  Tribunal.   There  was,  accordingly,
    "sufficient  evidence  to  enable  to  FtT  to  properly  assess   [the
    daughter's]  best  interests  and  to   treat   them   as   a   primary
    consideration" (paragraph 38).



D.   DISCUSSION

98. We have taken time to set out, in some detail, the relevant  provisions
    of the  Every  Child  Matters  guidance  because  it  is  necessary  to
    understand the nature of that guidance, as it impacts upon  the  duties
    of  the  respondent's  officials,  before  one  can  reach   any   safe
    conclusions about what might flow from any failures to have  regard  to
    the guidance.

99. In our respectful view, insufficient attention has hitherto  been  paid
    to this issue.  This failing  can  most  graphically  be  seen  in  the
    judgment in Tinizaray, where the position of  the  UKBA  was  examined,
    without reference  to  the  fact  that  the  UKBA's  position  differed
    significantly from that of other  agencies,  which  have  the  duty  of
    supporting a child once initial concerns about its  welfare  have  been
    identified.

100. Contrary to what HHJ Thornton QC held in  paragraph  24  of  Tinizaray,
    there is nothing in Every Child Matters which requires the respondent's
    officials to operate by reference to the principles  contained  in  the
    Children Act 2004.  In particular, there is  nothing  in  the  guidance
    which suggests those officials should  consider  commissioning  reports
    about where a child's best interests might lie, as between remaining in
    the United Kingdom or leaving it with one or both parents.   The  third
    bullet point in paragraph 2.7  of  the  guidance  is  about  consulting
    children and taking into account their wishes and feelings.   The  last
    sentence of that bullet point says that where parents  and  carers  are
    present "they will  have  primary  responsibility  for  the  children's
    concerns".  It is impossible to  extract  from  these  the  proposition
    that, even if the parents have made it plain that the child  wishes  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with both of those parents, the respondent
    should  nevertheless  commission  an  independent  expert,  such  as  a
    psychologist or social worker, in order  to  investigate  whether  that
    asserted wish is genuinely held by the child.

101. The reason for the absence of such a provision in the guidance  is  not
    hard to discern.  When, in the immigration  context,  the  respondent's
    officials first discover a child, with his or her parents, the ordinary
    position will be that the child's best interests lie in remaining  with
    the  parents,  whilst  the  immigration  position  of  the  family   is
    established.

102. As explained in the guidance (see paragraph 30 above), the  section  55
    duty nevertheless makes it plain that those officials need to be  alive
    to any signs that the ostensible position of the child may not  be  the
    position in truth and that, for example, the child  may  in  fact  have
    been trafficked to the United Kingdom and/or be at risk of  sextual  or
    other exploitation.  Even in such circumstances, however, the nature of
    the respondent's immigration functions is not such as  to  require  the
    respondent's  officials  to  undertake   or   commission   a   detailed
    examination of the position.  That is the task of other agencies, whose
    core function is to safeguard the welfare of children.

103. At the other  end  of  the  immigration  process  is  the  position  of
    children at or near the point at which either they are  to  be  removed
    from the United Kingdom, along with a parent or  parents;  or  where  a
    parent is to be  removed  in  circumstances  where  the  child  may  be
    remaining in the United Kingdom.  Here, we enter the area with which we
    are primarily concerned; namely, the appeal regime  under  sections  82
    and 84 of the 2002 Act.  This, in turn, brings us back to the  question
    posed in paragraph 1 above: how, if at all, does a  breach  of  section
    55(3) impact upon the Tribunal's determination  of  an  appeal  against
    refusal of a human rights claim?

104. So far as England and Wales is concerned, the answer is to be found  in
    the judgment of Pill LJ in AJ (India) (see paragraph 48 above).  As  is
    evident  from  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  DS (Afghanistan),  the  Tribunal's
    functions are an extension of the decision-making process, which begins
    with the respondent's consideration of the human  rights  claim.   This
    means that, in  deciding  whether  the  removal  of  an  individual  in
    consequence of the refusal of their  claim  would  be  a  proportionate
    interference with the Article 8  rights  of  anyone  affected  by  that
    removal, the Tribunal must make the  best  interests  of  any  affected
    child  a  primary  consideration   in   the   proportionality-balancing
    exercise.

105. The Tribunal's function is not limited to considering  the  submissions
    and evidential material put to the respondent.  It  must  consider  the
    position as at the date of its own decision on the appeal.  As Pill  LJ
    held at paragraph 22 of AJ (India), the Tribunal  "has  power  to  hear
    evidence, make findings of fact and decide points of law".  Indeed, the
    last two powers are, in truth, duties; and the power to  hear  evidence
    is in most instances an obligation, unless the evidence is not filed in
    accordance with procedural requirements or is irrelevant to the subject
    matter of the appeal.

106. What this means is that, even at the time  when  the  appellate  system
    included a duty to allow an appeal on the basis that  the  respondent's
    decision was "not in  accordance  with  the  law",  a  failure  by  the
    respondent's officials to comply with section 55 was extremely unlikely
    to prevent the Tribunal from reaching a lawful decision on the  appeal.
    As Pill LJ explained at  paragraph  24,  Lady  Hale  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    plainly contemplated  that  the  fact-finding  Tribunal  must  consider
    section 55; and if she had been of the view that a failure to do so  on
    the part of the respondent meant that the Tribunal had no option but to
    remit to the respondent (under the  former  appeal  system),  then  she
    would have said so.

107. The position, therefore, is that, as between the  competing  principles
    that the respondent is the primary decision-maker  in  the  immigration
    field, and that the  Tribunal  is  an  extension  of  the  respondent's
    decision-making process, it is the latter principle which holds sway as
    regards the discharge of the duties under section 55.

108. This position accords precisely with the result in SS (Nigeria),  where
    Laws LJ held at paragraph 35 that it will be "extremely rare"  for  the
    Tribunal to change its proceedings from the adversarial  and  "exercise
    an inquisitorial  function  on  its  own  initiative".   In  the  great
    majority of cases, the Tribunal will not err in  law  by  deciding  the
    "best interests issue" as an aspect of Article 8(2), on  the  basis  of
    the submissions and evidence before it, rather than deciding the matter
    on the basis of the respondent's failure to comply with section 55,  or
    adjourning to enable a party to assemble evidence on that issue.

109. Although the  Upper  Tribunal  in  JO  and  MK  made  reference  to  SS
    (Nigeria) and although AJ (India) was mentioned in paragraph 19 of  MK,
    both decisions were, in fact, decided per incuriam in relation  to  the
    relevant part of the judgment in AJ (India).  Accordingly, what JO  and
    MK say about the result of a  breach  of  a  section  55  duty  by  the
    respondent has to be read in that light.

110. It is against this important background that we turn  to  the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in JG.  Since judgments of the Court  of  Appeal
    of England and Wales are no more than persuasive in the separate  legal
    jurisdiction  of  Northern  Ireland,  the  absence  of   any   relevant
    consideration of AJ (India) cannot affect the binding nature of  JG  in
    that jurisdiction.  If the judgment in JG had emanated from England and
    Wales, however, it is plain that the weight placed by  McCloskey  J  at
    paragraphs 38 and 39 on the respondent as  the  primary  decision-maker
    would be problematic, given the absence of  any  consideration  of  the
    case law emphasising the role of the Tribunal as an  extension  of  the
    decision-making process in section  55  matters.   In  particular,  the
    judgment in JG pays no regard to (i) the ability of the  appellant,  as
    part of the Tribunal's appellate proceedings, to adduce evidence  about
    the wishes of his 13 year-old son regarding the proposed deportation of
    his father; (ii) the reference in Every Child Matters  to  the  parents
    having "primary responsibility for  the  child's  concerns"  (paragraph
    2.7); and (iii) the absence of any normative statement in the  guidance
    regarding  the  commissioning  by  the  respondent  of  an  independent
    assessment of the child's position.

111. Overall, the conclusions reached in  JG are more forthright than  those
    reached by the same author in JO and MK.  In  particular,  his  earlier
    suggestion that, in an appropriate case, the Tribunal could adjourn and
    direct the filing of relevant evidence is replaced by  the  finding  at
    paragraph 37 of JG that ensuring the child's views are  considered  via
    separate representation "would  inevitably  generate  much  litigation,
    delay and increased expense".

112. At paragraph 39, McCloskey J expressed regret that  the  new  appellate
    provisions no longer enable the Tribunal  to  remit  the  case  to  the
    respondent.  The Court of Appeal, therefore, concluded  that  it  would
    set aside the judgment of the Upper Tribunal and remit the case to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judgment does not  explain  what  course  the
    First-tier Tribunal should or could take at the remitted  hearing.   In
    particular, the question arises as to whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would direct the respondent to ask the  13  year  old  son  whether  he
    wanted his father to be deported to China, even if the evidence  before
    the Tribunal already gave it the answer.

113. The way in which the Court disposed of  the  matter  in  JG  raises  an
    issue which was touched  upon  by  Lady  Hale  in  ZH  (Tanzania).   At
    paragraph  24,  she  recorded  the  acknowledgment  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that a  decision  which  was  taken  without  having
    regard to the need to promote the  welfare  of  any  children  involved
    would not be "in accordance with the law" for the purposes  of  Article
    8(2) of the ECHR.

114. This is particularly significant for the present appeal  system,  where
    the only ground of appeal is that the  decision  to  refuse  the  human
    rights claim (and thus to remove) would be contrary to section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

115. Lady Hale's recording of the respondent's stance is  not  part  of  the
    ratio of ZH (Tanzania).  It is doubtful that the stance  was,  in  any
    event, correct.  The question for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(2)  of
    whether the decision "is in accordance with the law" is not necessarily
    determined by whether the actual decision is  in  accordance  with  the
    domestic law.  What is meant by "in accordance with the  law"  for  the
    purposes of the ECHR Article 8(2)  analysis  is  whether  the  proposed
    interference has a proper basis in domestic law, including whether  the
    law is accessible to the person concerned and  foreseeable  as  to  its
    effects: AB v HM Advocate [2017] UKSC 25, paragraph 25  and  paragraphs
    49 to 53 of R (A) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2021]
    UKSC 37.  Section 55  of  the  2009  Act  undoubtedly  satisfies  those
    requirements.  If the position  were  otherwise,  and  any  failure  to
    comply with section 55 on the  part  of  the  respondent  rendered  her
    decision not in accordance with the law for  the  purposes  of  Article
    8(2), then the Court of Appeal could not have decided as it did  in  AJ
    (India).

116. That is not, however, the end of the matter.   As  the  Upper  Tribunal
    held in OA and Others (human rights: "new matter" s.120) Nigeria [2019]
    UKUT 00065 (IAC); [2019] Imm AR 647, in  any  human  rights  appeal,  a
    finding that a  person  satisfies  the  requirements  of  a  particular
    immigration rule, so as to be entitled to leave to remain,  means  that
    the respondent  will  not  be  able  to  point  to  the  importance  of
    maintaining immigration control as a factor weighing in favour  of  the
    respondent in  any  proportionality-balancing  exercise  under  Article
    8(2), so far as that factor relates to the particular immigration  rule
    which the judge has found to be satisfied.

117. It can immediately be seen  that  there  is  a  fundamental  difference
    between, on the one hand, a decision which - if correctly made -  means
    the individual concerned is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom in
    accordance with the respondent's own  system  of  immigration  controls
    and, on the other hand, a decision to refuse a human rights claim  that
    may, in substance, be entirely correct and where any initial procedural
    failing can  be  corrected  as  part  of  the  overall  decision-making
    process, including the Tribunal's decision on appeal.

118. This point is forcefully made in the judgment of  the  Inner  House  in
    ZG.  At paragraph 35, Lord Doherty expressly recognised that the First-
    tier Tribunal "is an extension of the decision-making process in  human
    rights cases" and  that  it  is  "not  restricted  to  considering  the
    material which was before [the respondent]". The First-tier Tribunal:-

         "...has to decide for itself on the basis of the evidence before it
         whether the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  HRA  1998.
         Whatever the defects of the respondent's decision, it is  the  duty
         of the FtT to ensure that the ultimate disposal of the human rights
         claim is consistent with the Convention."

119. At paragraph 36 of JG, the Court of Appeal held that a material  breach
    of section 55(3) "gives rise to a breach of Article 8 ECHR rights",  in
    that the violation "engages, and contravenes, the procedural  dimension
    of Article 8".  This was the basis upon which the  Court  decided  that
    JG's substantive appeal succeeded.

120. Leaving aside the  problem,  already  mentioned,  about  where  such  a
    conclusion takes a court or tribunal in terms of sections 12 and 13  of
    the 2007 Act, the conclusion in JG that there  has  been  a  procedural
    breach of Article 8 is incompatible with the approach taken in  England
    and Wales in AJ (India) and by the Inner  House  in  ZG,   whereby  the
    procedural breach can be cured by the remainder of the  decision-making
    process.

121. Our analysis of the  case  law  has  deliberately  been  undertaken  by
    reference to section 55(1) and (3).  Since, in McCloskey J's words, the
    section 55(3) duty is merely the "handmaiden" of the  duty  in  section
    55(1) (see paragraph 74 above), the way in which courts have dealt with
    non-compliance with section 55(1) plainly informs the view that must be
    taken of any failure to comply with section  55(3).   If,  as  we  have
    seen, the courts of England and Wales and Scotland regard  breaches  of
    section 55(1) as being rectifiable by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    human rights appeal, it would be strange if a different view were taken
    of breaches of the section 55(3) duty to have  regard  to  Every  Child
    Matters.  This is particularly so, given that  the  guidance,  properly
    read, carries nothing of material significance, beyond the  requirement
    to take the child's wishes and feelings into account  "even  though  it
    will not always be possible to reach decisions  with  which  the  child
    will agree".   Apart  from  MK  and  JG  (and  Scoffield  J's  decision
    following the latter), the case law conspicuously  does  not  draw  any
    distinction between section 55(1) and (3).

122. This brings us to the following point.  As  we  have  already  been  at
    pains to emphasise, paragraph 2.7 of Every Child Matters places primary
    responsibility  for  identifying  and  communicating  the  wishes   and
    feelings of the child on the child's parents or carers.  In the case of
    a human rights appeal, that  accords  precisely  with  the  established
    legal position.  The appellant bears the burden of showing that his  or
    her removal would be a breach of section 6 of the 1998 Act  because  it
    would be an unlawful interference with the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant or some other affected person.  Although,  once  one  reaches
    the final stage of the exercise mandated by Article 8(2),  there  is  a
    requirement  on  the  respondent  to  show  that  the  interference  is
    proportionate, the appellant is nevertheless expected to put before the
    Tribunal evidence which is within the appellant's realm  of  knowledge.
    In cases involving children, this is routinely done by the provision of
    witness statements, school records, and other materials,  showing  that
    (a) the child wishes to remain in the United Kingdom; and (b) the child
    wishes the appellant to so remain.

123. Even if the respondent could be said to  have  failed  to  consult  the
    child in order to ascertain his or her wishes and feelings, the  result
    would almost invariably not be to  deprive  the  Tribunal  of  evidence
    about those wishes and feelings.  On the contrary, the result  will  be
    that the respondent will  have  to  make  her  case  for  removing  the
    appellant in the light of the evidence  that  the  child's  wishes  and
    feelings are as described by the appellant; and thus on the basis  that
    the child's best interests run counter to the result the respondent  is
    seeking to achieve.

124.  Whilst  this  is  the  paradigm  scenario,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal
    acknowledged in SS (Nigeria), there may be rare  or  exceptional  cases
    where the Tribunal would be wrong to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  such
    evidence as is before it regarding the position  of  the  child.   Such
    cases will, however, by their nature be extremely uncommon.  As Laws LJ
    emphasised, the Tribunal must not lightly step out of its role in  what
    are,  in  this  jurisdiction,  adversarial  proceedings  (paragraph  43
    above).

125. Mr Peters submitted that the effect of JG is to assist  appellants  who
    lack the finances or aptitude to assemble  and  adduce  evidence  about
    their children, in connection with  a  human  rights  appeal.   Section
    55(3) ensures that the respondent  must,  in  all  cases,  provide  the
    Tribunal with that evidence.

126. This submission is problematic on a number of  levels.   Section  55(3)
    does not require the respondent to apply the  guidance  but  merely  to
    have regard to it.  Properly read, the guidance does not  envisage  the
    respondent doing more in this respect  than  to  take  account  of  the
    child's wishes and feelings.  It does not envisage the commissioning by
    the  respondent  of  independent  reports  on  the  child,  whether  to
    determine the latter's wishes and feelings or to identify any harm that
    might be caused to the child by the removal of the appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Lastly, it needs to be pointed out that it is not  the
    purpose of section 55(3) to alleviate the procedural  consequences  for
    the appellant of bringing a human rights appeal.

127. What, then, might constitute a rare or exceptional case?   One  example
    has already  been  foreshadowed.  Judges  working  in  the  immigration
    jurisdiction may be required from time to time to decide a human rights
    appeal, where they harbour a concern regarding the welfare of  a  child
    upon whom an adult appellant is relying in order to resist removal. The
    child's welfare may be at risk if the appellant remains with the  child
    in the United Kingdom.  There may, for instance, be a concern that  the
    appellant is not, in fact, in a genuine parental relationship with  the
    child and/or that the child is, or is at risk of,  being  exploited  by
    the appellant in this country.  Where a judge has such concerns, he  or
    she has a duty to  draw  them  to  the  attention  of  the  appropriate
    authorities; and it would be wrong in such a case to proceed solely  on
    the basis of the position put forward by the appellant.

128. What we have just said is not  intended  to  be  comprehensive.   Other
    exceptional instances may be envisaged, using "exceptional" in its post-
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11; [2007] Imm AR 571 sense of something unlikely  or
    rarely to be encountered. The important point, however, is that in  the
    very great majority of cases, the evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant
    regarding the position of the child will enable the Tribunal to  decide
    the human rights appeal, whether or not there has been a failure by the
    respondent to comply with section 55 of the 2009 Act.

129. At paragraph 37 of ZG, the Inner House sought to distinguish JG on  its
    facts.  We are unable to take the same view in this case.  The  subject
    matter in JG was, as we have sought to demonstrate, far from being  the
    sort of unusual or exceptional case envisaged by the Court of Appeal in
    England and Wales. Were this appeal governed by the law of England  and
    Wales or the law of Scotland, it would be clear  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal could not succeed. The fact that the immigration jurisdiction of
    the Upper Tribunal extends to the whole of the United Kingdom does  not
    give the Upper Tribunal, when deciding a case arising under the law  of
    one part of the United Kingdom, the ability to ignore the authority  of
    the appellate court of that part and instead follow  the  authority  to
    the contrary of an appellate court whose jurisdiction is confined to  a
    different part of the  United  Kingdom.  So  much  is  plain  from  the
    judgment of  Laws  LJ  in  Clarke  v  Staddon/Caulfield  and  others  v
    Marshalls Clay Products Ltd [2004] EWCA Civ 422.   In  that  case,  the
    Court of Appeal was concerned with the jurisdiction of  the  Employment
    Appeal Tribunal, which,  like  the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  in
    immigration, extended across the United Kingdom. The Inner House of the
    Court of Session had construed the  EU  Working  Time  Directive  in  a
    particular way (MPB Structures Ltd v Munro [2003] IRLR 350). The  Court
    of Appeal rejected the submission that the EAT was bound to follow  the
    decision of the Inner House in an appeal arising in England and  Wales.
    Laws LJ held:

         "30. As I have indicated Mr Hogarth submitted that the EAT in these
         cases ought to have followed Munro. I understood him to  mean  that
         as a matter of law, not discretion or good sense,  it  should  have
         done so. If it is right this implies that this court would also  be
         bound by the Court of Session, at  least  to  the  extent  that  we
         should be obliged to correct the EAT's failure to follow the  Inner
         House; and that would give effect within this jurisdiction  to  the
         Munro judgment.

         31.   I  am  afraid  I  regard  this  argument  as  nothing  but  a
         distraction from the real questions posed by this appeal.  However,
         I acknowledge these following propositions at  once.  (1)  The  ET,
         EAT, and the Court of Session on appeal from the EAT administer  in
         Scotland  (with  some  esoteric  qualifications  not  relevant  for
         present purposes) the same statutory regimes as do the ET, EAT, and
         the Court of Appeal on appeal from the EAT in England.  (2)  Indeed
         the EAT spans the jurisdictions of England Wales and Scotland as  a
         single  jurisdiction:  s.20  of  the  Employment  Rights  Act  1996
         provides that it is to be a superior court of record and is to have
         a central office in London, but may  sit  in  any  place  in  Great
         Britain. (3) As a matter of pragmatic good sense the ET and the EAT
         in either jurisdiction will ordinarily expect to  follow  decisions
         of the higher appeal court in the other jurisdiction  (whether  the
         Court  of  Session  or  the  Court  of  Appeal)  where  the   point
         confronting them is indistinguishable from what was there decided.

         32.  In my judgment, however, none  of  this  brings  Mr  Hogarth's
         argument home. The rules of precedent or stare  decisis  cognisable
         here are given by the common law. Part of their  substance,  though
         not its whole, is that decisions of the Court of  Appeal  bind  the
         Court  of  Appeal  itself  and  all  lower  courts.  They   include
         refinements which teach where the edge of precedent is to be found,
         so that often the earlier decision can be distinguished. I need not
         go into those. The essence is  that  precedent  confines  the  very
         power of the courts subject to it. It is not a rule  of  discretion
         or comity or anything of the kind. It is therefore of  necessity  a
         doctrine whose reach is limited to the jurisdiction  in  which  the
         courts in question operate. The House of Lords is no exception;  by
         statute its writ runs to three jurisdictions,  and  accordingly  it
         binds the lower courts within each of those jurisdictions.  Statute
         might also extend the scope  of  precedent,  as  was  done  by  the
         European Communities Act 1972, part of  whose  effect  is  to  give
         binding force over the national courts to decisions of the European
         Court  of  Justice  (in  matters   within   the   latter's   proper
         competence). Had the Human Rights Act 1998 provided that the courts
         of the United Kingdom should be bound by decisions of the  European
         Court of Human Rights, rather than take account of them, that would
         have been another instance. Now, statutory  provisions  which  give
         dominion to courts in one jurisdiction (international or otherwise)
         over  courts  in  another  are  apt,  here  at  least,  to   father
         constitutional tensions. But it is at least clear, and here is  the
         point on this part of the case, that it would be  a  constitutional
         solecism of some magnitude to suggest that by force of  the  common
         law of precedent any court of England and Wales is  in  the  strict
         sense bound by decisions of any court whose  jurisdiction  runs  in
         Scotland only  or  -  most  assuredly  -  vice  versa.  Comity  and
         practicality are another thing  altogether.  They  exert  a  wholly
         legitimate pressure.

         33.  Mr Hogarth's argument on this part of the case is thus  in  my
         judgment mistaken. The EAT here was not obliged by  law  to  follow
         the Court of Session. And this court certainly is not."

130.  In his judgment (with which the other members of  the  Court  agreed),
    Laws LJ went on to explain why he  did  not  consider  that  Munro  was
    rightly decided and to dismiss the appeal against the decision  of  the
    EAT, which had reached a different view. There was no  suggestion  that
    the EAT would not be bound by the judgment of the Inner House in  cases
    arising in Scotland.  On  the  contrary,  at  paragraph  53,  Laws  LJ,
    discussing  the  fact  that  another  Tribunal  had  meanwhile  made  a
    reference to Luxembourg regarding the interpretation of the  Directive,
    opined that "some time will pass in which I suppose  the  EAT  deciding
    Scottish cases will follow Munro and the  EAT  deciding  English  cases
    will follow the judgments in these appeals".

131. We do not consider there is anything in the 2007 Act  that  mandates  a
    different approach. Section 26 enables the Upper Tribunal to  decide  a
    case in England and Wales, Scotland or Northern  Ireland  "even  though
    the case arises under the law of a territory  other  than  the  one  in
    which the case is decided".   Whilst  this  expression  clearly  covers
    jurisdictions administered by the Upper Tribunal, where  the  statutory
    regime is different in certain respects in one part  from  another  (or
    where the jurisdiction is confined to one part),  we  do  not  consider
    that it is to be read so narrowly. In any event, clear  language  would
    be required before it could be inferred  that  Parliament  intended  to
    create either the "constitutional solecism" envisaged by Laws LJ or the
    no less palatable situation in which the Upper  Tribunal  could  choose
    which appellate court to  follow,  irrespective  of  where  the  appeal
    arose.

132. We therefore conclude that  there  is  a  material  difference  in  the
    treatment of section 55(3) of the 2009 Act as between, on the one hand,
    Northern Ireland and, on the other, England  and  Wales  and  Scotland.
    Since this is an appeal governed by the law of Northern Ireland, we are
    required by JG to find that the decision of Judge  Grimes  contains  an
    error of law.  We are further compelled  by  JG  to  set  the  decision
    aside.  So far as concerns disposal, we follow the course taken  in  JG
    and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing
    before a judge other than Judge Grimes.






                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Lane






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               6 September 2021
