
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 R (on the application of Shrestha and others) v Secretary of State for  the
Home Department (Hamid jurisdiction: nature and purposes) [2018] UKUT  00242
(IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 11 June 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF
                      DEEPA ADHIKARI SHRESTHA & OTHERS

                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Appearance:

Mr Syed Wasif Ali, of Harrow Solicitors

(1) The "Hamid" jurisdiction of  the  High  Court  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
exists to  ensure  that  lawyers  conduct  themselves  according  to  proper
standards of behaviour. The bringing of hopeless applications  for  judicial
review wastes judicial time and risks delaying  the  prompt  examination  of
other cases, which may have merit. In many cases, the only  tangible  result
of such an application is that the applicant incurs significant expense.

(2)  Solicitors  who  practise  in  the  difficult  and  demanding  area  of
immigration  law  and  who  are  properly  discharging  their   professional
responsibilities can only safely enjoy the recognition they deserve  if  the
public is confident appropriate steps are  being  taken  to  deal  with  the
minority who are failing in their professional responsibilities.



                                  DECISION


 1.  This  is  the  judgment  of  the  Tribunal,  to  which  we  have  both
    contributed.




    1. The "Hamid" jurisdiction

 2. The Upper Tribunal, like the High Court, has inherent  jurisdiction  to
    govern its own procedure.  Part of that jurisdiction includes  ensuring
    that lawyers  conduct  themselves  according  to  proper  standards  of
    behaviour: R (Hamid) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin).   In  (R  (on  the  application  of  Butt)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 264  (Admin),  a
    subsequent case concerning the Hamid jurisdiction, Sir  Brian  Leveson,
    President of the Queen's Bench Division, pointed  out  that  "in  these
    days of austerity, the court simply cannot afford to spend  unnecessary
    time on processing abusive applications ..."  (paragraph 4).

 3. A solicitor who engages in a systematic course of conduct involving the
    bringing of judicial review applications that are totally without merit
    is not complying with his or her duty to uphold  proper  administration
    of justice; to act  with  integrity;  and  to  behave  in  a  way  that
    maintains public trust in the profession.   The  bringing  of  hopeless
    applications wastes judicial time, which is at  a  premium,  and  risks
    delaying the prompt examination of other cases, which may  have  merit.
    The fact that a person with no entitlement  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom may, in practice, be able to remain in  the  country  a  little
    longer, as a result of bringing  a  meritless  application,  serves  to
    reinforce the view that the procedure is being abused.  In  any  event,
    it is doubtful whether such an applicant will gain a material advantage
    by making the application.  In many cases, the only tangible result  is
    that the applicant  (or  the  applicant's  friends  or  family)  incurs
    significant professional fees, as well  as  the  fees  payable  to  the
    Tribunal.  In such cases, the only real beneficiary is the solicitor.

 4. In Vay Sui Ip v Solicitors Regulation Authority [2018] EWHC 957 (Admin)
    Irwin LJ said:-

         "180.    The Courts well understand the vulnerability  of  many  of
             those at risk of removal  or  deportation  from  the  country.
             They can be desperate to remain.  They are often  prepared  to
             grasp at straws.  The Courts  are  also  fully  alive  to  the
             technicality and difficulty of immigration  law,  and  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  These factors add  to  the  difficulty  of
             representing such clients.  However,  they  also  add  to  the
             responsibility of solicitors engaged for such clients.

         181.     It is critical that solicitors, and  others,  representing
             such  clients,  are  scrupulous  in   observing   professional
             standards.  The cost of not doing so to the system is  obvious
             and has been  emphasised  many  times.   Spurious,  or  merely
             hopeless, applications to courts and tribunals add greatly  to
             the burden on the system of  justice,  and  to  the  costs  of
             government.  However, it should not  be  forgotten  that  such
             applications also cost the applicants, both financially and in
             engendering  prolonged  and  unjustified   expectations.    In
             addition,   poor,   and   where   it   arises    unscrupulous,
             representation must,  to  some  degree  at  least,  overshadow
             careful  and  expert  immigration  lawyers.   The   Solicitors
             Disciplinary Tribunal is entirely  justified  in  taking  very
             seriously cases such as this."

 5. The exercise of the  Hamid  jurisdiction  has  an  additional  purpose.
    Solicitors  who  practise  in  the  difficult  and  demanding  area  of
    immigration law and who are  properly  discharging  their  professional
    responsibilities can only safely enjoy the recognition they deserve  if
    the public is confident that appropriate steps are being taken to  deal
    with   the   minority   who   are   failing   in   their   professional
    responsibilities.  In short, the reputations of the former must not  be
    tainted by the activities of the latter.



2. The present proceedings

 6. On 26 March 2018, the Upper Tribunal wrote to Harrow Solicitors to  say
    the Tribunal's records showed that out of 36 applications for  judicial
    review brought by the firm since January 2017, eleven have  been  found
    to be totally without merit; a further nine had not been admitted;  and
    one was subject to severe criticism at the oral renewal hearing.

 7. The details of the 21 cases were set  out  briefly  in  the  Tribunal's
    letter:-

         "1.       JR/1842/2017:  not  admitted  and  certified  as  totally
             without merit; in the decision it is said that the  claim  was
             an abuse of process.

         2. JR/2179/2017: refused and certified as totally without merit; in
             the decision it is said  that  letter  challenged  was  not  a
             decision of the respondent.

         3. JR/2183/2017: not admitted  and  certified  as  totally  without
             merit; in the decision it is said that the application is said
             to be lodged out of time because the client instructed  Harrow
             Solicitors after the due date but in  fact  the  decision  was
             served on yourselves.

         4. JR/2252/2017: refused and certified as totally without merit.

         5. JR/2879/2017: refused and certified as totally without merit; in
             the decision it is said that the further  submissions  were  a
             repeat  of  previous  submissions  and  the  application   was
             hopeless and bound to fail.

         6. JR/3648/2017: refused and certified as totally without merit; in
             the decision it is also said that  the  challenge  is  out  of
             time.

         7. JR/4490/2017: not admitted  and  certified  as  totally  without
             merit.

         8. JR/4497/2017: not admitted  and  certified  as  totally  without
             merit.

         9. JR/5442/2017: refused and certified as totally without merit; in
             the decision it is said that  the  claim  is  presented  in  a
             wholly incoherent way and that  it  is  not  even  clear  what
             decision the applicant seeks to challenge.

         10.       JR/6566/2017:  not  admitted  and  certified  as  totally
             without merit; it is said in  the  decision  that  the  letter
             challenged was not a decision of the respondent and the  claim
             was presented in a totally unparticularised fashion.

         11.      JR/337/2018: refused  and  certified  as  totally  without
             merit; it is said in the decision that the grounds are  poorly
             drafted.

         12.      JR/3236/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             that the challenge is hopelessly out of time  and  explanation
             was wholly inadequate and lacking in merit, and  further  that
             the case was devoid of any discernible merit.

         13.      JR/3239/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             there was serious and  substantial  delay  and  there  was  no
             application to extend time.

         14.      JR/3685/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             there was a significant delay and no particularisation of  the
             reasons for this and that the action was not brought against a
             substantive decision of the respondent.

         15.      JR/4492/2017 (decision on the papers): not admitted; it is
             said  in  the  decision  that  the  grounds  do  not  properly
             indentify the decision challenged and there was no application
             to extend time; in the decision on oral renewal it is said the
             matter was wholly without substance.

         16.      JR/5009/2017 (decision on the papers) not admitted; it  is
             said in the decision that there was no challenge to a decision
             of the respondent and no reason given to extend time, and that
             the grounds are formulaic.

         17.      JR/5180/2017 (decision on the papers) not admitted; it  is
             said in the decision that there  was  no  explanation  of  the
             delay and that the challenge was hopeless. At the  first  oral
             renewal hearing it was found  that  the  grounds  were  poorly
             pleaded and the matter  was  adjourned  to  amend  grounds  of
             appeal.

         18.      JR/5436/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             that the challenge was brought well outside the 3  month  time
             limit and that the grounds were only a vague disagreement.

         19.      JR/6357/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             that no good reasons  for  lateness  were  identified  and  no
             arguable merit was found in the grounds.

         20.      JR/7786/2017: not admitted; it is  said  in  the  decision
             that there was no application to extend time and this was also
             not a challenge to a decision of the respondent.

         21.      JR/6351/2017: refusal of permission  at  an  oral  hearing
             following a refusal on the papers, it was said in the decision
             of 9th March 2018 that the claim is wholly without  merit  and
             there was not proper basis upon which the  claim  should  have
             been issued let alone pursued to an oral hearing.

 8. These cases display a number of disturbing features.   In  almost  all,
    the decision said to be challenged in the claim form and grounds is the
    Home Office's response to the applicant's pre-action  protocol  letter.
    That PAP response is not, as is obvious, the decision  with  which  the
    judicial review application is concerned.  The PAP response is a  reply
    to a letter from the applicant, which puts the Secretary  of  State  on
    notice of the  applicant's  alleged  concerns  regarding  a  particular
    decision (or failure to take a decision).  A PAP response which defends
    the position taken in a decision cannot  (without  more)  constitute  a
    discrete decision, which  can  be  separately  challenged  by  judicial
    review.

 9. Any solicitor specialising in immigration law would be expected to know
    this.  In any event, it would have become apparent,  following  receipt
    of the first judicial review decision from the Upper  Tribunal,  making
    this point plain, that the approach  taken  by  Harrow  Solicitors  was
    fundamentally misconceived.

10. By reason of rule 28(2) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, an application for judicial review "must be made  promptly"
    and, in the case of immigration judicial reviews, must be sent "so that
    it is received no later than 3 months after the date of  the  decision,
    action or omission to which the application relates".  Accordingly,  it
    matters when the decision under challenge was taken.  If the  challenge
    to the decision is mounted outside the time  limit  in  section  28(2),
    then the application must explain why and seek an extension of time.

11. It may, as a result, be in  an  applicant's  interest  to  portray  the
    decision under challenge as a later one than is, in reality, the case.

12. The second general and disturbing feature of the applications  is  that
    they are poorly particularised. The   No attempt  is  made  to  grapple
    with the provisions of Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 or with the relevant case law on Article 8 of the ECHR.

13. For example, we find this in JR/329/2017:-

         "10.     The claimants informed us that it is  very  difficult  for
             them to restart their life back  home.   They  have  relocated
             from India to make their future and career  in  the  UK.   The
             Indian currency value much longer than that of the UK (sic).

         11.      They informed us that now they have mentally setup in  the
             environment of UK.  They have a  private,  family  and  social
             life in the United Kingdom.

         12.      They informed us that it is very  difficult  for  them  to
             restart their life in ther back home (sic).

         13.      They informed us that now they have mentally setup in  the
             environment of UK.  They have private, family and social  life
             in the United Kingdom (sic repetition).

         14.      The claimants further state that  they  have  no  criminal
             record and that there are nothing which could be regarded,  as
             detrimental to have character and request to be able to remain
             in the UK (sic).

         15.      The claimant states that to all intents and purposes  that
             UK is now their home and they  would  very  much  like  to  be
             allowed to continue with building a life in the UK.

         16.      Now it is almost impossible for  claimants  to  return  to
             their home country as they have been away  for  a  long  time.
             They have friends and social life in the UK."

14. The relief sought in these cases can only  be  described  as  intensely
    problematic.  For example, in JR/3685/2017:-

         "There are five grounds/issues:

         First, whether the SSHD's decision is not in  accordance  with  the
         Immigration Rules.

         Second, whether the SSHD's decision dated 15 November 2016  is  not
         unlawful/unreasonable.

         Third, whether  the  SSHD's  refusal  is  not  unlawful  for  being
         inconsistent with paragraph 276(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
         Articles 3, 5 and 8 of the ECHR.

         Fourth, whether the SSHD's did use his discretionary power  as  per
         settled principle of natural justice (sic).

         Fifth, whether the SSHD's can issue removal directions in spite  of
         claimant's right of appeal inside the United Kingdom (sic)."

15. In five of the cases that were judged  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be
    totally without merit,  Harrow  Solicitors  filed  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  At least,  that  is  what
    the covering letters indicated.  In each case, however, the grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal were no more than a replication of
    the  grounds  of  challenge  that  accompanied  the   application   for
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings.  No attempt whatsoever
    was made to engage with the reasoning  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge,
    notwithstanding that, by virtue of section 13 of the Tribunals, Courts,
    and Enforcement Act 2007, a right of appeal lies to the Court of Appeal
    against a decision of the Upper  Tribunal  "only  on  a  point  of  law
    arising from a decision made by the Upper Tribunal".  In none of  these
    cases was there any indication that  any  thought  had  been  given  to
    whether it was in any sense appropriate  to  apply  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.  It is hard to see how this is  anything
    other than an abuse of process.



3. Discussion

16. Mr Ali has not attempted to defend any of this  problematic  behaviour.
    On the contrary, both in his witness statement of 6 June  2018  and  in
    his oral submissions, he took sole responsibility for what he described
    as his "mistakes".

17. Mr Ali said that he has  one  case  officer  who  works  for  him.   It
    transpired that  this  case  officer  is  Mr  Ali's  wife,  who  has  a
    psychology qualification but who is not, it seems,  legally  qualified.
    Mr Ali said that his practice was almost  exclusively  in  immigration.
    He had done one or two family cases.

18. Mr Ali told us that,  in  addition  to  judicial  review,  he  prepared
    applications to the Home Office and appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.
     He had been working in the immigration  judicial  review  field  since
    2008/2009.

19. Most of the clients of Harrow Solicitors  are,  according  to  Mr  Ali,
    overstayers.  They are not allowed to work.  They nevertheless  survive
    by doing various "odd jobs".  As we understood it, Mr Ali said that his
    clients were unwilling to make formal applications to the  Home  Office
    for leave to remain because they  would  be  required  to  submit  bank
    statements, in connection with any request for  fee  remission.   Those
    bank statements might indicate the proceeds of illegal working.   As  a
    result, Harrow Solicitors would, in effect, put forward  the  substance
    of such an application in the form of  a  pre-action  protocol  letter,
    following that with judicial review.

20. Mr Ali said that he did charge his clients for the judicial review work
    undertaken by Harrow Solicitors.  That included filing applications for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  He  would  not,  however,
    charge them "too much".

21. In answer to questions from  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley,  it  was
    apparent  that  Mr  Ali  was  unaware  of  the  obligations  of  Harrow
    Solicitors under money-laundering legislation, whereby  money  received
    from clients which is considered to come from illegal earnings must  be
    the subject of reporting to the relevant authority.

22. Mr Ali repeated that he was sorry for his "several mistakes";  that  he
    had no excuse; and that  he  had  suspended  all  immigration  judicial
    review work, upon receipt of the Tribunal's letter of  26  March  2018.
    Mr Ali intended, for the future, to file a claim  for  judicial  review
    only if an independent  counsel  had  confirmed  that  the  matter  was
    properly arguable.  Before receipt of the letter of 26  March,  Mr  Ali
    said that he considered that he had been "doing a good service  for  my
    clients".

23. A case worker, Mr Ali's wife, had prepared the grounds but Mr Ali  said
    that he was not in any way blaming her.  In some of the cases,  Mr  Ali
    had read the grounds, before submission, but did not check the whole of
    the bundle in question.  We were left unsure of Mr Ali's  understanding
    of his duty to supervise unqualified staff.

24. We are concerned that Mr Ali sought to categorise the failings we  have
    described as mistakes, which he came to  realise  were  such,  only  on
    receipt of the Tribunal's letter of 26 March.  Had that letter not been
    written, we must accordingly assume that Harrow Solicitors  would  have
    continued to file applications for judicial  review,  challenging  pre-
    action protocol responses that did not constitute  discrete  decisions;
    filing poorly particularised grounds, of the kind  we  have  described;
    and making entirely unwarranted applications for permission  to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal against decisions designated by the Tribunal  as
    wholly without merit.

25. This raises serious concerns about the fitness of Harrow Solicitors  to
    deal with immigration judicial reviews.  We have to say  that  it  also
    raises the question of whether Harrow Solicitors did, in  truth,  think
    that nothing was wrong with their activities in this area.

26. Mr Ali was adamant that, henceforth, he would only file an  immigration
    judicial review, where counsel had advised that this  was  appropriate.
    It is true that, so far as we are aware, no such judicial reviews  have
    been filed by Harrow Solicitors since the end of March 2018.

27.  We  were,  however,  unpersuaded  that  Mr  Ali's  proposals  make  it
    unnecessary for us to refer these matters to the SRA.  On any  view,  a
    significant amount of wholly  sub-standard  work  has  taken  place  in
    Harrow Solicitors.  This is not a case of a "one-off" incident.

28. We also harbour serious doubts about Mr Ali's proposals.   The  routine
    use of counsel would  be  bound  to  increase  the  cost  for  would-be
    applicants, unless Harrow Solicitors bore that cost themselves.  In the
    circumstances, such a scenario  strikes  us  as  entirely  unrealistic.
    Furthermore and in any event, there can be no guarantee as to how  long
    any such proposal to use counsel would last.

29. These are, in short, matters that  lie  firmly  within  the  regulatory
    realm.



4. Decision

30. In all the circumstances, having considered the matter on 11  June,  we
    informed Mr Ali that we would be referring these cases to the SRA for a
    full investigation.  We will send the  Tribunal's  files  to  them  for
    their consideration.

31. At the end of the  judgment  in  R  (on  the  application  of  Gopinath
    Sathivel & Others [2018] EWHC 913 (Admin), the  Divisional  Court  said
    the following:-

         "Finally, we make  clear  for  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt  that
         although we have expressed our views on each of the cases before us
         we are not intending our views to be seen as binding upon the  SRA.
         It is an independent body and will  form  its  own  conclusions  on
         these matters in  accordance  with  its  own  rules  and  statutory
         obligations."

32. We adopt that statement.





                                    [pic]

            Signed:




                   Mr Justice Lane, President




        Dated:   18 June 2018
