
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Essa (Revocation of protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|9 February 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         AYMEN MOHAMMED BASHIR ESSA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, instructed by NLS Solicitors
                    (Cardiff).


   1. An appeal under s 82(1)(c) is an  appeal  against  revocation  of  the
      basis upon which the leave referred to in s 82(2)(c) was granted.


   2. The only allowable ground under s 84(3)(a)  is  by  reference  to  the
      Refugee Convention, and by s 86(2)(a) that matter  must  therefore  be
      determined in all cases.

   3. Where s 72(10) applies, however, the appeal must be dismissed even  if
      the ground is made out.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is the Secretary  of  State.   She  appeals  against  the
    decision of Judge O'Rourke in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal of the respondent, a national of Sudan whom we shall  call  'the
    claimant',  against  her  decision  of  2  March  2017  to  revoke  his
    protection status by reference to para 339AC of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom in February 2011,  and  claimed
    asylum.  Following an appeal he was recognised as a refugee and granted
    refugee status.  That he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Sudan as a non-Arab Darfuri is not now in dispute.  In May 2013 he  was
    sentenced to a term of nine years imprisonment following his conviction
    of serious offences.  It is those offences that led  the  Secretary  of
    State to make the decision under appeal.  The Secretary of  State  took
    the view that the claimant is a  person  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime, and constitutes a  danger  to  the  community.   Such  a
    person, even if a refugee, can be removed from the territory of a State
    Party to the Refugee Convention because, as an exception to the general
    rule, such a person cannot claim the  benefit  of  the  prohibition  on
    refoulment: see art 33(2) of the Convention.

 3. The Secretary of State certified the present case under s 72(9) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended),  with  the
    effect that, on appeal against the revocation decision, Judge  O'Rourke
    was obliged to begin his consideration by determining whether  the  art
    33(2) exclusion applied, as set out in s 72(2) (3)  and  (4).   He  did
    that and found that the  presumption  in  72(2)  applies:  having  been
    convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence and sentenced to  a  term
    of imprisonment of at  least  two  years,  the  claimant  falls  to  be
    presumed to be a person to whom art 33(2) applies.   There  is  now  no
    challenge to that part of his decision either.

 4. Following the amendments to the appeal rights by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014, the claimant's right of appeal against  the  revocation  decision
    was under s 82(1)(c) of the 2002 Act  against  the  revocation  of  his
    'protection status'.  That phrase is partially  defined  in  subsection
    82(2)(c): "a person has 'protection status'  if  the  person  has  been
    granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee  or
    as a person eligible for  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection";  and
    'refugee' is further defined  in  paragraph  (e)  as  having  the  same
    meaning as in the Refugee Convention. The only ground  upon  which  the
    claimant could appeal to the Tribunal was that set out in  s  84(3)(a),
    that 'the decision to revoke the appellant's protection status breaches
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention'.

 5. Section 72(10) of the 2002 Act provides that if the Tribunal  considers
    that the presumptions in s 72(2), (3) or (4) apply,  it  "must  dismiss
    the appeal insofar as it relies on the ground mentioned  in  subsection
    9(a)", and for present purposes it  is  sufficient  to  note  that  the
    ground under s 84(3)(a) is mentioned in subsection 9(a).

 6. It follows that, that being the only ground of appeal available to  the
    claimant, and the judge having found that the presumption  applies,  he
    was obliged to dismiss the appeal.  He observed as much in his decision
    at [29].

 7. Judge O'Rourke then went on to consider the implications of a  decision
    to this effect, assisted as he was by written submissions on behalf  of
    the UNHCR.  He noted that although the Refugee Convention provides  for
    the cessation of refugee status where a person no  longer  fulfils  the
    definition in art 1A(2) of the Convention, the Convention  itself  does
    not have provisions for the withdrawal of status where a  person  still
    falls within  art  1,  that  is  to  say  is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality, at risk of persecution for one  of  the  five  'Convention
    reasons', and is not excluded by art 1F.  Article 33(2) may permit  the
    removal of such a person, but it does not provide for revocation of his
    status.  In other words, a person  to  whom  art  33(2)  applies  is  a
    removable refugee, but still a refugee.

 8. Judge O'Rourke concluded that the withdrawal of the  claimant's  status
    as a refugee was not, therefore, permitted by the  Refugee  Convention,
    and that withdrawing his refugee status would put the United Kingdom in
    breach  of  its  obligations   under   that   Convention.    In   these
    circumstances his decision  was:  "The  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
    Refugee Convention".

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal do  not  mention  s  72(10).
    They cite extensively from Dang [2013] UKUT 00043 (IAC).   That  was  a
    case decided under the previous appeals provisions, in reference  to  a
    person who had been a refugee in the United Kingdom  since  before  the
    amendments to the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,  HC  395,
    made as a result  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  2004/83/EC.   The
    principles set out there in relation to the meaning and effect  of  the
    Refugee Convention in cases of this sort, however, remain valid.   What
    Dang decides is that the specific leave, permission or  status  granted
    to a refugee under national (or EU) law may be  revoked  in  accordance
    with the terms of the relevant legal regime, but that even a  removable
    refugee remains  a  refugee,  and  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the
    Convention, unless and until he is removed.

10. The difficulties in this area, explored in Dang, arise from the use  of
    terms in the Immigration Rules themselves.  It is clear from  para  334
    that 'refugee status' in the Rules is not the same as  the  entitlement
    to status under  the  Refugee  Convention:  para  334(iv)  specifically
    excludes  the  removable  refugee  (in  the  sense  used  above)   from
    entitlement to 'refugee status'.  Paragraph 335 provides for the  grant
    of leave to enter or remain to a person whose right to 'refugee status'
    is established; and paras 338A and 339AC permit the revocation or  non-
    renewal of 'refugee status' when a person falls within  the  art  33(2)
    exception.  In the present case, as we have said,  the  decision  under
    appeal was made by reference to para 339AC.

11. As Dang recognises, provided that the concern is solely with the  self-
    contained national elements of these provisions, there is no  objection
    to the revocation of the status to which the Rules refer,  and  to  the
    termination or withdrawal of the leave granted as a result.  It has  to
    be recognised, however, that that  vocabulary,  that  regime  and  that
    mechanism do not relate exactly to the provisions  of  the  Convention,
    under which,  as  we  have  said,  there  are  no  provisions  for  the
    revocation of status on the ground  that  a  person  falls  within  art
    33(2).  The 'refugee status' as defined and implemented  by  the  Rules
    may  cease,  but  the  individual's  status  as  a  refugee  under  the
    Convention is not affected.   Indeed,  it  could  not  be  affected  by
    anything in the Rules, because  s  2  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Appeals Act 1993 prevents the Rules  from  laying  down  "any  practice
    which would be contrary to the [Refugee] Convention".

12. Sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act use a  different  vocabulary  again.
    We have already set out the provision offering a definition of a person
    who has "protection status".  There is no suggestion that the status is
    the grant of leave.  It is, presumably, the reason  for  the  grant  of
    leave.  But what is defined as the decision under  appeal  is  not  the
    termination of the leave but the decision  "to  revoke  P's  protection
    status".  Looked at through the lens of the Immigration Rules, a person
    who has been granted leave under para 335 has 'protection  status';  if
    he no longer meets the requirements of para 334 (whether  through  para
    339AC or otherwise) that reason  for  the  grant  of  leave  will  have
    disappeared; and one might suppose that such a person should  therefore
    be unsuccessful in an appeal against the decision.  If,  on  the  other
    hand, the person is able to show that he still falls within  para  334,
    one might expect that his appeal would be allowed.

13. This, however, is not the case.  The amendments made  in  2014  removed
    grounds of appeal based on the Immigration Rules and their application,
    and the ground of appeal against a decision to revoke protection status
    is not an exception.  The ground, as we have seen, is set  out  not  by
    reference to the Rules,  but  by  reference  directly  to  the  Refugee
    Convention.  This immediately poses a difficulty.  Is an appeal  to  be
    determined on the basis that the decision is effectively  the  loss  of
    the leave that flowed, under the Rules, from the  "protection  status",
    as s 82 would suggest?  If  so,  the  appeal  would  be  determined  by
    reference to the Rules, and with the caveat that the Refugee Convention
    has nothing specific to say about the granting of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain under the law of the United  Kingdom,  but  requires  only  that
    certain benefits, as set out  in  arts  2-30  of  the  Convention,  are
    attributed to those  who  under  the  Convention  have  the  status  of
    refugees.  Or is the appeal to be determined in accordance with s 84 on
    grounds solely relating to the Convention, in  which  case  it  is  the
    status, rather than the leave  which  flows  from  it,  that  is  under
    examination, and an appeal would fall to be allowed if  the  withdrawal
    of status would breach the terms of the Convention?  In the latter case
    a person who fell within the cessation provisions would lose an appeal,
    but a person who merely fell within art 33(2) would succeed.

14. It seems to us that the reference to the Refugee Convention rather than
    the Rules in s 84, and the lack of definition of status itself as  well
    as the lack of reference to the Rules in s 82,  tend  to  lead  to  the
    conclusion that the second alternative is the correct one.  If that  is
    right, an appeal under s 82(1)(c) against the revocation of  protection
    status is, where the appellant  is  a  refugee,  to  be  determined  by
    reference to the Refugee  Convention,  as  the  only  available  ground
    provides, and not by reference to the Rules.

15. The question then is whether  this  interpretation  can  stand  with  s
    72(10) of the 2002 Act.  The effect of that provision is  that  despite
    the only ground of appeal being by reference to the Refugee Convention,
    the Tribunal 'must' dismiss the appeal against revocation of protection
    status solely on the ground that art 33(2) applies  to  the  appellant.
    The result has to be either that the Tribunal is required  to  reach  a
    result contrary to that demanded by the application of  Convention,  or
    that the subject-matter of such an appeal is not the rights  under  the
    Convention but something else - which, in the context, can only be  the
    rights under the Rules.

16. The more palatable result is obviously the latter, because it  is  only
    with the greatest of hesitation that we would conclude that  a  statute
    provided for a result contrary to the Refugee Convention.  On the other
    hand, if the latter is correct, the reference to the Convention as  the
    basis of the ground of appeal in relation to a revocation  decision  is
    of no effect at all.   No  provisions  in  the  Rules  can  affect  the
    application of the Convention, so if the substance of the appeal is the
    rights under the Rules, the Convention could never be  engaged  by  the
    appeal at all.  Besides, if the intention was that the appeal against a
    revocation decision was to be governed by  whether  the  appellant  was
    entitled to 'refugee status' under the Rules, one would  have  expected
    that the ground of appeal would be by reference to the  application  of
    those very Rules.

17. For these reasons we have concluded that the first result  of  the  two
    set out in para [13] above is correct.  In the circumstances  in  which
    it applies, s 72(10) requires an appeal to be dismissed even though the
    ground of appeal is based on the Refugee  Convention  alone,  and  even
    though the provisions of  the  Refugee  Convention  would  require  the
    appeal to be allowed.   This  perhaps  surprising  result  is  in  fact
    consistent with the structure of s 72  itself.   Although  the  section
    relates,  as  subsection  (1)  provides,  to  the   "construction   and
    application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention" (which is  then
    immediately and incorrectly summarised as "exclusion from protection"),
    what it does is to lay down, for the purposes of certain  decisions,  a
    national gloss on the meaning of certain phrases  within  art  33.   In
    fact the section of the Act in which s 72 occurs is  headed  "Removal",
    but as we have seen, the section also governs the outcome  of  appeals.
    (At the time of the original enactment of the  section,  appeals  would
    have been  on  various  grounds,  including  refugee  grounds,  against
    removal decisions; but since the 2014 Act amendments  are  not  appeals
    against removal decisions.)  An officer of the Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled by s 72 to presume that art 33(2) applies  to  persons  within
    the categories set out, and therefore to make a decision removing  him;
    and, likewise, a Tribunal considering the same question is required  to
    come to a specific conclusion.  Despite subsection (1), these  are  not
    assessments made by reference to the Refugee Convention in  its  single
    autonomous meaning in international law as the decision of the House of
    Lords in SSHD v R  (Adan)  [2000]  UKHL  67  would  require:  they  are
    assessments made solely by reference to national law.  The  purpose  of
    the section is to remove from decision-makers a  priori  evaluation  by
    reference to the Convention, and replace it with a rule-based  national
    interpretation.  In these circumstances it is to be expected  that  the
    result may sometimes be a decision that  is  not  in  accord  with  the
    meaning of the Convention as an international instrument.

18. That interpretation of s 72(10) allows it to stand with  our  preferred
    interpretation of ss 82 and 84.  To sum  up:  (1)  an  appeal  under  s
    82(1)(c) is an appeal against revocation of the basis  upon  which  the
    leave referred to in s 82(2)(c) was granted; (2) the appeal  is  to  be
    determined by reference to the provisions of the Refugee Convention, as
    that is the only ground allowable under s 84(3)(a);  but  (3)  where  s
    72(10) applies, it requires the appeal to be dismissed even though  the
    ground is made out.

19. We note in closing this discussion that even  the  last  of  the  above
    propositions does not constitute a contradiction.  The amendments under
    the 2014 Act also deleted those parts of s 86  of  the  2002  Act  that
    required a Tribunal to allow or dismiss an appeal: the only requirement
    now is (usually) to "determine any matter raised as a ground of appeal"
    (s 86(2)(a)).  Thus the way is open for a determination that the ground
    in s 84 is made out but a decision dismissing the appeal because of the
    mandatory requirement in s 72.

20. In these circumstances the Judge was in a sense both wholly  right  and
    wholly wrong.  The Secretary of State's grounds are  not  of  any  real
    assistance: they fail to understand and engage with the Judge's  notion
    that he ought to allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention  despite
    being required by s 72 to dismiss it.  On the other hand, the mandatory
    force of s 72 cannot, and should not  have  been  ignored.   The  judge
    erred by ignoring it, but that does not  mean  that  he  was  wrong  to
    consider factors under the Convention as he did.

21. We set aside the Judge's decision allowing the appeal under the Refugee
    Convention.  We substitute a decision dismissing the appeal as required
    by s 72(10) but determining, as required by s 86(1)(a), that the ground
    of appeal is made out.  The effect of that is that although the  appeal
    is formally dismissed, the Secretary of State is  on  notice  that  the
    provisions of the Refugee Convention continue to apply to the claimant,
    and (whether or not he is granted leave) he is entitled to them, as set
    out in arts 2-30 of the Convention and including access to  the  labour
    market and welfare.  Although his  appeal  is  formally  dismissed  his
    status under the Convention is not affected and can,  if  required,  no
    doubt be enforced elsewhere.








                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 19 June 2018.

