

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

PK (Draft evader; punishment; minimum severity) Ukraine [2018] UKUT 00241
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |             Decision & Reasons         |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|on 14 March 2018                   |                                        |
|                                   |                                        |
|                                   |....................................... |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     PK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

     i) A legal requirement  for  conscription  and  a  mechanism  for  the
        prosecution  or  punishment  of  a  person  refusing  to  undertake
        military service is  not  sufficient  to  entitle  that  person  to
        refugee protection if there is no real risk that the person will be
        subjected to prosecution or punishment.


    ii) A person will only be entitled to refugee protection if there is  a
        real risk that the prosecution or punishment they face for refusing
        to perform military service in a conflict that may  associate  them
        with acts that are contrary to basic rules of human conduct reaches
        a minimum threshold of severity.

   iii) VB and Another (draft evaders and  prison  conditions)  Ukraine  CG
        [2017] UKUT 00079 (IAC) did  not  consider  whether  the  Ukrainian
        conflict involved acts contrary to basic rules of human conduct.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Frankish (the judge),  promulgated  on  25  October  2017,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        dated 5 September 2017 refusing his asylum claim.

   Factual Background


     2. The following  is  a  summary  of  the  material  elements  of  the
        appellant's protection claim, as developed  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal,  necessary  for  determining   whether   the   First-tier
        Tribunal's decision contains material errors of law.

     3. The appellant is a national of Ukraine, date of  birth  30  January
        1981. He is Catholic and worked as a carpenter.  He  and  his  wife
        left Ukraine in December 2013. They illegally entered the UK on  an
        unknown date and were arrested on  23  December  2014  and  granted
        Temporary Admission.

     4. A military call-up notice issued by the Ukrainian  authorities  was
        delivered to  his  parents'  address  requiring  the  appellant  to
        present himself to the military in October 2016. A  further  notice
        was  similarly  delivered  requiring  him  to  present  himself  in
        February  2017.  The  appellant   maintains   that   the   military
        authorities have been enquiring about his whereabouts.

     5. The appellant, with his wife as  a  dependant,  claimed  asylum  in
        March 2017. He feared that he would be subjected  to  serious  ill-
        treatment as a draft evader and because his political activities as
        a supporter of the Party of the Regions. We need  say  no  more  in
        relation to the 2nd basis of the protection claim as the  political
        landscape in Ukraine has materially  changed  since  the  appellant
        departed. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  concentrated
        almost exclusively on the consequences  of  the  appellant's  draft
        evasion.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     6. The judge  accepted  that  conscription  call-up  papers  had  been
        delivered to the address of the appellant's parents, which was  his
        official address. The judge found that the appellant's conscription
        had been deferred in the past on account of  an  illness  (cerebral
        arachnoiditis).


     7. The judge then considered whether any military  service  undertaken
        by the appellant would associate him with acts that are contrary to
        basic rules of human conduct as defined by international law.  This
        was  identified  by  the  judge  as  'Question  One'.  Whether  the
        appellant would go to prison if he refused conscription and, if so,
        whether the conditions were  such  as  to  breach  article  3,  was
        identified by the judge as 'Question Two'.


     8. In answering  these  questions,  the  judge  relied  on  the  Upper
        Tribunal Country Guidance decision in VB and Another (draft evaders
        and prison conditions) Ukraine CG  [2017]  UKUT  00079  (IAC).  The
        headnotes of VB reads,


         1. At the current time it is not reasonably likely that  a  draft-
            evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in  Ukraine  would
            face criminal  or  administrative  proceedings  for  that  act,
            although if a draft-evader did face prosecution proceedings the
            Criminal Code of Ukraine does provide, in Articles 335, 336 and
            409, for a prison sentence for such an offence. It would  be  a
            matter for any Tribunal to consider, in the light of developing
            evidence, whether there were aggravating  matters  which  might
            lead to imposition of an immediate custodial  sentence,  rather
            than a suspended  sentence  or  the  matter  proceeding  as  an
            administrative offence and a fine being sought by a prosecutor.


         2. There is a real risk of anyone being returned to Ukraine  as  a
            convicted criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment in  that
            country being detained on arrival, although anyone convicted in
            absentia would probably be entitled thereafter to a retrial  in
            accordance with Article 412 of the Criminal Procedure  Code  of
            Ukraine.


         3. There is a real risk  that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
            imprisonment in Ukraine would subject a person returned  to  be
            detained or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

     9. At [28] the judge briefly  mentioned  three  human  rights  reports
        adduced by the appellant's representative in order  to  demonstrate
        that  the  situation  in  Ukraine  had   deteriorated   since   the
        promulgation of VB and that both Ukrainian and Russian forces  were
        committing atrocities in the Crimean conflict.


    10. At [29] the judge stated,


          Reverting to the issue of the status of country guidance case law,
          it is long established that it is to stand until found to be wrong
          in law (OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006]  UKAIT  00077).
          In this case I do not, in common with the UT  determination,  find
          that Question One is made out. That is, that the threshold reached
          by which the appellant, if returned, may be compelled to engage in
          acts contrary to basic rules of human conduct.

    11. In relation to Question Two, the judge had this to say at [30],

          Finally, we have the issue of imprisonment and article 3. With the
          appellant having complied  with  call-up  and  being  deferred  as
          unfit, thereafter not receiving his call-up papers as he  was  out
          of the country, I conclude that he falls under (1) of  VB,  above.
          He is likely to be dealt with by way of fine. The UT determination
          allowed the appeal under Question Two .... However, that appellant
          was found to be liable to lengthy detention pending trial. He  was
          also likely to receive particularly harsh treatment because he was
          an ethnic Ukrainian Russian who sympathies were with  the  Russian
          side. Neither of these factors apply to this appellant.

    12. The judge consequently dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

    13. The appellant challenges the  judge's  decision  on  two  principal
        grounds.


    14. Firstly, the judge misdirected himself in  holding  that  VB  dealt
        with the issue whether those conscripted or mobilised were at  risk
        of being associated with breaches of International Humanitarian Law
        (IHL), and failed to make any express  finding  on  this  point  in
        light of the further country evidence. In  her  grounds  Ms  Norman
        referred to this as the 'IHL point'.


    15. Ms Norman relied on paragraphs 6 and 7 of VB. These read,

         6. It was agreed with the parties that  this  decision  would  also
         seek to provide Country Guidance on the following issues:

           i) What are the likely punishments for draft evasion in Ukraine?
          ii) Are prison conditions for draft evaders in  Ukraine  contrary
              to Article 3 of ECHR, or has there  been  a  significant  and
              durable change in Ukraine  such  that  the  country  guidance
              decision of  PS  (prison  conditions;  military  service)  CG
              [2006] UKAIT 00016 should no longer be followed?
         iii) Are draft evaders who have been imprisoned under Article  336
              of  the  Ukrainian  criminal  code  required  thereafter   to
              undertake military service during periods of mobilisation? If
              so what are the conditions to  which  they  will  be  exposed
              during such military service?

          7. At the hearing however it was agreed by both parties and  the
          Panel that it is only possible to address the  first  two  issues
          with a view to providing country  guidance  and  that  there  was
          simply insufficient country of origin material available to  make
          any informed guidance decision on the third issues as to  whether
          those conscripted or mobilised into the Ukrainian  army  were  at
          real  risk  of  being  required  to  commit  acts   contrary   to
          international humanitarian law or whether they would be  at  real
          risk  of  persons  such  as  the  appellants  being  subject   to
          "dedovshchina", which means violent bullying or initiation within
          the army, which might in turn put those recruited or mobilised at
          risk of serious harm.

    16. In her Grounds Ms Norman submitted that the judge erred in  law  in
        regarding VB as being  authoritative  on  the  IHL  point,  and  in
        failing  to  assess  the  further  evidence  provided  relating  to
        breaches of IHL. At the 'error of  law'  hearing,  and  in  written
        submissions received from the parties following the 'error of  law'
        hearing, Ms Norman developed her second ground. She  contends  that
        the relevant law provides as follows:


          A person is a refugee if he faces  non-optional  recruitment,  or
          penalty for refusal, to a military which is committing acts, with
          which  he  may   be   associated,   contrary   to   international
          humanitarian law.

    17. In her  submission  the  mere  fact  that  there  is  'non-optional
        recruitment' or a 'penalty' for refusing  conscription,  regardless
        of the nature or seriousness  of  the  penalty,  would  entitled  a
        person to refugee status if he would, as a result of  conscription,
        face a real risk of being associated with acts  contrary  to  basic
        rules of human conduct. In support  of  her  submission  Ms  Norman
        relies on Sepet v SSHD [2003] UKHL 15, Krotov v  SSHD  [2004]  EWCA
        Civ 69 and BE (Iran) [2008] EWCA Civ 540.


    18. Secondly, the grounds contend that the judge  failed  to  determine
        whether the appellant would be subject to  pre-trial  detention  on
        return to Ukraine. The judge was asked to make a finding as to  the
        prospects of the appellant facing pre-trial  detention  on  return,
        even if the eventual sentence was likely to be  non-custodial.  His
        failure to do so rendered the decision unsustainable.


    19. Following the 'error of law' hearing the Tribunal gave both parties
        an opportunity to supplement their oral  submissions  with  further
        written submissions in respect of the IHL issue. We are grateful to
        the representatives for the further submissions.

Discussion

The pre-trial detention issue

  20. In her written grounds Ms Norman accepts that the judge's finding that
      the appellant "... is likely to be dealt  with  by  way  of  fine"  is
      "unassailable" in light of the conclusions reached in VB. She contends
      however that the judge failed to determine whether the appellant would
      nevertheless  face  the  prospect  of  pre-trial  detention  on  being
      returned to Ukraine.


  21. In the skeleton argument before  the  judge  the  issue  of  pre-trial
      detention on return to Ukraine  was  specifically  raised.  The  judge
      failed to engage with this issue. This failure constitutes an error of
      law. We must nevertheless be satisfied that the error is material.


  22. Ms Norman contends that the error was material as it was open  to  the
      judge to find that there was a real risk that the appellant would face
      pre-trial detention. She relies upon paragraph 103 of VB.

          Whilst there have been submissions about the pressure under which
          the Ukrainian government currently  finds  itself  from  war  and
          economic problems it remains a member of the Council  of  Europe,
          and it has not been contended by anyone that Ukraine is a failing
          state without an operating  criminal  justice  system.  In  these
          circumstances we find the evidence of Professor Bowring that  the
          appellants would be checked against computer systems and found to
          be convicted offenders without any appeal  against  sentence  and
          with  prison  sentences  outstanding  on  re-entry   to   Ukraine
          compelling.  We  also  accept  Mr  Symes'  submission  that   the
          appellants cannot be required to  lie  in  response  to  standard
          questioning on re-entry which might  reasonably  be  expected  to
          include  issues  regarding  criminal  convictions   or   military
          service. We note  the  view  of  the  Australian  Refugee  Review
          Tribunal in their Country  Advice  Ukraine  decision  dated  11th
          December 2009 at page 3 of the document where it is said:  "If  a
          person has broken the law by evading the draft, their  return  to
          Ukraine is likely to attract the attention of the  authorities  -
          particularly if they enter Ukraine  through  official  channels."
          This is also consistent with the  Guardian  newspaper  report  of
          10th February 2015 which refers to draft-dodgers  being  arrested
          at border checkpoints in  the  context  of  a  government  decree
          regulated foreign travel for those subject to mobilisation. It is
          also consistent with the observation by UNHCR in their  September
          2015  report  at  paragraph  34  which  records  fears  of  being
          mobilised at  official  border  crossings.  We  therefore  accept
          Professor Bowring's evidence that as a result it is highly likely
          that the appellants would be taken into detention on  arrival  in
          Ukraine. We find it highly unlikely that there could be any other
          response  given  their  return  as   convicted   criminals   with
          outstanding prison sentences.


  23. While accepting that the two appellants in VB had  been  convicted  in
      absentia, Ms Norman submits that the  same  process  of  re-entry  and
      questioning about military service would apply  to  the  appellant  in
      view of the judge's findings that he had received and failed to answer
      call-up papers.


  24. We accept that the appellant cannot  be  expected  to  lie  about  his
      failure to answer the call-up papers, and that he is likely to come to
      the attention of the authorities if returned in Ukraine. We proceed on
      the basis that there is  a  real  risk  that  he  will  be  questioned
      concerning his failure to  answer  the  call-up  papers.  We  are  not
      however persuaded that there is a real risk that  he  will  face  pre-
      trial detention.


  25. The two appellants in VB had been prosecuted and  convicted  of  draft
      evasion  and  sentenced  to  5  years   and   2   years   imprisonment
      respectively. They had not appealed against their sentences. They were
      facing return to  Ukraine  as  convicted  criminals  with  outstanding
      custodial sentences. The Tribunal found there was  a  real  risk  that
      anyone being returned as a convicted criminal sentenced to a  term  of
      imprisonment would be detained on  arrival,  and  that  conditions  of
      detention and imprisonment risked breaching article 3 (headnotes  2  &
      3). It was for these reasons that the Tribunal allowed  their  appeals
      on article 3 grounds.


  26. The appellant, by contrast, has no convictions and there is no
      evidence that any prosecution has been mounted against him or any
      charges laid against him. His circumstances are materially different
      to the appellants in VB.

    27. We remind ourselves of the 1st headnote of VB. Given  the  findings
        that a draft evader avoiding conscription is not reasonably  likely
        to face criminal or administrative proceedings, we see no basis for
        concluding that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  pre-trial
        detention, or indeed any period  of  detention  on  his  return  to
        Ukraine. If there is no real risk that the appellant would face any
        such proceedings, there  would  be  no  reason  for  the  Ukrainian
        authorities to detain him. Nor was  Ms  Norman  able  to  draw  our
        attention to any background country evidence suggesting that  draft
        evaders returning to Ukraine who were not subject to  any  criminal
        or administrative  proceedings  for  their  avoidance  of  military
        service have been detained. We additionally note the absence of any
        aggravating features such as being an  ethnic  Russian  or  leaving
        Ukraine in order to  avoid  call-up  (the  appellant  left  Ukraine
        before he received any call-up papers).


    28. We are reinforced in our conclusion by reference to the presumption
        of bail in Ukraine. The new Criminal Procedural  Code,  which  came
        into force on 19th  November  2012,  provides  for  automatic  bail
        rather than pre-trial detention in the majority of  cases  (VB,  at
        [19]). There is therefore a presumption in favour of bail for those
        awaiting trial and the removal  of  criminal  penalties  for  minor
        matters (VB, at [77]). We can find no reason why the presumption in
        favour of bail, even if the Ukrainian authorities  do  manifest  an
        adverse interest in the appellant, would not apply to him.


    29. For the reasons given above we are satisfied that even if the judge
        had engaged with the issue of pre-trial detention he would not have
        been entitled to conclude that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  such
        detention. The appeal would inevitably have failed on this basis.

The IHL issue

    30. In her skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  Ms  Norman
        raised, as an issue which it was submitted required  determination,
        the question whether there was a real risk that the appellant would
        be called upon to undertake military service in circumstances where
        such service might associate  him  with  internationally  condemned
        acts. It was argued that if there was such a risk any  penalty  for
        refusal to be conscripted was persecutory.  The  skeleton  argument
        referenced  various  human  rights  reports  in  support   of   the
        proposition that there was now  a  conflict  in  Crimea  where  the
        Ukrainian forces were committing atrocities.


    31.  The  judge  acknowledged  these  submissions  but  his  conclusion
        [paragraph 10 supra] that  VB  had  determined  the  issue  whether
        military service may associate a conscriptee  with  acts  that  are
        contrary to basic rules of human conduct was inaccurate. VB did not
        address the issue  whether  conscriptees  were  at  risk  of  being
        associated with breaches of IHL. This is apparent from paragraph  7
        of VB [paragraph 15 supra].

    32. VB did not consider whether the Ukrainian  conflict  involved  acts
        contrary to basic rules of human conduct and the judge  misdirected
        himself in assuming otherwise.  We  additionally  accept  that  the
        judge failed to satisfactorily engage with the background documents
        before him relating to breaches of IHL, or to make any reference to
        an  Office  of  the  High  Commissioner  of  Human  Rights  (OHCHR)
        document, despite the fact  that  this  document  was  specifically
        identified in the appellant's skeleton argument before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal.

    33. Once again, we must determine whether the misdirection by the judge
        and his failure to engage with the background evidence  constitutes
        a material legal error.

    34. In her oral submissions at the 'error of  law'  hearing  Ms  Norman
        submitted that the existence of a legal  requirement  to  undertake
        military service renders a person a refugee if they  refuse  to  be
        conscripted, regardless of the nature of any penalty,  including  a
        fine, if the military service would associate that person with acts
        contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.  She  relied  on  the
        authorities of Sepet v SSHD [2003] UKHL 15 and Krotov v SSHD [2004]
        EWCA Civ 69, although neither authority was served on the Tribunal.
        She additionally drew our attention  to  the  respondent's  Country
        Policy and Information Note on Ukraine: Military  Service,  version
        4.0, April 2017, and in particular, to 3.1.2.


         3.1.2 Compulsory national/military service  is  a  prerogative  of
         sovereign states. A requirement to undertake - or  punishment  for
         failing  to  complete  -  national/military  service   will   only
         constitute persecution where:


         . military service would involve acts, with which the person may be
         associated, which are contrary to the basic rules of human conduct;
         . the conditions of military service would be so harsh as to amount
        to persecution; or
         .   the   punishment   for   draft   evasion   or   desertion    is
        disproportionately harsh or severe.


         None of those conditions are generally met in respect of service in
        Ukraine.

    35. Ms  Norman  submitted  that,  as  the  appellant  was  required  to
        undertake military service, his refusal to do so  entitled  him  to
        refugee status.

    36. Although neither party drew our  attention  to  the  terms  of  the
        Refugee   Convention   itself,   or   Directive   2004/83/EC   (the
        Qualification Directive) or  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
        International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006, 2006 No.
        2525 (the 2006 Regulations), we consider it necessary to frame  our
        deliberation by reference to these provisions.


    37. Under Article 1(A)(2) of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
        of Refugees, as amended by the New York Protocol dated  31  January
        1967, the term 'refugee' is to apply to any person  who  'owing  to
        well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for  reasons  of   race,
        religion, nationality, membership of a particular social  group  or
        political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
        unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the
        protection of that country; or who, not having  a  nationality  and
        being outside the country of his former  habitual  residence  as  a
        result of such events,  is  unable  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
        unwilling to return to it.


    38.  The  United  Nations  Handbook  on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for
        Determining Refugee Status, reissued in December 2011,  states,  at
        paragraph 51,


          There is no universally accepted definition of 'persecution', and
          various attempts to formulate such a  definition  have  met  with
          little success. From Article 33 of the 1951 Convention, it may be
          inferred that a threat to life or freedom  on  account  of  race,
          religion, nationality,  political  opinion  or  membership  of  a
          particular social group  is  always  persecution.  Other  serious
          violations  of  human  rights-for  the  same  reasons-would  also
          constitute persecution.


    39. Paragraphs 167 to 174 of  the  Handbook  deal  with  deserters  and
        persons avoiding military service. Paragraph 171  of  the  Handbook
        reads,


          Not every conviction, genuine though it may be, will constitute a
          sufficient reason for claiming refugee status after desertion  or
          draft-evasion.  It  is  not  enough  for  a  person  to   be   in
          disagreement  with  his  government   regarding   the   political
          justification for a particular military action.  Where,  however,
          the type of military action, with which an  individual  does  not
          wish  to  be  associated,  is  condemned  by  the   international
          community as contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct,
          punishment for desertion or draft evasion could, in the light  of
          all other requirements of the definition, in itself  be  regarded
          as persecution.


    40. The reference in the Handbook  to  "punishment"  for  desertion  or
        draft evasion suggests it is a  necessary  element  in  determining
        refugee status for someone who may be associated with military acts
        contrary to the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct,  and  that  such
        "punishment" could be regarded as persecution "in the light of  all
        other requirements of the definition." The  Handbook  is  otherwise
        silent as to the nature of the "punishment".


    41. The Qualification Directive prescribes minimum  standards  for  the
        qualification and status of individuals as refugees or otherwise in
        need of international  protection.  Article  9  of  the  Directive,
        entitled 'Acts of persecution', defines those acts in its first and
        second paragraphs, as follows:


         1. Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article 1(A)  of  the
         Geneva Convention must:

         (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as  to
         constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in particular
         the rights from which derogation  cannot  be  made  under  Article
         15(2) of the European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
         Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

         (b) be an accumulation of various measures,  including  violations
         of human rights which is  sufficiently  severe  as  to  affect  an
         individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).

         2. Acts of persecution as qualified in  paragraph  1,  can,  inter
         alia, take the form of:

         ...

         (b) legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures  which
         are in themselves discriminatory or which  are  implemented  in  a
         discriminatory manner;

         (c)  prosecution  or  punishment,  which  is  disproportionate  or
         discriminatory;

         ...

         (e) prosecution or punishment  for  refusal  to  perform  military
         service in a conflict, where  performing  military  service  would
         include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion clauses as  set
         out in Article 12(2) [emphasis added]


    42. Article 12(2) deals with  those  who  are  excluded  from  being  a
        refugee because they have committed a crime against  peace,  a  war
        crime, or a crime against humanity, or have committed a serious non-
        political crime or  have  been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the
        purposes and principles of the United Nations.


    43. The 2006 Regulations came into force on 9 October 2006,  after  the
        decisions in Sepet and Krotov. The 2006 Regulations, together  with
        amendments to the immigration rules, were intended to transpose the
        Qualification Directive into UK law.


    44.  Regulation  5  of  the  2006  Regulations  is  headed   'Acts   of
        persecution'. Regulation 5 reads, in material part,


This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
         1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act of persecution
            must be:


          a)  sufficiently  serious  by  its  nature  or  repetition  as  to
             constitute a severe  violation  of  a  basic  human  right,  in
             particular a right from which derogation cannot be  made  under
             Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
             and Fundamental Freedoms; or


          b) an accumulation of various measures, including a violation of a
             human right which  is  sufficiently  severe  as  to  affect  an
             individual in a similar manner as specified in (a).


         2) An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:


            a) an act of physical or mental violence, including  an  act  of
               sexual violence;


            b) a legal, administrative, police, or judicial measure which in
               itself  is  discriminatory  or  which  is  implemented  in  a
               discriminatory manner;


            c) prosecution  or  punishment,  which  is  disproportionate  or
               discriminatory;


            d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate or
               discriminatory punishment;


            e) prosecution or punishment for  refusal  to  perform  military
               service in a  conflict,  where  performing  military  service
               would include crimes or  acts  falling  under  regulation  7.
               [emphasis added]

    45.  Regulation 7 deals with those excluded  from  refugee  status.  It
        includes those who, by reference  to  Article  1F  of  the  Refugee
        Convention, have committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a
        crime against humanity, or have committed a  serious  non-political
        crime or have been guilty of acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
        principles of the United Nations.


    46.  We  are  satisfied,  having  regard  to  Article   9(2)   of   the
        Qualification Directive, and its counterpart in Regulation 5(2)  of
        the 2006 Regulations, that prosecution or punishment for refusal to
        perform military service in a conflict, where  performing  military
        service would associate a person with breaches  of  IHL  or  action
        contrary to the basic rules of  human  conduct,  is  distinct  from
        prosecution   or   punishment   which   is   disproportionate    or
        discriminatory (Article 9(2)(b)  and  Regulation  5(2)(c)).  It  is
        therefore not necessary  for  the  prosecution  or  punishment  for
        refusing to perform military service which may associate  a  person
        with action contrary to the basic rules  of  human  conduct  to  be
        either disproportionate or discriminatory. We note however that the
        definition of persecution in  Article  9(1)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive and its  counterpart  in  Regulation  5(1)  of  the  2006
        Regulations requires the act  of  persecution  to  be  sufficiently
        serious so as to constitute a severe violation  of  a  basic  human
        right. The structure of both the Qualification  Directive  and  the
        2006 Regulations suggests that the definition in Article  9(1)  and
        Regulation  5(1)  conditions  the  examples  given   of   acts   of
        persecution in Article 9(2) and Regulation 5(2).  In  other  words,
        any prosecution or punishment  for  refusing  to  perform  military
        service must still reach a minimum threshold of severity.


    47. The issue in the House of Lords decision in Sepet, handed  down  on
        20 March 2003, was whether the Turkish applicants were entitled  to
        asylum on the basis of their conscientious  objection  to  military
        service. Charges relating to draft evasion were very likely  to  be
        levelled against both applicants and their fear that they would  be
        liable to imprisonment for between 6 months and 3  years  was  well
        founded ([1], [3], [4], [5] & [8]).


    48. At [8] Lord Bingham stated,


          There is compelling support  for  the  view  that  refugee  status
          should be accorded to one who has refused to undertake  compulsory
          military service on the grounds that such service would  or  might
          require him to commit atrocities or gross human rights  abuses  or
          participate  in  a  conflict  condemned   by   the   international
          community, or where refusal to serve would earn grossly  excessive
          or disproportionate punishment... But the  applicants  cannot,  on
          the  facts  as  found,  bring  themselves  within  any  of   these
          categories.... The crucial question is whether the treatment which
          the applicants reasonably fear is to be regarded, for purposes  of
          the Convention, as persecution for one or more of  the  Convention
          reasons.


    49.  As  the  military  service  in  Turkey  would  not  associate  the
        applicants with acts offending the basic rules  of  human  conduct,
        the House of Lords was not  required  to  examine  in  any  further
        detail the circumstances in which a person who refused to undertake
        military service which may involve such conduct would be recognised
        as a refugee. It is important to note that  both  applicants  faced
        the deprivation of their liberty if they refused conscription,  and
        that, at [9], Lord  Bingham  described  persecution  as  a  'strong
        word'.

    50. We also note what was said by  Laws  LJ  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
        decision in Sepet and Bulbul [2001] EWCA Civ 681, at [62],


          Next I should emphasise that it is  plain  (indeed  uncontentious)
          that there are circumstances in which a conscientious objector may
          rightly claim that punishment for draft evasion  would  amount  to
          persecution: where the military service  to  which  he  is  called
          involves acts, with which he may be associated, which are contrary
          to basic rules of human conduct; where the conditions of  military
          service are themselves so harsh as to amount to persecution on the
          facts; where the  punishment  in  question  is  disproportionately
          harsh or severe.


    51.  The  observation  by  Laws  LJ   focuses   on   "punishment"   for
        conscientious objectors where the military  service  may  associate
        them with inhuman conduct. The Court of Appeal did not consider the
        nature or the degree of the punishment that would entitled a person
        to be recognised as a refugee.


    52. The issue with which the Court of Appeal had to grapple  in  Krotov
        was  whether   a   particular   conflict   required   international
        condemnation before a refusal to participate  in  military  service
        entitled a person to refugee status. The case concerned a  deserter
        from the Russian army who objected to  fighting  in  Chechnya.  The
        deserter was facing a term of imprisonment for  his  desertion  (at
        [3]) and the appeal was advanced  by  his  representatives  on  the
        basis that he would face punishment for desertion (see [9] & [21]).




    53. The Court of Appeal did not comment on the nature of the punishment
        faced by the deserter, but the anticipation  that  there  would  be
        punishment permeated the submissions made by the  parties  and  the
        Court's own assessment (e.g. [27], [37], [39], [45], and especially
        [51]).


    54. In her further written submissions, Ms Norman relied on  BE  (Iran)
        [2008] EWCA Civ  540,  and  in  particular  Lord  Justice  Sedley's
        conclusion at [40]


          In our judgment, on the limited facts before the  tribunal,  this
          appellant was entitled to succeed in his claim for  international
          protection. It is common ground that, once it is established that
          the individual  concerned  has  deserted  rather  than  commit  a
          sufficiently grave abuse of human rights, whatever punishment  or
          reprisal consequently faces him  will  establish  a  well-founded
          fear of persecution for reasons of political opinion.


    55. BE concerned a regular soldier in the  Iranian  army  who  deserted
        rather than plant landmines in  a  populated  area.  He  previously
        deserted for the same reason and had been  sentenced  to  3  months
        imprisonment. There was therefore a strong likelihood that he would
        face actual punishment, and that the  penalty  was  serious  as  it
        involved the deprivation of his liberty. The Court of  Appeal  were
        concerned with whether  there  was  a  difference  of  approach  to
        refusals to participation in military service during peace time and
        times of war (see [11] & [13]). In his references  to  Krotov  Lord
        Justice Sedley noted, at [32], that the Court of Appeal,

          ...  held  that  the  prospect  of  punishment  for   a   genuine
          conscientious  refusal  to  participate  in  inhumane  acts   was
          sufficient to attract international protection as a refugee.

    56.  His Lordship then set out an extract  from  paragraph  37  of  the
        judgment of Potter LJ in Krotov.

          In my view, the crimes listed above, if committed on a systematic
          basis as an aspect  of  deliberate  policy  or  as  a  result  of
          official indifference to  the  widespread  actions  of  a  brutal
          military, qualify as acts contrary to the basic  rules  of  human
          conduct  in  respect  of  which  punishment  for  a  refusal   to
          participate will constitute persecution within the ambit  of  the
          Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951).

    57. VB found that there was no real risk that a draft evader  would  be
        imprisoned for refusing to be  conscripted.  At  paragraph  67  the
        Tribunal  noted,  after  considering  the  background  and   expert
        evidence before it, that only a couple of persons appeared to  have
        actually been sent  to  prison  for  conscription  or  mobilisation
        evasion, with evidence of suspended sentences, probation  or  fines
        in only tens of other cases. On the basis of the information before
        the Tribunal, the  overwhelming  majority  of  over  100,000  draft
        evaders have  faced  no  consequences  at  all  for  their  actions
        (paragraph 69). This is reflected in the first headnote to VB.


    58. Based on the detailed assessment carried out in  VB,  and  applying
        that guidance to this appellant's particular circumstances, we find
        it is not reasonably likely that  he  will  face  any  criminal  or
        administrative proceedings  for  avoiding  conscription.  There  is
        therefore no real risk that he will be prosecuted or that a penalty
        will be imposed on the appellant for his draft evasion. None of the
        authorities relied on by Ms Norman can be  properly  understood  as
        entitling a draft-evader or deserter to refugee status if there  is
        no real risk that they will be subject to  prosecution,  punishment
        or penalty. In Sepet, Krotov and  EB  there  was  a  real  risk  of
        punishment. The higher Courts were not  dealing  with  a  situation
        where the prospect of punishment was as remote  as  it  is  in  the
        context  of  Ukraine.  There  is  no  authority  to   support   the
        appellant's  contention  that  the  mere  existence  of   a   legal
        requirement of conscription or the existence of a mechanism for the
        prosecution  or  punishment  of  a  person  refusing  to  undertake
        military service is sufficient to entitle them to  refugee  status.
        It is not sufficient that national legislation makes provision  for
        the imposition of a penalty, whether it be custodial or  financial,
        if there is no real risk of that penalty  actually  being  imposed.
        While Ms Norman relies  on  a  UNHCR  report  from  September  2015
        suggesting there had been a stepping up of prosecutions  for  draft
        evaders, this document was already considered by  the  Tribunal  in
        VB. Having regard to all the evidence that was before the judge, we
        find that the appellant does not have a 'well-founded fear of being
        persecuted' because he does not face a real risk of  being  subject
        to a penalty for his draft evasion. The judge's failure to consider
        the 'IHL point' is therefore  not  material  as  there  was  simply
        insufficient evidence that the appellant faced a real risk of being
        punished.


    59. Even if we are wrong in the above assessment, we  doubt  whether  a
        fine, probation or  a  suspended  sentence  would  be  sufficiently
        serious to amount to persecution. The concept  of  persecution  for
        the purposes of the Geneva Convention (and indeed the Qualification
        Directive) requires that the harm feared must attain a  substantial
        level of seriousness. Although persecution is not  defined  in  the
        Convention Lord Bingham described it as a 'strong  word'  in  Sepet
        (see also MI & Anor v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
        [2014] EWCA Civ 826, and Amare v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1600, at [27]). Article 9(1) (a)  &  (b)
        of the Qualification Directive (paragraph  41  supra)  makes  plain
        that the feared ill treatment must be  at  a  sufficiently  serious
        level so as to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights.
        We read Article 9(1) as informing and conditioning  the  nature  of
        the acts that may constitute persecution, including the prosecution
        or punishment identified in Article 9(2)(e). The same must apply in
        respect of Regulation 5 of the 2006 Regulations. Thus understood, a
        person will only be entitled to refugee protection if  there  is  a
        real risk that the prosecution, penalty or punishment they face for
        refusing to  perform  military  service  in  a  conflict  that  may
        associate them with gross human rights  abuses  will  result  in  a
        severe violation of their basic  human  rights.  A  deprivation  of
        liberty may be a sufficiently serious violation, depending  on  its
        length and the person's particular characteristics, but a suspended
        sentence, probation or fine will generally not  be  a  sufficiently
        serious  violation.  There  was  no  evidence  before   the   judge
        suggesting that any of these punishments  would  be  applied  in  a
        disproportionate manner to the appellant.

    60. We find that any  other  result  would  frustrate  the  fundamental
        principles underlying the Refugee Convention and the  Qualification
        Directive, that of surrogate  protection.  There  is  no  need  for
        surrogate protection if there is no real risk that  a  person  will
        face serious ill-treatment sufficient to amount to persecution.


    61. On the basis of the detailed assessment undertaken in VB,  we  find
        there is no real risk that the appellant will be prosecuted or face
        any penalty, but that even if he is, there is no real risk that the
        punishment or penalty he is likely to face, considered on the lower
        standard of proof, will attain a substantial level  of  seriousness
        sufficient to amount to persecution.


    62. In reaching our decision we have also considered  the  judgment  of
        the CJEU in Andre Shepherd v Bundesrupublik  Deutschland  C-472/13,
        which analysed Article 9(2)(e) of the  Qualification  Directive  in
        the context of an America soldier who sought asylum in  Germany  on
        the basis that he would be required to  participate  in  the  Iraqi
        conflict which he considered to be both illegal and  one  involving
        the commission of war crimes.  While  the  CJEU  judgment  provides
        guidance on the operation of Article 9(2)(e) it does not deal  with
        the specific issues posed to us.


    63. The grounds additionally criticise the judge for stating  that  the
        appellant "is not a well man" and that he may get  another  medical
        deferral,  given  that  his  medical  condition  was  regarded   as
        temporary and was treated between 2004 and 2008. Any error  of  law
        by the judge in applying the historic deferral of military  service
        to the role the applicant may be given if mobilised  clearly  falls
        away in light of our assessment above.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               1 May 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
