
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


     R (on the application of SO) v London Borough of Barking and Dagenham
AAJR [2013] UKUT 00256 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 and 9 April 2013                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between
                    THE QUEEN (ON THE application OF SO)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                 THE LONDON BOROUGH OF BARKING AND DAGENHAM

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr T Buley, instructed by Fisher Meredith
For the Respondent:    Mr K Rutledge, QC, instructed by London Borough of
                    Barking and Dagenham.


                                  JUDGMENT


1.   In these proceedings the applicant (to  whom  we  shall  refer  as  SO)
    challenges the decision of the respondent to refuse to accommodate  him
    as a former relevant child on the basis that he is the age he claims to
    be, having been born on 6 July  1990.  The  essential  reason  why  the
    respondent does not accept that the applicant is the age he  claims  he
    is, is because the respondent believes him to be a person  (hereinafter
    referred to as HH) who was born in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on 21 February
    1987.  Although this is an age assessment judicial review the essential
    issue is that of identity.  It is common ground that if  the  applicant
    is who he says he is then his  application  for  judicial  review  must
    succeed.  Alternatively, if he is the person who the respondent says he
    is, then his claim must fail.

2.   SO claimed asylum on 26 September  2007.  A  screening  interview  took
    place on the same day.  The respondent carried out an age assessment on
    2 October 2007 and accepted that he was the age he claimed  to  be.  He
    made a statement on 19 October 2007 and his asylum interview took place
    on 30 October of that year. His asylum claim was refused on 20 November
    2007 and removal directions were issued on 28 November 2007.  An appeal
    was lodged on 10 December 2007.  His appeal was  allowed  on  10  March
    2008 by Immigration  Judge  Oliver.  Subsequently  reconsideration  was
    ordered, and on 10  September  2008  Immigration  Judge  Charlton-Brown
    heard his appeal and dismissed it, and on 19 January 2009 permission to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused by Scott Baker LJ.   A  fresh
    claim was made on 15 June 2009 with further submissions on  7  July  of
    that year, but on 17 June 2010 the UKBA declined  to  accept  that  the
    fresh material taken with the previously considered  material  amounted
    to a fresh claim. An application to apply for judicial  review  against
    that decision has been stayed behind these proceedings.

3.   After SO became 18, the respondent  decided  that  it  would  cease  to
    provide him with accommodation on the basis that it considered  it  had
    no obligation to do so at that time.  This decision was  challenged  by
    way of an application for judicial review, and the matter proceeded  to
    the Court of Appeal where it was resolved in the applicant's favour  in
    2011 (R (SO) v Barking and Dagenham LBC [2011] 1WLR 1283).

4.   It seems that it was during the course of those  proceedings  that  the
    respondent became aware of the fact that  Immigration  Judge  Charlton-
    Brown had agreed with the Secretary of State that SO was  in  fact  HH.
    The  respondent  had  accepted  that  it  would  need  to  make  a  new
    determination on this issue which the applicant would  be  entitled  to
    challenge, and the matter was consequently remitted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal to the Administrative Court and subsequently transferred to  the
    Upper Tribunal for a  determination  of  the  applicant's  age.  A  new
    decision was in fact not made until 1 October 2012.  It consists of the
    adoption in effect in a witness statement by  Deborah  Noel,  a  social
    worker employed by the respondent, of a report by an age  assessor,  Mr
    Kenneth Ambat.

5.   It is relevant to mention at this stage a preliminary issue that  arose
    before us as to the admissibility of evidence submitted late in the day
    on behalf of  the applicant.  On 16  January  2013  Mr  Ockelton,  Vice
    President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
    ordered that the applicant could  not  seek  to  rely  on  any  amended
    grounds or serve any additional evidence.  This was  a  consequence  of
    the failure on the part of the applicant  to  comply  with  a  previous
    order of 12 October 2012.  The evidence on which the  applicant  sought
    to rely consisted of a further witness statement of his dated 13  March
    2013, a witness statement of Mr Abdulkadir Turkey of 19 March  2013,  a
    witness statement of  Kamal  Mohammed  of  25  March  2013,  a  witness
    statement of Colin Michael Ravden of 26 March 2013, a birth certificate
    in the name of the applicant, and an expert report concerning that  and
    previously submitted documents, by  Professor  Gaim  Kibreab,  dated  5
    April 2013.

6.   We can condense quite significantly the argument that was  made  before
    us concerning this evidence.  We were concerned and remain concerned at
    the fact that no formal application to admit this evidence in light  of
    Mr Ockelton's order had been made prior to oral submissions by Mr Buley
    on the day of the hearing.  Essentially Mr Rutledge QC on behalf of the
    respondent took a pragmatic view, bearing  in  mind  the  inquisitorial
    nature of the hearing and the relevance of the evidence.  He  suggested
    that the matter had to be approached on the  basis  of  what  had  been
    said by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  IAR
    318, that in assessing credibility it is necessary to take into account
    the late delivery of evidence. The Tribunal would have to evaluate  the
    evidence and its timing.  He  also  made  the  point  with  respect  to
    paragraph 12 of Mr Ravden's report that it   was  not  agreed  that  Mr
    Ambat had implied that he accepted the truth of what SO had  told  him.
    Mr Rutledge emphasised the need for finalising  the  case,  bearing  in
    mind the period of time over which the proceedings had taken place  and
    previous adjournments.  Mr Buley argued that best efforts had been made
    to obtain the documents and he hoped there would not  be  criticism  of
    those involved in their provision. In particular efforts had been  made
    to obtain the birth certificate which had been given by  the  applicant
    to his immigration solicitors, some time  previously  and  it  was  not
    possible to apply for its admission until they had seen it.

7.   On consideration we  accepted  that  the  further  evidence  should  be
    admitted, given its clear  relevance  to  the  proceedings,  though  we
    deprecated the late production of the evidence.

8.   We turn to SO's account. In his screening  interview  on  26  September
    2007 he said that he had left Eritrea on 18 September 2007 and  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 25 September. He had travelled via  Sudan  and
    one other country (unknown).  He said the Immigration  Officer  checked
    his passport and said "Welcome" and let him pass through.

9.   In his statement, dated 19 October 2007, he said that he was born on  6
    July 1990 and had lived in Asmara, Eritrea, all  his  life.   He  spoke
    Tigrinya and a little Arabic. He said  that  approximately  two  months
    before he came to the United  Kingdom  his  father  received  a  letter
    stating that the applicant was required to report to Sawa for  military
    service. His father said that he would not allow him to report and said
    that many of his cousins and nephews had not returned from Sawa and  he
    would not allow his only son to disappear in the  same  way.   He  said
    that during the two months after his  father  received  the  letter  he
    remained in hiding in Asmara.  On 18 September 2007 he  was  introduced
    to  an  army  officer  whom  he  had  never  met  before.   He  had  no
    identification documents with him.  The officer  took  him  by  car  to
    Tesseney where another man was waiting to take him to Kessala.  He  did
    not know this man's name or nationality and the man  spoke  Arabic  and
    the applicant could not understand him very well. A man  drove  him  to
    Kessala and he spent the night there at the man's home and the next day
    the man drove him to Khartoum.  He said that he did not  speak  to  any
    officials himself at  any  time  during  the  journey  from  Asmara  to
    Khartoum.  At checkpoints the  driver  simply  spoke  to  the  official
    whilst the applicant remained in the car. He did not hear what was said
    and he was not asked any questions.

10.  On arrival in Khartoum on 19 September the man handed  him  over  to  a
    third man whose name and nationality again he never knew, and who spoke
    Arabic. He remained in Khartoum for approximately  a  week  staying  at
    this man's home and on 25 September he boarded a flight  from  Khartoum
    to the United Kingdom in the company of the  same  man.   The  man  sat
    apart from him during the flight and told him not to speak  anyone  and
    to follow him once he had landed. The plane stopped once on its  flight
    to the United Kingdom but the applicant did not know where, as  he  did
    not leave the plane. He said that just before  landing  in  the  United
    Kingdom the man gave him a red document that looked  like  a  passport.
    He did not open  it  and  did  not  know  what  details  it  contained,
    following the man's instructions not to open the document.  He followed
    the man off the plane and through the airport and when  he  showed  the
    document to the British officials they did not  stamp  it  or  ask  him
    questions but  simply  said  "Welcome".  Once  he  had  passed  through
    immigration the man asked him to return the passport  to him and he did
    so.  He was driven by a fourth man whom he did not know to  that  man's
    home and he spent the night at that house.  The  next  day  the  driver
    dropped him off outside the offices of his solicitors, as they  became,
    and he was met there by an Eritrean man who interpreted for him  during
    his interview with the solicitor.  He explained that he was  completely
    reliant on the men who helped him on his  journey.   The  man  whom  he
    travelled with on the plane gave him strict instructions not  to  speak
    to anyone.

11.  The applicant's answers at his asylum interview,  which  was  conducted
    on 30  October  2007,  essentially  repeat  what  is  set  out  in  his
    statement.  There are,  however,  a  number  of  further  matters.   At
    question 23 he was asked what the terrain was in Kessala and whether it
    was mountainous or flat and he said it was just small houses  and  flat
    land and no mountains.  He did not know the name of the agent with whom
    he left Asmara as his father told him not to  ask  any  questions.  The
    agent with whom he was on the plane did not tell him on whose  name  he
    was travelling. He was asked what he would have  said  if  someone  had
    asked him his name and said that the agent would  answer  and  did  not
    tell  him to say anything.

12.  At question 51 the applicant was shown  a  photograph  of  someone  who
    obtained a UK visa in  Riyadh  who  the  Immigration  Officer  said  he
    believed to be the applicant.  He was asked whether it was his  picture
    and said "no". he denied it again and also denied  applying  for  a  UK
    visa in Riyadh under this name.

13.  There was then  a  break  for  some  ten  minutes  and  then  when  the
    applicant was asked again whether it was him in  the  picture  he  said
    yes, he took it three months ago. He denied having  applied  for  a  UK
    visa in Riyadh. He said it was  not his passport  and he did  not  know
    how it was that his photograph was used to  apply  for  a  UK  visa  in
    Riyadh.  He agreed that the photograph was his, but  said  he  did  not
    have a passport. He did not know or understand how his  photograph  got
    inside the passport.  He did not know where Riyadh was  and  had  never
    been there.  He was asked why the photograph was taken and he  said  he
    thought it was for school.  He was asked why it was  taken  for  school
    and said he did not know, his father told him to  provide  him  with  a
    photograph and he had given the photograph to his  father.   He  denied
    taking part in the interview in Riyadh and had never taken part  in  an
    interview  by  phone.   He  denied  that  the  signature  on  the  Visa
    Application Form was his. He had never heard of the sponsor of the visa
    application and said he knew nothing about it.

14.  He did not have any proof of his  identity  with  him.   He  said   his
    father advised him not to take any proof of identity with him.  He  was
    not in contact with his family in Eritrea as he did not have a  contact
    number. He was asked whether he had any documents he  could   get  sent
    from Eritrea to prove his identity and said he had nothing and said  he
    did not have an ID card.  He had had a school card  which  had  enabled
    him to register for school, but he had left  it  in  Eritrea.   He  was
    asked whether he had a birth certificate and said "no".  His birth  had
    been registered and when asked why he thought he did not have  a  birth
    certificate he said he had not seen it and did not know.

15.  Returning to the photograph, he said he could  not  remember  how  long
    ago it was taken but it was about a year and his father had  asked  him
    to take a photograph and he had done it.  As  regards  the  terrain  in
    Kessala he said it was dark and he had not  seen  it  properly  and  he
    thought it was flat.  He left Kessala the next day in  the  morning  at
    6.00 am and it had not been really dark then. It was put  to  him  with
    the production of pictures of Kessala that it was  a  very  mountainous
    area and he said he had not seen this all and had not  seen  mountains.
    He said it was dark and he could not see and he was a  bit  scared  and
    all of his concern was for his safety.

16.  As regards the call-up letter he said he did not read himself  although
    it was addressed to him.  His father had received it.  He had  no  idea
    as to whether it came by post or was served in person.  He had not seen
    it and had not asked to see it as his father had told him not to worry.
     He then said he had asked to see it but his father had told him not to
    worry about it. The call-up letter was with his father.  He  was  asked
    whether he could ask his father to send a copy to him and he asked  how
    he could ask him and asked whether they wanted him to write  a  letter.
    He did not know whether his father would send a copy  if  he  wrote  to
    him.  He was in hiding in the family house in Asmara between  the  time
    of receiving the call-up letter and leaving.  Sometimes he  went  to  a
    relative's  house.

17.  The applicant went on to answer a  number  of  questions  about  Asmara
    including the market where he said his father worked, its distance from
    his house, the district (Akria) in Asmara in which he lived, the  names
    of other districts  in  Asmara,  the  names  of  newspapers  and  radio
    stations and sports teams in Asmara.

18.  In his most recent statement of 13  March  2013  the  applicant  denies
    being HH.  He acknowledges that the photograph in HH's documents is him
    (SO). He remembers having the photograph taken when he was taken by his
    father to a shopping district in  Asmara  and  he  was  told  that  the
    photograph was  needed  for  papers  in  relation  to  school  and  his
    education.

19.  He says in the statement that he did not have any documentary  evidence
    to support his age or identity when he arrived in the  United  Kingdom.
    He had not questioned his father and he  trusted  him.   He  said  that
    after they landed at Heathrow and had disembarked from  the  plane  the
    agent  handed  him  a  red  travel  document  and  he  passed   through
    immigration whereafter the agent took the travel document back.  He had
    not looked inside the document and just did what he was told.

20.  He refers to having contacted  his  family  on  three  occasions  since
    being in the Kingdom.  The first time was in 2009 when he sent a verbal
    message to them through a member of the Eritrean community,  requesting
    documents  that  would  support  his  immigration  case.  This   person
    responded with a verbal message, but eventually the applicant's  father
    responded by sending him a conscription letter  and  a  certificate  of
    immunisation.

21.  On the second occasion he wrote to his mother as  he  was  missing  her
    very much and this must have been, he said, in around  September  2011.
    By this time he had convinced himself that it was safer to make  direct
    contact with his family.  His mother wrote a letter back to  him  on  7
    November 2011 and the letter and the translation are exhibited  to  the
    statement. The applicant expresses concerns that if the government were
    aware of the contact they would reprimand the mother  or  ask  her  for
    money and hence he did not send letters directly to his family sooner.

22.  The third communication was sent  after  he  received  Mr  Ambat's  age
    assessment and he  said  he  was  upset  because  this  questioned  his
    identity. He wrote and asked his  mother  to  send  him  all  documents
    available  at  home  including  school  certificates  and   any   birth
    certificates and she responded after about four to six weeks, including
    his original birth certificate which the applicant  then  gave  to  his
    immigration solicitor.

23.  In his statement the applicant also refers to the sessions he had  with
    his support worker, Mr Ravden.  He had told him he had written  to  his
    family and asked for his birth certificate and any documents that might
    help. Mr Ravden had encouraged him to write by telling him that one  of
    the other Eritreans from his class had made  contact  with  his  family
    even though he had previously held back from doing so.   The  applicant
    had not told his solicitors at the time because he was  unsure  whether
    or not the letter would reach his mother  and  whether  anything  would
    result  from  it.   He  was  also  scared  that  the  letter  would  be
    intercepted.  In her letter his mother referred  to  problems  she  was
    having with his father.  He had known that they were having problems in
    their marriage as these had been going on  for  a  long  time,  and  he
    thought that they lived separately.  The most recent letter his  mother
    sent showed a different address on the envelope and he was not sure why
    this was the case.  He did not recognise the address so he thought  she
    might have opted to use a safe address or the address  of  a  different
    family member.

24.  He referred to meeting Kamal Mohammed at a wedding party  in  2007.  He
    had gone there with his friend Jabar and he saw  Kamal  and  recognised
    him.  He knew Kamal in Asmara as he lived in the neighbourhood and grew
    up in  the  same  neighbourhood  as  the  applicant's  mother  and  her
    brothers and Kamal knew the applicant's mother and maternal grandfather
    and used to visit his grandfather at  his home.  He had last seen   him
    in Eritrea in about 1999 or 2000.  The meeting at the wedding  in  2007
    was a very short meeting and he did not see Kamal again until  the  end
    of 2012.

25.  The second person that he had met in the United Kingdom  whom  he  knew
    in Eritrea was Abdulkadir Turkey.  He met him in  October  or  November
    2012  at  Jabar's  house.   The  recognised  each  other   immediately.
    Abdulkadir was a very good friend of the applicant's  mother's  younger
    brother, his uncle Mubarak.  He used to see  Abdulkadir  often  at  his
    grandfather's house where Mubarak lived.  It was Abdulkadir who got the
    applicant back in touch with Kamal Mohammed as they  knew  each  other.
    The last time he had seen Abdulkadir prior to seeing him in the  United
    Kingdom in 2007 was in Asmara. He used to see him in the mosque in  the
    same neighbourhood as his grandfather.  Abdulkadir  suggested  that  he
    contact Kamal who he knew was in the United Kingdom  and  whom  he  had
    seen, and they met up.

26.  In his oral evidence before us the applicant confirmed the  correctness
    of the contents of his statements.  When cross-examined  he  said  that
    when the call-up letter came he was out playing in  the  area  and  his
    father had told him he had received it.  It was put  to  him  that  the
    letter was addressed to him and he said "yes, but  youngsters'  parents
    received letters for them".  He was asked why he had not asked  to  see
    it and said they could not ask their fathers and he agreed that it  was
    risky that he hid at home after receiving the letter but  said  it  was
    also difficult to find a place to  hide.

27.  He was asked why he said Kessala was flat when the  photographs  showed
    that it was mountainous and he said that they had entered at night  and
    when he came out it was morning and he saw no mountains at all.  He was
    asked whether that was because it was dark and he  said  probably  they
    passed the mountains as it was dark. It was put to him  that  he  would
    see them anyway and he said he was not aware of the  mountains  and  he
    was frightened and it was at night time and he was not  thinking  about
    the landscape of the place but thinking how to be safe.

28.  At the Sudan border the agent had spoken to the man  and  they  had  no
    problem. He had been sitting in the  back  and  was  visible  with  his
    luggage at his feet.  He was asked what he would have said  if  he  had
    been asked and said that he would have answered what he could, but  his
    father had told him that the  agent  was  responsible  for  everything.
    When the question was repeated he said he could tell them his name.  He
    was asked whether that would be the case even  though  he  was  fleeing
    because he had been conscripted, and he had  to  tell  his  name.   The
    agent had not told him anything to do and had not told him  to  lie  to
    them.  He accepted that he had come to the United Kingdom  on  a  false
    passport and that possibly that involved a lie, yet he would have  said
    who he was if asked earlier. But, he  said,  his  father  had  arranged
    everything and the man knew what to do and  his father had told him  he
    would leave Eritrea safely with the agent. He said that  he  was  given
    the document which he assumed was a passport when he  was  leaving  the
    plane.

29.  It was put to him that there was an inconsistency in  his  evidence  as
    to whether he was given it when he was leaving the plane  or  after  he
    had left the plane and he said that the agent  gave  him  the  passport
    when they were leaving he plane and still on the plane and  as  to  any
    discrepancies it was five years ago and very difficult  to  recall  all
    the details. He had not opened the document. He  trusted  the  man.  If
    anyone had asked him on the plane who he was he would  have  asked  the
    man.

30.  He accepted that the photograph  on  HH's  Visa  Application  Form  and
    passport  were his photograph. He agreed that he had  initially  denied
    that when he was asked by the Immigration Officer and when asked why he
    said he was scared and shocked at how his picture had got there and did
    not know how it had happened.  He had been shocked as he knew  he  left
    Eritrea illegally and entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  and  this
    would be a forged document that they had put his picture under.  He had
    no clue how his photograph got on to the visa and the  passport  issued
    to HH.  He denied being HH.  He did not  recall  being  interviewed  in
    Riyadh.  With regard to him having said earlier that his  father  could
    have had something to do with the photograph he said that when he  came
    to the United Kingdom he saw the documents and it was probably done  as
    a forgery and he did not know. As to whether his father had anything to
    do with it, he said that the  picture  was  his  picture  and  not  his
    father's and it should have been taken from his father  or  mother.  He
    had no idea  whether his father had anything to do with his  photograph
    being on that passport. He had not asked his father about this. He  had
    explained to his mother about the forged documents  and  told  her  his
    picture was in a different document and that he needed ID to prove  who
    he was.

31.  He had met Kamal in 2007 at a wedding.  He could not recall  the  exact
    date.  He thought it was after his  asylum  claim  had  been  made  and
    before the decision.  He was asked whether when he got the decision  he
    had told the Home Office he had met a man at a  wedding  who  might  be
    able to vouch for him and he said he had not even  remembered  him  and
    they had just met and departed.  It had not come into his mind  and  he
    had not remembered.  He was new at that time  and  knew  nothing  about
    documents and the asylum system.  He was asked why it had come into his
    mind now and said that when he met Kamal again he told  him  all  about
    his problems with documents and he said he would help him  and  he  had
    told his solicitor who had written to Kamal and Kamal had said he  knew
    him.

32.  He was referred to the birth certificate.  He  agreed  that  it  seemed
    that it was issued on 1 August 1996.  He agreed that  he  presumed  his
    parents needed it to register him at school.  He agreed that his mother
    would have had it for years. He agreed that  his father' name  was  not
    on it, but he did not know  why  not  and  said  it  was  the  Eritrean
    government.  He agreed that it was the case that he was initially  very
    reluctant to contact his parents to send evidence as he feared that any
    communication would be intercepted but he was a little  more  confident
    by 2009 about contacting his parents.  Colin Ravden  had  told  him  he
    would have done so and this gave him confidence to write  a  letter  to
    his mother.

33.  He was asked whether he had asked his mother  to  give  him  the  birth
    certificate at that time and said yes, he had told her  but  the  third
    time he made sure he explained  everything  right.   The  question  was
    repeated and he said that on the second occasion he wrote her a  letter
    about her  condition  and  did  not  mention  documents  and  then  she
    responded with a letter.  He knew that he had a  birth  certificate  at
    that time but he had not seen it.  He was asked why he  had  not  asked
    his mother for it in 2009 and said he did not want to put them at risk.
      It was put to him that he had asked her to send  his  call-up  letter
    and he said that when that letter came he had not written except to ask
    how his mother was and on the third occasion he told her everything and
    asked her to help him with the documents. He  had  initially  seen  the
    call-up letter of 2009 when they sent it to  him.  He had  received  it
    because he had asked his father by another person to send it.  When  he
    asked the family he had not mentioned the papers  but  said  he  needed
    papers which proved him.

34.  He had initially obtained the birth certificate in October or  the  end
    of September 2012 and he had given it to his immigration solicitors and
    not to his age assessment solicitors.  He was asked whether he had  not
    thought it would be helpful to give it to Fisher Meredith and said  his
    solicitor asked the immigration solicitor to send her a  copy.  He  had
    not even taken a photocopy. He was asked why he had not told  Mr  Ambat
    about the birth certificate or produced it and he  said  that  when  he
    received the documents he gave them to the immigration  solicitors  and
    they would provide everybody with it.

35.  He could not explain why his district was spelled  in  three  different
    ways on the birth certificate.  He denied that it  was  a  forgery  and
    said it was real. At B81 was the envelope he had received it  in,  from
    his mother.  It was not an address which he knew.  It was  his mother's
    name.

36.  On re-examination  the  applicant  said  that  he  had  not  asked  for
    specific documents when he sent the message to  his  family  requesting
    documents. He had asked them for any documents which proved who he was.
     He had not asked for any documents when he  wrote  to  his  mother  in
    September 2011.  The letter he sent in 2012 was to his mother only  and
    he received the birth certificate in reply.  That was the initial  time
    she had sent him documents.

37.  We asked the applicant if he knew when his  parents  separated  and  he
    said he did not but when he saw the new address  he  thought  they  had
    separated and his mother was living at a different  address.  They  had
    argued for a long time.   He  had  not  tried  to  contact  his  father
    separately. When we asked him why not he said he loved his mother.

38.  In his statement, adopted in oral evidence before us,  Mr  Turkey,  who
    came to the United Kingdom in November 2011  and  successfully  claimed
    asylum, said that he knew the applicant while living in Asmara  through
    the applicant's maternal uncle Mubarak who was a very  good  friend  of
    his from school days.  He had last seen the applicant in Asmara in 2007
    and subsequently heard he had left Eritrea.  He met him  again  between
    October and November 2012 at the home of  their  mutual  friend  Jabar.
    In Eritrea he  used  to  see  the  applicant  through  Mubarak  because
    sometimes Mubarak would bring the applicant with him when they went  to
    coffee shops or to get the applicant some sweets in Gezabanda where  Mr
    Turkey and Mubarak attended the mosque.   He  said  that  he  knew  the
    applicant's mother and could  recognise his father but  they  were  not
    close acquaintances. He knew Kamal Mohammed from Asmara and he had  put
    the applicant back in touch with Kamal as he had his phone  number  and
    his phone.

39.  In his oral evidence he said that the last time he  saw  the  applicant
    in Eritrea was in  Asmara  in  around  May  2007  and  occasionally  in
    Gezabanda at  the  mosque.  Although  the  applicant's  appearance  had
    changed between then and now  he  could  not  be  mistaken  as  to  his
    identity, and was quite  sure.  He  referred  to  Jabar  as  being  the
    applicant's friend and his (Mr Turkey's) extended relative. It was  put
    to him that he said in the statement that Jabar was his friend  and  he
    said he was a friend of  the  applicant  and  a  relative  of  his  (Mr
    Turkey's). They were extended relatives and friends also.

40.  It was put to him that his evidence in this regard  contrasted  and  he
    said perhaps he did not go into details in the statement.  He had  kept
    in touch with the applicant since remeeting.  They went for tea and for
    a chat.  He was asked why he had not made his witness  statement  until
    19 March and said he was not asked before then and when  the  applicant
    asked he was ready to assist him.  It was put to him that  he  was  the
    applicant's friend and had seen him continuously and was here  to  help
    him and he said he had not come to help his  friend  but  to  tell  the
    truth. It was put to him the truth was that the applicant  was  not  SO
    but HH who came to the United Kingdom from  Saudi  Arabia.   Mr  Turkey
    said that the person he knew as SO was the person who lived  in  Asmara
    and Gezabanda and whose uncle was Mubarak.

41.  On re-examination he said that he had a lot of extended  relatives  and
    was friends with about half of them. He could not recall  when  he  had
    contact with the solicitors.

42.  In his witness statement, adopted in his oral evidence, Kamal  Mohammed
    said that he knew the applicant  in  Eritrea  because  the  applicant's
    mother was from the same area as he was  from  and  probably  knew  his
    maternal grandparents better than he knew the Applicants father. He had
    met the applicant once by chance in 2007 at a wedding in London. He had
    not recognised him when said hello to him.  He remembered thinking that
    he had grown so  much  taller  but  did  not  recognise  him  until  he
    introduced himself.  He had probably seen him in the  few years  before
    he left Eritrea but could not remember exactly when.  He did not  think
    much about the applicant afterwards but at  the  end  of  2012  he  was
    contacted by Mr Turkey whom he also knew from Asmara and he had put the
    applicant and Mr Mohammed back in contact.  In  his  oral  evidence  he
    said it was not possible that he had been deceived  by  the  applicant.
    Although he had not seen him for several years his facial structure was
    the same.  He had last seen the applicant before the hearing,  possibly
    last month in west London together with Mr Turkey.  They  had  had  tea
    together.  Previously he had last seen  him in Asmara in  around  2000.
    He  did  not  know  what  school  the  applicant  had  attended.    The
    applicant's grandparents were Mr Mohammed's neighbours and he  had  not
    known where his parents were.  He had seen him when he had come to  his
    grandparents at Eid when he had played at Mohammed's place. His  mother
    had come once a week.  As to not knowing what school he  attended,  the
    applicant lived in a different area.

43.  He was sure that he was the same person whom he had  seen  in  2007  in
    London previously  and  Eritrea.   They  met  at  the  wedding  of  the
    applicant in 2007 and he thought it was perhaps the wedding of a person
    called Negash.  There were 150 to 250 people there.  The applicant  had
    not told him he had come to the United Kingdom to  claim  asylum.  They
    were just thinking about the marriage and he had planned to  meet   him
    again but could not. There had been   no  decision  as  such  with  the
    applicant asking him to vouch for him.  It was put to  him that he  had
    come here today to say that he was SO when in fact he  was  HH  and  Mr
    Mohammed said he had not come to witness for HH but had come to witness
    for SO.

44.  Colin Ravden has provided a witness statement,  dated  26  March  2013,
    which is not contested.  He has known the applicant since October  2007
    when he joined Mr Ravden's class at DOST, which is a project for  young
    asylum seekers  and refugees.  Previously Mr Ravden was a teacher,  for
    a number of years a head teacher. The applicant  attended  his  classes
    for a period of time and did well, and although the applicant  now  has
    little contact with Dost he continues to maintain close contact with Mr
    Ravden personally and Mr Ravden  considers  that  he  is  probably  the
    British adult whom the applicant knows best.  The  applicant  turns  to
    him for  advice  and  support  and  he  has  accompanied  him  to  many
    solicitors'   appointments   and   immigration   hearings   and   other
    appointments.

45.  Mr Ravden comments on the unanimity with which the Eritrean  contingent
    in his class warned each other against  making  contact  with  families
    back   home.  There  were  six  other  Eritreans  in  addition  to  the
    applicant.   The  applicant  played  a  leading  role  in   discussions
    concerning the two different cultures and his comments were approved by
    the other Eritreans.   His  comments  included  specific  reference  to
    Asmara. He discussed with the applicant whether it would be possible to
    have evidence sent from Eritrea when he became aware of the  Applicants
    identity difficulties with the Home Office.  He returned to  the  issue
    several times but  did  not  press  him  as  he  did  not  want  to  be
    responsible for persuading the applicant to take  action  that  led  to
    trouble for his family. He says that the applicant has enormous respect
    for adults and had told him that his father had told him not to contact
    home and he had found it very difficult to break this instruction.  The
    applicant had said he had had a difficult relationship with his  father
    as he was unhappy with  the  way  that  he  treated  his  mother.   The
    applicant had told him in 2009 that he had decided to make contact with
    his family in a way that should be safe for them, via a fellow Eritrean
    who was returning  to  Eritrea.   He  said  that  he  attended,  as  an
    observer, the age assessment carried out by Mr Ambat and that Mr  Ambat
    implied that he accepted the truth of what he was told but  the  report
    in 2012 concentrated overwhelmingly on the identity  issues.  This  led
    the applicant to realise how vital it was to secure compelling evidence
    and Mr Ravden encouraged him to write to his family.  He speaks  highly
    of the applicant's character and behaviour.

46.  In Deborah Knowles' witness statement  she  exhibits  and  reports  the
    findings in the age assessment review carried out by Mr  Ambat  and  Ms
    Burton.  The applicant was interviewed on 24 August 2011 and again on 7
    September 2012.  Comments are made in the review  on  the  respondent's
    age assessment of 2 October 2007. It  is  said  that  there  have  been
    significant developments within the sector that have arisen since  this
    assessment was completed.  It is noted  that  it  was  conducted  by  a
    single worker and that it appears to have  been   on  the  basis  of  a
    relatively short interview.  Her  report  was  of  a  length  that  the
    assessor would have expected to find in a  single  section  of  an  age
    assessment report.  It did not appear that Ms Carr, who carried out the
    assessment, would have had access to the Applicants witness  statement.
    His journey to the United Kingdom and reasons for leaving Eritrea  were
    not discussed within the original assessment report. It seemed unlikely
    that the  local  authority  were  aware  of  the  UKBA  evidence  which
    undermined the asserted identity.

47.  At paragraph 2.7 the authors of the report state that  the  independent
    assessors placed no weight on the applicant's  physical  appearance  at
    the time when they assessed him since it was not felt that  this  could
    be  seen  as   a  determinative  factor  given  the  age  range   under
    considerations. It is said that similar considerations would  apply  to
    any observations of demeanours at this time. The assessor had  accepted
    the asserted age but acknowledged  that  he  appeared   "nervous"   and
    "afraid of  answering  questions".   The  opinion  of  the  independent
    assessors was that the assessment fell short of the  standard  required
    to ensure compliance with both case law and best practice in the  area.
    It is noted that the report was  countersigned  by  a  manager  and  it
    therefore appeared that it had been completed  and  filed  without  any
    level of  management  oversight  and  the  independent  assessors  were
    confident  that  the  local  authority  would  have  agreed  that   the
    assessment did not meet  the  standard  required  to  demonstrate  good
    evidence-based practice and critical analysis of the information gained
    during the assessment process.

48.  The report notes in summary form the documents taken  into  account  by
    the independent assessors.   It  goes  on  to  review  the  applicant's
    evidence and  also  the  evidence  concerning  HH.   In  light  of  the
    questions raised in relation to that, Mr Ambat  wrote  to  the  British
    Embassy in Riyadh. It transpired in the course  of  evidence  that  the
    British Embassy was reluctant to provide this information  directly  to
    Mr Ambat,  and  as  a  consequence  it  was  relayed  to  the  Treasury
    Solicitors who passed the  information  on  to  the  local  authority's
    solicitors and thence to Mr Ambat.  Among  other  things  the  response
    stated when asked whether the Eritrean passport  could  be accepted  as
    genuine that there was nothing adverse identified when it was assessed,
    but UKBA/FCO were no longer in possession of the passport. It is  noted
    that all ECOs and entry  clearance  assistants  have  received  forgery
    training and applied this expertise when looking at  passports  and  if
    there is any suspicion as to  ethnicity  the  case  is  referred  to  a
    specialist department. It is said to be a  possibility  that  HH  could
    have previously entered Eritrea as a dependant on a  parent's  passport
    and then applied for a new passport in Saudi Arabia but  there  was  no
    evidence to confirm or deny this assertion. There was  no  evidence  to
    confirm that he had left Eritrea illegally.  Asked as to whether  there
    was evidence that HH had a continuing right to reside in Saudi  Arabia,
    a general enquiry had been made against his name and the  results  were
    awaited.  As to whether there was conclusive evidence that placed HH in
    Saudi Arabia at the time of the application the response  was  yes,  on
    the basis that although no biometrics were taken for him  an  interview
    in person was conducted at the British Embassy on 21 August 2007.

49.  The independent assessors put  their  provisional  conclusions  to  the
    applicant and his response to that  appears  to  have  been  calm.  The
    conclusion of the independent assessors is that  the  applicant  is  in
    fact HH and aged 25 years at the time of submitting the report.

50.  In his oral evidence Mr Ambat adopted the report. He  had  subsequently
    seen the additional witness statement  and  the  documents.  There  was
    nothing in this  that  caused  him  to  revise  his  opinion  that  the
    applicant was HH.

51.  In cross-examination Mr Ambat agreed that  he  was  not  a  witness  of
    primary fact. He was asked whether he gave his evidence  as  an  expert
    and said it was as an independent social worker and was aware  that  it
    would only be admitted if it was expert evidence.  He was  referred  to
    the guidance at part 35 of the CPR and said that  he  did  put  himself
    forward as an expert in age assessment but nothing else. He agreed that
    he should not give evidence on matters outside his expertise.

52.  He was aware of criticisms that had been made of  him  in  the  courts.
    He was referred to paragraph 237 of the judgment of Lord Stewart in ISA
    [2012] CSOH 134.  He agreed that he was criticised for giving  evidence
    outside any area of expertise he purported to have.  His opinion  there
    had been on the presentation of a young person, but he said there was a
    lot more to consider. He had given his impression of the individual  as
    an expert. He was asked whether in light of that  criticism  he  should
    not have been particularly  careful about the limits of  his  expertise
    in this report and said yes.  He said of course he had  taken  heed  of
    the advice and his practice had evolved.  He agreed  it  was  the  case
    that no weight could be placed on the physical appearance or  demeanour
    of the applicant.

53.  He was asked whether the documents listed at  paragraph  1.2  were  the
    only documents that he had seen and said yes, though a lot were in  the
    trial bundle.  If a document was not referred to he had not  looked  at
    it.  He was asked whether he had not seen the social services  file  on
    the applicant and he said he had seen most of it and it had been in the
    first bundle.  He was referred to documents at tab B of bundle 2 and it
    was put to him that he had not seen it separately from the  High  Court
    bundle and he said he had requested it and he had thought  he  had  all
    the documents he needed. He was asked whether he had for  example  seen
    the Pathway Plan document at page 61 and said he had seen  it  and  had
    spoken to the author.  It was put to him that it was not referred to in
    paragraph 1.2 and he said it was in the first bundle of 9 January 2008.
     It was suggested to him that he had said he had seen it before he knew
    which plan it was and he said he had seen several but he could not  say
    he knew how many there were in total.  It was suggested to him that  he
    had not seen them all and he said he believed he had seen them all  now
    and he had asked for the most recent.  He thought that this  particular
    document was in subparagraph (i) of paragraph 1.2 of his report.

54.  He was referred to the document at page 84  of  tab  D  and  was  asked
    whether he had seen it when he had prepared the report and he  said  he
    had thought so given the date on it of 25 October 2007.  As regards the
    profile notes at page 116 onwards, he said he  had  seen  them  but  he
    could not recall which bundle they were in.  It was  put  to  him  that
    they were not in subparagraph (i) of paragraph 1.2 and he said  he  did
    not know.  It was suggested that they were not in fact in  any  of  the
    categories of documents referred to at paragraph 1.2 and he said he did
    not know and he apologised if he had failed to list them. It was put to
    him that it was either untrue that he had seen all  or  they  were  not
    listed and he said it was the latter.  His  practice  had  evolved.  He
    agreed that it was shoddy in that section. It was put to him  that  the
    Pathway plans were not in the bundle and he said that  he  had  perused
    them all and had spoken to Mr Mirza who had worked with the  applicant.



55.  It was put to Mr Ambat that the reason for the questions  was  that  he
    could be claiming to be expert on the perusal of social services  files
    but he did not refer to those documents in the report. He said that  he
    would rely on them in a different kind  of  case  and  this  was  about
    identity not age.

56.  He was asked, with reference to paragraph 6.1 of  his  report,  whether
    his opinion about the family was a matter  of  expertise  and  he  said
    "no".   He thought it was a matter  he  had  to  consider  as  a  local
    authority social worker.  It was all evolving.  He  was  not  sure  the
    guidelines fitted with the work he was asked to do. He  felt  qualified
    to do an age assessment where the age was unknown and in this case most
    social workers would not have gone as far he had, but he was  asked  to
    consider these documents.  He did not claim to be a country expert.

57.  He was asked whether he accepted that paragraph 6.1 was not within  his
    expertise and he said he was entitled to have an opinion.  It  was  put
    to him that he was not entitled to put himself forward as an expert and
    he said he was not a country expert, not on Eritrea.  He  could  defend
    his opinions.   He  said  that  the  factual  circumstances  about  the
    journey of a migrant to the United Kingdom were all a large part of any
    age assessment.  He agreed that he was not an expert in truth  and  the
    Tribunal was not bound by non-expert opinion. He said that where  there
    was a negative decision about age then it was important that views were
    taken on credibility and it was necessary to explain to the person  why
    those views were reached.

58.  Mr Ambat said that the text of the letter at paragraph  32  annexed  to
    his report was his text.  The final sentence at the  top  paragraph  at
    page 33 entailed him seeking to confirm what additional checks had been
    made. He agreed he had not exhibited a copy of the response.  He  could
    get it (as set out above) and this was  subsequently  provided  on  the
    basis that we have set out.  He agreed that he should have exhibited  a
    copy of the email and that it was bad practice not to.  It would be  on
    his file.

59.   He  could  say  that  his  expertise  extended  to  presentation   and
    appearance of a person and if they were a child, but not in this  case.
    The report was really an expression of his views as to the truthfulness
    of an adult in light of the documents but was as much about considering
    documents.  It was not appropriate for  him  to  consider  whether  the
    applicant had told the truth today.  He had considered  the  provenance
    of the documents, not the truthfulness, in coming to his view. Even  if
    the document was genuine it could concern a different person.   He  did
    not have a view on the genuineness of the document.

60.  In  re-examination  Mr  Ambat  said  that  there  was  always  judicial
    criticism. He was referred to tab 9 paragraph 49 in ALA [2012] CSOH 135
    and agreed that it  seemed  Lord  Stewart  had  accepted  that  he  had
    substantial experience of age assessments.  He was also referred to the
    decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MW  CO/10823/2011  at  tab  8,  at
    paragraph 93 onwards.  He had been instructed always by  applicants  in
    the past. He said that what was said at paragraph 93 was right.  He had
    twelve to thirteen years' experience of African cases which were mainly
    if not all from Sudan and Eritrea.  He  had  looked  at  documents  and
    considered escape routes over those years. He had never  seen  a  birth
    certificate from Asmara before.  He was asked whether he felt qualified
    to express any view about the validity of  the  birth  certificate  and
    said he  could  not  conclude  it  was  true  given  his  view  of  the
    Applicants' identity and hence he had doubts.

Other Evidence

61.  The original age assessment was carried out by Ms  Carr  on  2  October
    2007.  She noted the applicant's physical appearance including the fact
    that he had no facial hair and generally shy demeanour.  With regard to
    his interacting during the assessment he interacted, she said, as would
    be expected for a young person of his age.   She  said  he  spoke  with
    confidence but it was clear he was  nervous  and  afraid  of  answering
    questions.  He gave the names and approximate ages of his parents.   He
    said that he had just completed his year 11 education and used to  play
    with his friends and never had a job and used to help his mother around
    the house. He had started school at the age of 6.  He referred  to  his
    education in a little detail.  He said he was able to cook, wash, clean
    and budget and shop by himself but felt he would require support living
     in the country and in accessing education and independent  skills.  He
    was a practising Muslim and in good health.   There  was  reference  to
    Home Office documents having been a source of information,  but  it  is
    not said what those documents were, and in light of  the  date  of  the
    assessment it would seem that it could not be no more than  at  best  a
    relatively brief screening  interview  and  certainly  not  the  asylum
    interview.

62.  Ms Carr assessed the applicant as being a child aged 17.

63.  Professor Kibreab has provided an expert report  dated  5  April  2013.
    He is out of the country so it was not possible for him  to  give  oral
    evidence before us.  He comments on  three  specific  matters.   First,
    whether Eritrean government departments  other  than  the  Ministry  of
    Defence were involved in the call-up for national service,  bearing  in
    mind that the letter to the applicant came from the Ministry  of  Local
    Government.  His view on this is that the fact that it was sent to  his
    father by the Ministry of Local Government is something known to happen
    in practice and consistent with Professor Kibreab's  own  observations,
    sources and background information.

64.  As to the likelihood of the call-up letter,  the  Child  Health  Growth
    and Promotion Card and birth certificate being  genuine,  he  makes  it
    clear  that  he  is  not  in  a  position  to  provide   a   definitive
    authentication of the documents and states that he is not qualified  to
    authenticate documents.  He says that however based on comparison he is
    able to give an opinion regarding the documents and express an  opinion
    as to whether they appear to be  genuine  when  compared  with  similar
    documents with which he is familiar.

65.  So far as he can tell,  the  birth  certificate  and  health  card  are
    original documents, though he only had a copy, as do we, of the call up
    letter. He notes a slightly different spelling of the applicant's  name
    in the English translation of the call up  letter  and  says  that  the
    translations of Eritrean names into English is  not  standardised  with
    slight  variations  in  the  spelling  of  the  name  Omar  not   being
    significant and they are likely to be one  and  the  same  surname.  He
    considers that the call-up letter's details appear to  correspond  with
    other genuine call up letters he has seen before.  The Child Heath  and
    Growth Promotion Card and birth certificate appear  to  be  similar  to
    genuine cards he has seen before and he showed both of them to  trusted
    sources who said that they were similar to ones  with  which  they  had
    been  issued.




Assessment

66.  There is no burden of proof in a case such as this. We have  to  decide
    on the balance of probabilities what the age of the applicant  is,  and
    in this case that effectively comes down to deciding whether he  is  SO
    as he claims to be, or HH as the respondent claims him to be.

67.  We start with a consideration of the  applicant's  evidence,  which  we
    have set out above.

68.  Mr Rutledge has raised a number of concerns about  the  credibility  of
    the applicant's evidence, to which Mr Buley has responded.  We  do  not
    consider it to be adverse  to  the  applicant's  credibility  that  his
    father, on his account, opened the call up letter and did not  show  it
    to him.  We accept that the father might open his teenage son's letters
    and decide on the proper way of dealing with such an  important  matter
    as the question of his call up. Nor do we have any particular  concerns
    about the relative passivity of the applicant in not asking the  agents
    their names.  The discrepancy as to whether the third  agent  gave  the
    applicant the passport while still on the  plane  or  soon  after  they
    disembarked seems to us to be essentially minor.

69.  However, we do have concerns about the fact that the applicant  appears
    to have been  content to travel from his home  to  the  United  Kingdom
    without  ever  enquiring  as  to  the  identity  under  which  he   was
    travelling.  We do not  accept  that  his  passivity  could    credibly
    extend to never asking the agent any questions of  this  kind.   It  is
    relevant to note the  background  information,  to  which  Mr  Rutledge
    referred us, concerning the road blocks and checks both within  Eritrea
    and at the Sudanese border. We do not find credible the claim that  not
    having been told the identity under which he was  travelling  he  would
    not have asked about it, given the inevitable risk of being stopped and
    questioned at any stage of the journey.

70.  We also find it lacking in credibility that he would have been able  to
    board the aircraft at Khartoum without documentation.  We bear in  mind
    what Mr Buley says about the possibility of bribes having been employed
    by the agents for every stage of the journey, and  we  do  not  dismiss
    that possibility, but it seems to us to be inherently implausible  that
    a person would be able to  board  a  flight  without  documentation  at
    Khartoum and also they would be prepared to undertake a journey of this
    kind without at any stage facing questions about the identity in  which
    they were travelling or about the documentation which was being used.

71.  We also consider adverse to the applicant's credibility the  fact  that
    at interview he described the terrain in Kassala  as  being  flat  land
    with no mountains, contrasting with the mountains that  clearly  appear
    in the background to the town as shown in the photographs with which we
    have been provided.  In response to question 116 he said  that  it  was
    not really dark when he left Kassala the morning after he arrived.   We
    can understand that he might have been  concerned about his safety  and
    scared, but we do not find it credible that he would not  have  noticed
    the sizeable range of mountains which could  clearly  be  seen  in  the
    photographs.

72.  Having met Mr Mohammed in 2007 soon after his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  he  did  not  see  fit  to   mention   that   fact   to   his
    representatives.  Even if it is the case that the  meeting  took  place
    between his interview and the Home Office decision on  his  case,  once
    that decision had been made, and the doubts about his identity had been
    raised, we have not found credible any explanation he as  given  as  to
    why he did not at that stage remember the meeting with Mr Mohammed,  if
    indeed  it  took   place,   and   relay   that   information   to   his
    representatives.   Nor  do  we  understand  why,  given  that  the  age
    assessment procedures were well under way, when he received  the  birth
    certificate from his mother he did not at least provide a copy of  that
    to Fisher Meredith rather than sending the document to  his immigration
    solicitors.

73.  To an extent we agree with Mr Rutledge that the evidence of  Mr  Turkey
    and Mr Mohammed lacked precision.  Neither  however  resiled  from  his
    identification of the applicant as the person he says he is, and  there
    is an essential consistency between their  evidence  and  that  of  the
    applicant.

74.  As regards the evidence of Mr Ambat, we  have  been  unable  to  derive
    more than minimal assistance from this. Mr Ambat properly accepted that
    he could not say anything about the applicant's age from his appearance
    or demeanour given the age range. We have derived a  little  help  from
    what he says about the 2007 age assessment, with regard to  the  detail
    in the report and the then prevalent procedures.  But  essentially  his
    report  goes  dangerously  close  to  trespassing  on  the   Tribunal's
    territory in assessing the credibility of the applicant.

75.  Inevitably social workers carrying out  an  age  assessment  will  take
    into account the credibility of an applicant in  assessing  their  age.
    It is not a process that can be carried  out  in  a  vacuum  of  simply
    considering a  person's  appearance,  demeanour  and  interaction  with
    others.  If a person's account of their background or how they came  to
    the United Kingdom or their actions while  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    palpably untrue, then that must have some relevance to their  claim  to
    be of the age they claim to be, although clearly it is  a  matter  that
    must be considered in the round together with the other matters such as
    demeanour, appearance and interaction. But in a case such as this where
    those matters last  mentioned  do  not  feature  as  part  of  the  age
    assessment carried out by an independent assessor, we can see little if
    any value to the views of such an assessor carrying out a review.   The
    matters that fall for consideration in  such  a  case  are  essentially
    matters for the Tribunal, and that is the basis upon which we assess Mr
    Ambat's report and his oral evidence.

76.  We have summarised the evidence of Mr Ravden above.  He  has,  entirely
    properly, not sought  to  assess  the  applicant's  age.  We  note  his
    observations of the applicant including approval of  comments  made  by
    the applicant during discussions during other Eritreans, those comments
    including specific reference to Asmara, and the encouragement  that  Mr
    Ravden gave him where appropriate, to make contact with his family. His
    evidence takes matters little  further  but  it  is  of  relevance  and
    assists.

77.  Professor Kibreab is unable to provide a definitive  authentication  of
    the documents that he saw. He is able to confirm that there is  nothing
    surprising about the call-up letter having been issued by the  Ministry
    of Local  Government.  As regards the Child Health and Growth Promotion
    Card and the birth certificate, he has shown both of those  to  trusted
    sources who say they are similar to their own documents.  He says there
    is nothing to suggest that the slight variations in the spelling of the
    applicant's  surname  are  of  any  significance.   He  says  that  the
    translation of Eritrean names into English is not standardised and that
    more often than not the translations are phonetic and the  spelling  is
    random. He does not comment on the fact that the word Maakal  which  is
    part of the address of both the applicant on his birth certificate  and
    the Public Registration Officer is spelt variously in the way  set  out
    above and also as Maakel and Maekel.

78.  In his skeleton argument and in oral submissions  Mr  Buley  emphasised
    as one of the aspects of his positive case, as he put it, the  evidence
    on the social services file.  He argued that this was valuable  as   it
    gave a snapshot of the applicant's behaviour at a particular time.   He
    argued  that  the  applicant  would  have  had  to   have   been   very
    sophisticated to be acting and the evidence in that file had  not  been
    before the Immigration Judge.  It was striking, Mr Buley  argued,  that
    no one had ever had any reason to doubt the applicant's age  among  any
    of the social workers with whom he dealt.  As an example, he  drew  our
    attention to the review carried out on 25 October 2007, to be found  at
    page 84 of tab D.  Among other  things  it  is  noted  there  that  the
    applicant spoke very little English, was said to be settling in slowly,
    was developing a relationship with his key worker and could tend to  be
    very dependent.  This, he said, should be contrasted with a 20 year old
    pursuing an active  deception  and  what  was  said  there  was  highly
    consistent with the applicant's evidence about his journey.  He did not
    question the adults then nor while in the United Kingdom.

79.  There was reference at page 86 in the same review to the fact  that  he
    appeared to miss his family members and had broken down crying, and the
    same reaction could  be noted in the profile note of  26  October  2007
    where he was said to be missing his mother to the point where he  broke
    down on the previous day.

80.  From the Pathway Plan of 9 January 2008, beginning at page  61  of  tab
    D, there is reference for example at page 65 of  the  applicant  having
    developed a good relationship with two young people in the flat who had
    become like family to him. They would have been in the  16  to  18  age
    range.  Also, at page 76, he was noted as having shown a keen  interest
    in establishing contact with his relatives back home,  most  especially
    his mother to whom he had written a letter but had not yet  received  a
    reply.  There is further reference to him having written  a  letter  to
    his mother at page 74 and a reference there also to the  fact  that  he
    sometimes broke down in tears when talking about his  mother.   He  was
    said to have developed a good  relationship  with  some  of  the  young
    people with whom he shared his placement. There was a reference also in
    oral evidence when asked why he had not contacted or tried  to  contact
    his father to him saying "I love my mum". It was, said Mr  Buley,  very
    difficult to imagine this was in fact HH playing  a  role.  The  social
    services file was  said  to  contain  an  independent  picture  of  his
    behaviour and was consistent.

81.  We agree that this is again relevant evidence to be borne in mind  when
    making our overall assessment of the evidence.  It is clear  that  both
    at the original age assessment and subsequently the respondent  saw  no
    reason to doubt the age of the applicant until the point  at  which  it
    took on board the views of the Home Office and the conclusions  of  the
    Immigration Judge.

82.  We turn next to the documents.  We have noted  above  the  points  made
    about the three different ways in which a particular part of an address
    is set out in the birth certificate.  We have also  set  out  Professor
    Kibreab's views which are of  course  of  assistance  concerning  these
    documents. We have looked  at  the  documents  ourselves.  We  are  not
    experts in documentation and can say no more than that subject  to  the
    points about the various spellings on the birth  certificate  there  is
    nothing on the face of them to suggest to us that they are  other  than
    genuine.  They have to be seen with the other evidence  in  the  round,
    however.

83.  A major point upon which Mr Rutledge  relied  was  the  fact  that  the
    applicant's photograph, on his  own  admission,  appears  in  the  Visa
    Application Form and on the passport  of HH.   The  applicant  in  oral
    evidence was unable to give any explanation for this  although  he  had
    previously referred to his father having taken the photographs after he
    had originally had them taken.  He did not suggest any  particular  use
    to which his father might have put the photographs. As Mr Buley argued,
    without that evidence it is difficult to imagine that there would  have
    been any need for an age  assessment  for  judicial  review  given  the
    acceptance of the applicant's age on the part of the respondent.

84.  There is however this  evidence,  and  it  is  powerful  evidence.   To
    accept that the applicant is who  he  says  he  is  we  would  have  to
    conclude that the Entry Clearance Officer either did  not  compare  the
    face of the person whom she interviewed with  the  photographs  on  the
    Visa Application Form and the passport or that there was such a  strong
    likeness between the person she interviewed and the photographs as  not
    to cause  her  concern.   We  do  not  think  we  unduly  speculate  in
    considering that part of the point of an entry clearance  interview  is
    to establish identity, and even if we are wrong about that, it seems to
    us that ordinary prudence on the part of  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    would be to compare the photographs in  the  documentation  before  her
    with the person whom she was interviewing.  As a  consequence,  we  are
    led to the conclusion that the Entry Clearance Officer had no reason to
    doubt that the person she interviewed was HH, on the basis of  a  clear
    identity  between  that  person  and  the  photographs  on   the   Visa
    Application Form and the passport.

85.  We must bring all this evidence  together  in  our  assessment  of  the
    claim as a whole. The positive case on behalf of the applicant  as  set
    out by Mr Buley in his submissions consists of the 2007 age  assessment
    (although that must to a minor extent we think be seen in  the  context
    of Mr Ambat's remarks concerning it), the social  services  file  which
    indicates that no-one at that time had any concerns about  the  age  or
    identity of the applicant, the evidence of Mr Ravden which, as Mr Buley
    accepted, is hearsay and opinion evidence, but who has worked with  the
    applicant for  a  long  time  and  developed  his  views  on  him,  the
    documents, the report of Professor Kibreab and the oral evidence of the
    applicant and the two witnesses.

86.  The negative case consists to a slight extent  in  Mr  Ambat's  report,
    and also the negative credibility matters arising from the  applicant's
    evidence of his journey to the United Kingdom, and the  timing  of  the
    production of the late evidence and the failure on the applicant's part
    to alert his representatives and through them  the  respondent  of  the
    potentially strong evidence of Mr Mohammed whom he met as early as 2007
    after he had come to the United Kingdom.  There is also the fact of the
    applicant's photograph appearing  in  the  Visa  Application  Form  and
    passport  of HH, a person who we think we can  properly  take  to  have
    been identified as being the person in those  photographs  having  been
    interviewed by the Entry Clearance Officer.

87.  We see that latter piece of evidence as  being  of  particular  weight.
    Taking all these matters in the round, we conclude that on the  balance
    of probabilities the applicant is HH.  He is therefore aged 26  and  is
    not entitled to the ongoing services that are potentially available  to
    a formerly relevant child.

88.  We make  a  declaration  therefore  that  the  date  of  birth  of  the
    applicant is 21 February 1987 and that at the date of  the  hearing  he
    was 26 years and 1 month old.

89.  The parties may make further submissions on the terms  of  any  further
    order sought and in particular on the issue of costs, to be received no
    later than 14 days after the promulgation of this judgment.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

