

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


       Ahmad and others (removal of children over 18) [2012]
      UKUT 00267(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 10 May 2012                            |                            |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |

                                   Before

                             Mr Justice Collins
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

                     Tousif Ahmad a.k.a Touseef Mohammed
                       Jehan Mohammed a.k.a. Jehan Zeb
                       Ishrut Begum a.k.a. Tanzila Bi
                      Mohammed Atif a.k.a Atif Mahboob
                      Mobushra Begum a.k.a. Mobusha Bi
                        Furah Begum a.k.a. Farah Baz
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Ronan Toal, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr David Blundell & Mr Andrew Byass, Counsel,
                    instructed by Treasury solicitors

There  is  no  power  under  the  provisions  of  section  10(1)(c)  of  the
Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to remove children who are over the  age  of
18 years as the family members of  an  adult  being  removed  under  section
10(1)(b) of that Act.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants in these appeals are from four  families.  They  raise
       common issues and have  therefore  been  listed  together.  All  four
       families (the principals of which Qadir Ahmed  AA/08841/2008,  Noreen
       Shakila Bi AA/08855/2008, Rungzaib Mohammed AA/08846/2008 and Mehmood
       Ahmed AA/01519/2009) are Pakistani citizens and inter-related  either
       by blood or marriage or both. The family members not the  subject  of
       this determination also have appeals  outstanding  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal.


    2. Each family obtained visit  entry  clearances  in  2000  or  2001  as
       Pakistani  nationals  applying  through  the  High  Commissioner   in
       Islamabad.  Having arrived  in  this  country,  each  family  claimed
       asylum on the basis that they were  Indian  nationals  giving  names,
       dates of birth and  histories  which  differed  from  what  had  been
       presented to obtain the entry clearances.  In particular, each family
       alleged that the parent was single and his or  her  spouse  had  been
       murdered by the Indian army.  They all have associated family members
       including a number of children some of whom were dependants upon  the
       asylum  claims  of  the  principal  appellants   and   were   granted
       'derivative' refugee status and indefinite leave to  remain  on  that
       basis; other family members  are  failed  asylum  seekers  and  their
       dependants.


    3. All the parents  then  engaged  in  fraudulent  activities  and  were
       arrested  in  July  2004.   They  were  charged  with  conspiracy  to
       contravene section 25 of the Immigration Act 1971 and  conspiracy  to
       defraud by obtaining benefits to which they were not  entitled.   The
       immigration offences involved obtaining leave to enter by  deception.
       All pleaded guilty.  The grants  of  refugee  status  and  indefinite
       leave to remain, where granted, were  rescinded  against  all  family
       members.


   Procedural history


    4.  The  Secretary  of  State  served  decisions  to  remove  under  the
       provisions of section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on  all  the
       family members, including  those  who  are  not  considered  in  this
       appeal. All the family  members  appealed;  the  Secretary  of  State
       conceded they had an in country right of appeal and all  the  appeals
       came to be heard together before a First-tier Tribunal (IAC) panel of
       Judge Renton and Judge Forrester between 7th and 22nd December  2009.
       At that hearing it was conceded:


           i. that all the appellants were Pakistani  nationals  and  would
              not be at risk of persecution or serious harm on their return
              to Pakistan;
          ii. they were not entitled  to  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
              protection;
         iii. the Secretary of State was entitled to cancel  the  grant  of
              refugee status where it had been granted including those with
              'derivative' status.


    5. The appeals of all the family members were dismissed  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. Permission to appeal was granted on 23rd April 2010 on
       all grounds submitted namely:


           i. It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in law by  failing  to
              allow the appeals of those  aged  over  18  at  the  date  of
              decision on the  grounds  that  the  decisions  were  not  in
              accordance with the immigration rules and/or failing to allow
              the appeals on  the grounds that the decisions  were  not  in
              accordance with the law owing to  the  Secretary  of  State's
              failure to give effect to his  policy  as  to  how  he  would
              exercise his powers under section 10(1)(c) and/or failing  to
              allow the appeals  because  they  were  not  the  spouses  or
              partners or children under the age  of  18  of  a  person  in
              respect of whom removal directions under section 10 had  been
              made and there was therefore no power in law  to  make  those
              immigration decisions.
          ii. It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in law in relation  to
              those appellants nearing  the  age  of  18  at  the  date  of
              decision the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law
              because it was made without regard  to  policy  contained  in
              Chapter 50 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance  with
              regard to the exercise of the power under section 10(1)(c).
         iii. It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in law in reaching its
              conclusion that the nature and consequences of the  deception
              practised were of such gravity  as  to  operate  against  the
              presumption not to remove families where  the  children  have
              been in the UK for 7+ years, wrongly treated  all  appellants
              as  parties  to  the  deception,  irrationally  excluded  the
              benefit of DP5/96 and Article 8, erred in its  assessment  of
              the individual culpability of each appellant, failed to  make
              proper assessment of the trafficking submission.


    6. The Secretary of State filed a response under rule 24 of the Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    7. Directions given  by  Judge  Latter  on  13  March  2012  included  a
       direction that an initial hearing  will  be  listed  for  hearing  to
       consider as a preliminary issue:-


           "Whether there is power in law to remove children who  are  over
           the age of 18 under the provisions of section  10(1)(c)  of  the
           Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as family members  of  an  adult
           being removed under section 10(1)(b)."


       All other matters were to be  listed  after  determination  of  this
       issue.


   Hearing


    8. It was agreed before us that we would determine whether there was  an
       error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  with  regard  to
       those appellants with leave to remain in the UK who were over the age
       of 18 on the date of decision; if so we would remake the decision.


    9. It was agreed between the parties that the individuals with  whom  we
       were concerned were as follows:  Tousif  Ahmad  AA/08844/2008,  Jehan
       Mohammed AA/08847/2008, Ishrut  Begum  AA/08849/2008,  Mohammed  Atif
       AA/08853/2008,  Mobushra  Begum   AA/08852/2008   and   Furah   Begum
       AA/08856/2008.


   10. The remaining grounds upon which permission to  appeal  the  decision
       relating to all the other family members had been  granted  would  be
       separately listed for a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  after
       promulgation of our decision with regard to these 6 appellants.

   Discussion

   11. In each case, removal directions were given under section 10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (the 1999 Act).  This provides, under
       the heading "Removal of certain  persons  unlawfully  in  the  United
       Kingdom", so far as material:-


           "(1) A person who is not a British citizen may be  removed  from
           the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions  given  by  an
           immigration officer, if
      ...
           (b) he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully  or  not)
           leave to remain;
           ...
             (c) directions have been given for  the  removal,  under  this
           section, of a person to whose family he belongs
      ...
           (5A) Directions for the removal of  a  person  under  subsection
           (1)(c) cease to have effect if he ceases to belong to the family
           of the person whose removal under subsection (1)(a)  or  (b)  is
           the cause of the directions under subsection (1)(c) ....."
      ...
           (7) In relation to any such directions, paragraphs 10, 11, 16 to
           18, 21 and 22 to 24 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971
           (administrative provisions as to control  or  entry),  apply  as
           they apply in relation to directions given under paragraph 8  of
           that Schedule.


           (8) Where a person is notified that a decision has been made  to
           remove him in accordance with  this  section,  the  notification
           invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
           previously given to him."


       Subsection (1)(a) covers overstayers and those who have  breached  a
       condition of their leave and subsection (1)(ba) covers  those  whose
       indefinite leave to enter or remain has been  revoked  because  they
       have ceased to be refugees.


   12. The issue we have to determine is whether the sons and daughters  who
       have had removal directions under section 10(1)(c) and who were  over
       18 are to be regarded as belonging to the family of the parents whose
       removal has been directed under section 10(1)(b).   This  depends  on
       whether "family" within the meaning of  section  10(1)(c)  should  be
       limited so that only children under 18 fall within the subsection.


   13. It is necessary to consider the legislative history since there  have
       been  a  number  of  Acts  which  have  dealt  with  deportation  and
       administrative removal.   In its original form, the  Immigration  Act
       1971 provided by section 3(5) as follows:-

           "A person who is not a patrial [now a British Citizen] shall  be
           liable to deportation from the United Kingdom -


               (a) if, having only a limited leave to enter or  remain,  he
               does not observe  a  condition  attached  to  the  leave  or
               remains beyond the time limited by the leave; or


               (b) if the Secretary of State  deems his deportation  to  be
               conducive to the public good; and


               (c) if another person to whose family he belongs is  or  has
               been ordered to be deported."


      A decision to make a deportation order attracted an  in-country  right
      of appeal.  The Asylum and Immigration Act  1996  added  a  subsection
      (5)(aa) which provided as a further ground for deportation:


               "if he has obtained leave to remain by deception."

   14. The addition in  section  3(5)(aa)  was  limited  to  those  who  had
       obtained leave to remain by deception since those who obtained  leave
       to enter by deception were illegal entrants.   Illegal  entrants  are
       defined in section 33(1) of the 1971 Act (as amended by the 1996 Act)
       as meaning persons:


           "(a) unlawfully entering or seeking to  enter  in  breach  of  a
           deportation order or of the immigration laws, or
           (b)  entering  or  seeking  to  enter  by  means  which  include
           deception by another person,
           and include also a  person  who  has  entered  as  mentioned  in
           paragraph (a) or (b) above."


       This  definition  was  substituted  by  the  1996  Act  because,  as
       originally enacted, the 1971 Act did not refer specifically to entry
       by deception.   In  Khawaja  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [1984]  AC  74  the  House  of  Lords  confirmed  earlier
       authorities that, notwithstanding the failure to refer to deception,
       one who used deception to enter breached the immigration law and  so
       was an illegal entrant.  The 1996 Act thus did not need to refer  to
       deception  practised  by  the  entrant  himself  but  extended   the
       definition to include those whose entry was  achieved  by  another's
       deception.  Thus for example children  of  deceiving  parents  would
       themselves be illegal entrants even if unaware of the deception.


   15. Section  5  of  the  1971  Act  as  currently  in  force  deals  with
       deportation.  Section 5(4) provides:


           "For the purposes of deportation the following  shall  be  those
           who are regarded as belonging to another person's family -


           (a) where that other person is a man, his wife or civil  partner
           and his or her children under the age of eighteen; and


           (b) where that other person is a woman,  her  husband  or  civil
           partner and her or his children under the age of eighteen."


       Illegal  entrants  are   not   subject   to   deportation   but   to
       administrative removal  pursuant  to  paragraphs  8,  9  and  10  of
       Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  Paragraph 8 enables  directions  to  be
       given to the owners or agents responsible for the ship  or  aircraft
       in  which  entry  was  achieved  to  remove  the  illegal   entrant.
       Paragraph 10 enables the Secretary of State, if such directions  are
       impractical (as no doubt they would often be  if  the  discovery  of
       deception occurred some time after the illegal entry) to  "...  give
       directions for his removal in accordance  with  arrangements  to  be
       made by the Secretary of State to any country or territory to  which
       he could be removed ..." (see paragraphs 10(1) and (2)).  The  power
       of the Secretary of State under paragraph 10 can be  exercised  when
       the immigration officer's powers  under  Paragraph  8  (which  arise
       specifically on a refusal of leave to enter) are impractical.


   16. Paragraph 9 of Schedule 2 is important since, albeit the  preliminary
       issue was, as directed, limited as identified in paragraph 8 of  this
       determination, the Secretary of State  has requested that, if section
       10(1)(c) does not in our judgment extend to sons and  daughters  over
       18, removal should be permitted under paragraph 9.  As amended by the
       1996 Act, paragraph 9 provides;-


           "(1) Where an illegal entrant is not given  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the United Kingdom, an immigration  officer  may  give
           any such directions in respect  of  him  as  in  a  case  within
           paragraph 8 above are authorised by paragraph 8(1).


           (2) Any leave to enter the United Kingdom which is  obtained  by
           deception  shall  be  disregarded  for  the  purposes  of   this
           paragraph."


       While paragraph 9(1) conveys on  an  immigration  officer  the  same
       powers as he has under Paragraph 8  in  removing  a  person  refused
       leave to enter, paragraph 10  enables  the  Secretary  of  State  to
       exercise those powers.  The drafting is not as  clear  as  would  be
       desirable, but it  is  not  disputed  that  paragraph  9  gives  the
       necessary powers of removal found in paragraph 10 to  the  Secretary
       of State.


   17. It is to be noted that there was no explicit power  given  to  remove
       family members of an illegal entrant.  After  the  definition  of  an
       illegal entrant was extended by the 1996 Act to include those who had
       achieved entry by the fraud of another that created no problem since,
       whatever their ages, any children whose  parents  achieved  entry  by
       deception were themselves illegal entrants.


   18.      However, the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  added
       a paragraph 10A in Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act which provides:


           "Where directions are given in respect of a person under any  of
           paragraphs 8 to 10 above, directions to the same effect  may  be
           given under this  paragraph  in  respect  of  a  member  of  the
           person's family."


       Since this is not needed where a family member has achieved entry by
       the deception of another member of the family,  this  provision  can
       only sensibly apply to family  members  who  did  not  for  whatever
       reason achieve such entry.  It would  clearly  cover,  for  example,
       children born or wives, husbands or partners in place  after  entry.
       But, as will be apparent, it creates a problem since family  is  not
       limited in the way that section 5(4) provides  for  the  purpose  of
       deportation.


   19.      As is apparent from the extracts from Hansard, to which we  were
       referred, from the White Paper which led to the 1999  Act  and  from
       the explanatory notes to the Act, the purpose of section 10  was  to
       substitute administrative removal for deportation in respect of  all
       who fell within section 10.  This meant that overstayers, those  who
       breached conditions of their leave and those who obtained  leave  to
       remain by deception would not now be liable  to  deportation.   This
       gave them some advantage, but some disadvantage.  The advantage  lay
       in the removal of the bar to  re-entry  where  a  deportation  order
       existed.  The disadvantage lay in the removal of an in-country right
       of appeal (save where breaches of human rights were relied on).

    20. Following the passing of the 1999 Act, new  Immigration  Rules  were
        passed to deal with the provisions of section 10.   Those  were,  so
        far as family members are concerned, paragraphs 395A, 395B and  395C
        inserted into HC 395 by Cm 6339 (and HC582), which provided:

               "395A. A person is now liable to administrative  removal  in
               certain circumstances in which he would, prior to 2  October
               200, have been liable to deportation.


               395B. Those circumstances are set out in s.10  of  the  1999
               Act.  They are:
               ...
               (iii) where the person is the spouse, civil partner or child
               under 18 of  someone  in  respect  of  whom  directions  for
               removal have been given under section10.


               395C
               ...
               In the  case  of  family  members,  the  factors  listed  in
               Paragraphs 365-368 must also be taken into account."

    21. Paragraphs 365 to 368 deal with deportation.  Paragraph 366 provides
        that deportation of a child will not normally be directed where  the
        child and his mother or father are living apart from  the  deportee,
        where the  child  has  left  home  and  established  himself  on  an
        independent basis or has  married  or  formed  a  civil  partnership
        before deportation came into prospect.  Since by section 5(4) of the
        1971 Act family members are limited as stated in paragraph 395B(iii)
        of the Rules, paragraph 366 can only apply to children under 18.

    22. Six of the appellants were over 18 when the removal directions  were
        made,  Mr Toal submits that those six cannot be removed because they
        do not belong to their parents' family within the meaning of section
        10(1)(c).  'Family' within section 10(1)(c) should, he  submits,  be
        limited to those specified in section 5(4) of the  1971  Act.   That
        was the clear understanding of the draftsman of  paragraph  395B  of
        the Rules which  has  been  approved  by  Parliament.   Mr  Blundell
        submits that it is noteworthy that Parliament did not, as  it  could
        have done, transfer to the 1999  Act  the  limitation  contained  in
        section 5(4) of the 1971 Act.  That limitation is  expressly  stated
        to be 'for the purposes of  deportation'.   No  such  limitation  is
        provided for in relation to administrative removal.   Paragraph  10A
        of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act shows that 'family' for  the  purposes
        of removal of illegal entrants must be wider than for  the  purposes
        of deportation since the limitation is not extended in the 1971  Act
        beyond deportation.  This, submits Mr Blundell, is  consistent  with
        his claim that 'family' for the purposes of  administrative  removal
        under the 1999 Act is also wider.


    23. It is certainly unhelpful that Parliament did not make clear whether
        the limitation to the meaning of family was to be transferred to the
        1999 Act.  'Family' is a word which can  be  used  in  a  number  of
        different senses.  But it must take its particular meaning from  its
        context.  So much is clear from authorities  which  have  considered
        its meaning in different legislative provisions.  An example of this
        is to be found in a  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Carega
        Properties SA v Sharralt [1979] 2 All ER 1084, in  which  the  issue
        was whether the appellant was a  member  of  the  original  tenant's
        family so that he became on the tenant's death a  statutory  tenant.
        The House decided, as the headnote indicates, that the word 'family'
        was to be given its ordinary meaning in  the  context  in  which  it
        appeared.  Some of the reasoning in that case might well not survive
        civil partnerships, but the  general  approach  to  the  meaning  of
        family  remains  appropriate.   Observations  of  Lord  Nicholls  in
        Fitzpatrick v Stirling  Housing  Association  Ltd  [2001]  1  AC  27
        (another Rent Act case) at  p.41B  to  D  are  also  in  point.   He
        observed that the word family was not a term of art but  a  word  in
        ordinary usage with a flexible meaning and Parliament had left it to
        the courts to determine, in any given  case,  whether  a  particular
        individual fell within the description.


    24. There can be no doubt that sons and daughters over 18  can  properly
        be regarded as continuing to be members of  their  parents'  family.
        Under Article 8 of the ECHR, for example, such  sons  and  daughters
        can be regarded as having family life with their parent or  parents.
        Mr Blundell in his skeleton argument suggested that regard should be
        had to particular cultural arrangements  whereby  uncles,  aunts  or
        even relatively distant cousins might be regarded as members of  the
        primary appellants' family.  He asserted that the protection lies in
        the right of appeal and the need to exercise the power rationally so
        that, as he put it, "if the Secretary of State sought  to  remove  A
        who had entered the country independently, without any reference  to
        or reliance on their third cousin  B,  and  who  had  an  impeccable
        immigration history, for the sole reason that B was an overstayer, A
        would be able to challenge the decision on  appeal  on  the  grounds
        that it was irrational".  We doubt that anyone would believe that  A
        could  properly  regarded  as  removable  under  section   10(1)(c),
        particularly as he would immediately lose his leave  to  be  in  the
        United Kingdom and so his rights dependent on  lawful  presence;  he
        could be liable to detention under paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 to the
        1971 Act and he might have no in-country right of appeal.


    25. On any view, the  meaning  of  family  in  context  must  have  some
        limitation. Section 10(5A) recognises  that  those  who  are  family
        members can cease to be such.  Children under 18 can  marry  and  so
        move away from the family.  Accordingly, even within  the  household
        definition, consideration has to be given to  whether  a  particular
        person is properly to be regarded as within  section  10(1)(c).   Mr
        Blundell  makes  the  point  that  all  the  appellants  entered  by
        deception, whether or not they were personally aware of or  involved
        in that deception, and all should  be  removable  accordingly.   But
        such removal should not necessarily be based  on  section  10(1)(c).
        If an over 18 had established an independent life and was not  aware
        of the deception, it is difficult to  see  that  his  removal  would
        necessarily be desirable.  If there was evidence that he  was  aware
        of or complicit in the deception, he could be removed under  section
        10(1)(b) or, if he  had  not  been  given  leave  to  remain,  under
        paragraph 9 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  Further,  the  Secretary
        of State could rely on conducive grounds if persuaded they arose.

    26. Mr Blundell draws attention to section 8(3) of the  1971  Act  which
        disapplies the provisions of the Act relating to those who  are  not
        British citizens or members of a mission within the meaning  of  the
        Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 and 'a person who is a member of  the
        family and forms part of the household of such a member'.  In  Gupta
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1979-80] Imm AR 52 the
        IAT decided that a sister could be (but on  the  facts  was  not)  a
        member of her brother's family within the meaning of  section  8(3).
        Woolf J later  on  in  a  judicial  review  challenge  approved  the
        Tribunal's approach.  It is understandable that family should not be
        limited in the same way as  for  deportation  since  there  was  the
        additional requirement that any  family  member  should  also  be  a
        member of the diplomat's household.   Reference  was  also  made  to
        section 29 which enabled the Secretary of State to make payments  to
        cover the expenses of,  inter  alia,  members  of  the  families  or
        households of those non-citizens leaving the United Kingdom to  live
        permanently abroad.  These provisions,  and  now  paragraph  10(5A),
        show, submits Mr Blundell, that  family  is  to  be  given  a  wider
        meaning when not used in the context of deportation.

    27. Mr Toal submits that there is an  ambiguity  having  regard  to  the
        potential width of the word  family  if  not  specifically  defined.
        Thus, he submits, reference can be made to Hansard, the  explanatory
        notes and to the Rules.  We do not regard  Hansard  as  particularly
        helpful since nothing said by the minister is in any  way  explicit.
        The  explanatory  notes  say  no  more  than  is  clear   from   the
        legislation, namely that  'those  currently  liable  to  deportation
        action under sections 3(5)(a) and 3(5)(aa) of the 1971 Act, and  the
        family members of such people will be subject to new  administrative
        removal procedures'.  This is perhaps more consistent with Mr Toal's
        contention  that  Parliament  must  have  intended  that  the   same
        definition of family should apply.  As against  that,  Mr.  Blundell
        refers to section 167(2) of the 1999 Act which provides that various
        expressions should have the same meaning as  in  the  1971  Act  but
        'family' is not included.

    28. Mr Blundell also refers to sections 74 and 76 of  the  1999  Act  as
        originally  enacted.   Those  contained  the  so-called   'one-stop'
        procedure and enabled Regulations to be made to prescribe  who  were
        relevant members of an applicant's family for the purposes  of  one-
        stop notices (sections 74(8) and 76(6)).  The Immigration and Asylum
        Appeals  (One-Stop  Procedure)  Regulations  2000   (SI   2000/2244)
        provided that relevant family  members  were  spouses,  children,  a
        partner who had been such for  at  least  3  years,  dependents  and
        persons upon whom the person was dependent.  While  all  this  shows
        that Parliament could have made the position clear, it does  not  in
        our view mean that in context the limited meaning  in  section  5(4)
        should not have been intended by Parliament to be transferred.

    29. Mr Toal made what seemed to us to be  a  compelling  point.   If  Mr
        Blundell were correct, a son or daughter who  before  the  1999  Act
        came into force on 2 October 2000 was over 18 and so  could  not  be
        deported as a family member would suddenly on that date be liable to
        removal.  The purpose behind section 10 of the 1999 Act was  clearly
        said to be to make those within sections 3(5)(a) and 3(5)(aa) of the
        1971 who could be  deported  thereafter  subject  to  administrative
        removal.  It must be borne in mind that the power of removal carries
        with it a power to detain  and  automatic  rescission  of  leave  to
        remain  in  this  country.   There  is  ample  authority   for   the
        proposition that powers of  administrative  detention  must  clearly
        exist and a statute conferring such  powers  will  be  strictly  and
        narrowly construed: see for example Khawaja  in  which  all  members
        sitting made this clear.  As Lord Scarman put it;-

               "As I understand the law, it cannot extend  to  interference
               with liberty unless  Parliament  has  unequivocally  enacted
               that it should".

    30. No-one can  properly  be  subject  to  penal  consequences  upon  an
        ambiguous  or  unclear  provision.   It  would  in   our   view   be
        extraordinary if Parliament is to be taken as having, without making
        it clear that it was  intending  so  to  do,  made  a  person  whose
        position in this country was irremovable because he was  not  liable
        to deportation suddenly liable to administrative  removal  when  the
        deportation powers were transferred.

    31. Mr Toal in  addition  sought  to  rely  on  paragraph  395B  of  the
        Immigration Rules as a guide to construction  of  section  10(1)(c).
        That the Rules can be used if there is an ambiguity is supported  by
        a decision of Roch LJ in  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department ex p Valdic QBCOF 98/0808/4 (unreported).  Paragraph 395B
        certainly shows the understanding of the Secretary of State  at  the
        time and we are entitled to have regard to this and to  Parliament's
        approval of the paragraph in the Rules.  However, it is necessary to
        bear in mind that the Rules are a statement  of  the  policy  to  be
        applied by the Secretary of State in dealing with immigration.  Thus
        it was open to the Secretary of State to limit in the Rules those to
        be regarded as family members even though  the  statute  could  have
        meant that a wider category could properly have been included.

    32. As is apparent, 395B is consistent with Mr Toal's  submissions,  and
        it is open to us to have regard to it.  But it carries a further bar
        to  Mr  Blundell's  success.   Section  86(3)  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which concerns the  powers  of  the
        Tribunal on determination of appeals, provides;-

               "The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as  it  thinks
               that -


               (a) a decision against which the appeal is brought  ...  was
               not in accordance with the law (including immigration rules)
               ..."

    33. The decision was not in  accordance  with  paragraph  395B.   It  is
        correctly accepted by Mr Blundell that, even if the  Tribunal  could
        disregard a rule if it decided it was  ultra  vires,  395B  was  not
        ultra vires.

    34. Mr Blundell sought to extricate  himself  from  this  difficulty  by
        submitting that 395B represented policy which the Secretary of State
        was lawfully entitled to disapply if the  primary  legislation  gave
        her the relevant power.  That argument we reject.  Section 86(3)  is
        clear.  The Secretary of State must not make a Rule which she wishes
        not to follow given particular circumstances.  Once  in  a  Rule,  a
        policy must be followed.  Thus whether we  are  right  or  wrong  in
        deciding in Mr Toal's favour on the  true  construction  of  section
        10(1)(c), 395B would require us to allow the appeals of  those  over
        18.


    35. Foreseeing this possibility, Mr Blundell sought to rely on paragraph
        9 of the 1971 Act.  There was an issue whether the application so to
        do was made in time, but, since we reject his attempt to rely on it,
        we need not go into that.

    36. It is common ground that all the  appellants  are  illegal  entrants
        since the grants of leave to enter as visitors  from  Pakistan  were
        obtained by deception.  All the children gained entry as a result of
        that deception whether or not any knew of or were complicit  in  it.
        Some but not all were given leave to  remain  and  those  grants  of
        leave were obtained by deception.  Paragraph 9(2) requires  a  leave
        to enter granted  as  a  result  of  deception  to  be  disregarded.
        Paragraph 9(1) applies to a person granted leave to  enter  obtained
        by deception.  But paragraph 9(2) does not require a leave to remain
        even if obtained by deception to be  disregarded.   The  reason  for
        this is obvious.   Section  10(1)(b)  deals  with  leave  to  remain
        obtained by deception, but this is limited to a deception  in  which
        the person to be removed was himself or herself involved.

    37. Mr Blundell sought to rely on  a  recent  decision  of  the  Supreme
        Court, Welwyn Hatfield BC v SSCLG and Beesley [2011] 2 AC  304.   He
        contended that this decision  showed  that  a  course  of  prolonged
        deception aimed at  circumventing  a  statutory  system  of  control
        could, on the principle that 'fraud unravels everything',  enable  a
        statutory provision to be construed in  a  way  which  covered  such
        conduct.  We do not find it necessary to go into the details of  the
        Welwyn Hatfield decision, which concerned  a  dishonest  attempt  to
        avoid planning control. Having got permission to construct  a  barn,
        what in fact Mr Beesley constructed was a dwelling house  which  was
        concealed within what looked like a barn.  Mr  Beesley  than  argued
        that enforcement action could not be taken against him once 4  years
        had elapsed.

    38. Here, Parliament has clearly  decided  how  deception  in  obtaining
        leave should be dealt with.  Whether or not  complicit,  no-one  can
        take advantage  of  leave  to  enter  obtained  by  deception.   But
        deception in obtaining leave to remain must be  deception  in  which
        the person whose removal is sought was complicit.  Mr Blundell is in
        effect asking us to rewrite paragraph 9(2) so that it extends to one
        obtaining leave to remain by deception.  Furthermore, his suggestion
        that fraud unravels all is not needed since any child over 18 could,
        if complicit in the deception, be removed under section 10(1)(b).

    39. Since paragraphs 395A to  C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  have  been
        revoked, the provisions of section 10  will  prevail.   Accordingly,
        although as we say in paragraphs 32 and 33 above, these appeals  are
        governed by the paragraphs which were in force at the  time  of  the
        decisions, it is clearly desirable that we should have indicated how
        in our view section 10(1)(c) should be construed.   The  limitations
        on who should be regarded as family members in  deportation  are  as
        set out in section 5(4) of the 1971 Act.  We do not need  to  decide
        whether the failure to apply  the  definition  in  section  5(4)  to
        paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to  the  1971  Act  has  the  effect  of
        widening the ambit of family members  in  that  Paragraph.   We  are
        strongly inclined to the view that in context and having  regard  to
        the legislative history the limitations  should  apply  and  we  are
        faced with a drafting error.  Such drafting problems are by no means
        unknown in the Immigration Acts as a whole.

    40. Accordingly, the six who are now over  18  and  who  have  leave  to
        remain must have their appeals allowed.  They are Tousif Ahmad a.k.a
        Touseef Mohammed, Jehan Mohammed  a.k.a.  Jehan  Zeb,  Ishrut  Begum
        a.k.a. Tanzila Bi, Mohammed Atif a.k.a Atif Mahboob, Mobushra  Begum
        a.k.a. Mobusha Bi, and Furah Begum a.k.a. Farah Baz.  The  remaining
        family member appeals will proceed.   The  Secretary  of  State  can
        decide whether any further action should be taken against any of the
        six if, for example, there is evidence that any  were  complicit  in
        the deception in obtaining leave to remain.

Conclusion

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      We set aside the decision.

      We re-make the decision in these appeals by allowing them.







Signed

Mr Justice Collins












