

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Saboun)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 0269 (IAC)

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                            AMINA MAHAMAT SABOUN

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Ms V Laughton, Counsel, for the applicant (instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP)
Ms C Parry, Counsel, for the respondent (instructed by Government Legal
Department)

                                  JUDGMENT
    Background

   1.   The applicant is a national of Chad. She was granted entry clearance
      as a spouse on 15th August 2011 and arrived in the  UK  on  11th  July
      2012 and was refused leave to enter. She sought asylum  on  17th  July
      2012 based upon an extra marital affair in Chad - she claimed to  have
      had a relationship with MT in Chad prior to her  marriage  to  AB  and
      that after her marriage she recommenced that relationship. She  claims
      that she remained with her husband's family after her marriage but was
      subjected to bullying  and  physical  violence.  She  claims  she  was
      informed that her husband's family discovered her extra marital affair
      and so she fled to the UK and MT was subsequently imprisoned  by  both
      her family and her husband's family.


   2.    Her asylum claim was considered in the Fast Track procedure and was
      refused. Her representatives at that time informed her that they could
      no longer represent her. At her asylum appeal hearing she requested an
      adjournment in order to obtain legal representation and  to  obtain  a
      document from her sister who, although present  in  the  UK,  did  not
      attend the hearing. The application for an adjournment was refused and
      her appeal was heard by a First-tier Tribunal judge who dismissed  the
      appeal on 8th March 2013. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 15th March 2015. The grounds
      in support of that application did not raise issue of her knowledge of
      the reasons for refusal but did include an assertion that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge had disregarded the applicant's emotional state in
      the understanding and answering of questions, disregarded also  issues
      of cultural differences and responsibilities and it was asserted  also
      that proof that the applicant had relatives present in the UK was  now
      available. That unsuccessful application for permission to  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal was not renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

   3.    Removal directions were made on 9th April 2013 directing removal on
      12th April 2013. The applicant made further  representations  on  11th
      April 2013 (a copy of which were not in the documents  before  me  and
      had not been seen by her current  representatives),  with  the  result
      that  the  removal   directions   were   postponed.    Those   further
      representations were rejected by the respondent on  17th  April  2013.
      The applicant lodged  an  application  for  permission  to  judicially
      review that decision without legal representation.

   4.   On 19th April  2013  further  removal  directions  were  issued  for
      removal on 24th April 2013; the  applicant's  current  representatives
      were instructed on 19th April 2013 and a fresh claim  for  asylum  was
      submitted including a witness statement from her sister in the UK  and
      from a cousin in Chad. On  24th  April  2013  the  respondent  replied
      refusing to treat the submissions as a  fresh  claim  for  asylum  and
      refusing to stay removal. A stay on removal was then  granted  by  UTJ
      Allen.

   5.   Further submissions accompanied by a report from  Dr  Thomas  and  a
      statement from the applicant were refused on 31st May  2013.   Removal
      directions  were  again  set  for  27th  June  2013.  The  applicant's
      solicitors requested a copy of the  record  of  proceedings  from  the
      First-tier Tribunal fast track  hearing  and,  on  receipt,  forwarded
      these to the respondent on 17th June 2013  requesting  reconsideration
      and a stay on removal.  No response being received from the respondent
      this claim for judicial review was lodged on 24th June 2013, a stay on
      removal was granted by UTJ Southern on 26th June 2013 and on 12th July
      2013 the respondent served her Acknowledgment of service  and  summary
      grounds of defence.

   6.   Further decisions were made by the respondent on 31st May  2013  and
      7th August 2013 refusing to treat the submissions as a fresh claim. On
      3rd September 2013 UTJ Warr granted permission. The respondent  agreed
      to  reconsider  the  claim  and  the  proceedings  were  stayed   with
      directions as to the filing of further grounds and grounds of  defence
      in the event that the reconsideration was adverse  to  the  applicant.
      On 7th January 2015 (some 15 months later)  the  respondent  served  a
      further decision refusing to treat the submissions as  a  fresh  claim
      and withdrawing the decisions dated 31st May 2013 and 7th August  2013
      (the latter of which the applicant states she has not seen).

   7.   On 30th March 2015 the applicant was served with  a  decision  dated
      26th March 2015 again refusing to treat the  submissions  as  a  fresh
      claim and withdrawing the decision dated 7th  January  2013  (although
      this presumably intended to refer to 7th January 2015).

      Summary of issues between the parties

   8.   The applicant sought to exclude the respondent from participating in
      the proceedings: it was asserted that the most recent letter  of  26th
      March 2015 was not significantly different to that of 7th January 2015
      and that it appeared to be an attempt by the respondent to  avoid  any
      adverse  consequence  for  failing  to  comply  with  directions.  The
      applicant  drew  attention  to  Rule  31  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 which she argued were mandatory and it  would  be
      "odd" if the same principle did not apply in  the  Upper  Tribunal  as
      applied for a similar provision  in  the  Administrative  Court.   The
      suggestion that the recent decision was a tactic to  avoid  having  to
      comply with directions in order  to  avoid  adverse  consequences  was
      disputed by the respondent. The respondent accepted that she could not
      suggest that she should not have dealt with the proceedings in a  more
      timely fashion but that even if detailed grounds of defence  had  been
      served earlier they would have been otiose given the new decision. She
      referred to the continued involvement of the respondent  in  the  case
      and that although there had been a failure to comply  with  directions
      there  was  no  adverse  consequence  to  the  applicant  if  she  did
      participate.


   9.   These proceedings have not been dealt with timeously and  the  order
      staying the proceedings to await a fresh  decision  was  one  that  is
      perhaps surprising given the lengthy delays that can so  often  ensue.
      The decision that is now the subject  of  challenge  is  significantly
      different to the decision in respect of which permission was  granted.
      Given the submissions that have been made by the applicant, I consider
      it is appropriate for the respondent  to  participate  to  enable  the
      Tribunal to be given as much assistance as possible.


  10.   The essence of the issue before the parties is that  the  respondent
      took as her starting point for consideration of the issues  raised  in
      submissions by the  applicant  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal as per Devaseelan. The applicant's premise is  that  although
      that is certainly permissible in the generality of cases, in this case
      that approach is incorrect: this applicant's case falls within one  of
      the few cases where such an  approach  is  inappropriate  because  the
      result is that her lack of credibility  as  found  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal significantly and  substantially  undermined  all  subsequent
      submissions  yet those  findings  on  credibility  were  significantly
      flawed for the following combination of reasons:

   a) the applicant had been unrepresented and had sought an adjournment  to
      obtain legal representation;
   b) she had to give evidence through an interpreter;
   c) the reasons for refusal letter had not been read through to her;
   d) there was a significant error in the reasons for refusal letter;
   e) significant challenges to her account, which she could have  explained
      and has done so since, were not put to her at the hearing;
   f) the further evidence produced, namely  the  psychiatrist  report,  the
      sister's witness statement, the  cousin's  statement  and  the  social
      services report were corroborative of persecutory treatment.


  11.   The respondent's position was that if it were the case that a  judge
      hearing this appeal again would have to ignore  the  findings  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal then the decision letter,  based  as  it  is  upon
      those findings cannot stand and the applicant  would  succeed  in  her
      application.


  12.   The respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      applicant's  former  solicitors  had  treated  her  badly  or   poorly
      represented her; that in so far as the  applicant  alleged  procedural
      unfairness by the First-tier Tribunal then the appropriate  manner  of
      redress was by way of an  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  a
      matter she had not raised in her application for permission and in any
      event there was no  procedural  unfairness.  She  submitted  that  the
      instant case was not one of the rare cases  identified  in  Devaseelan
      such that the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  not  to  be
      treated as a starting point; that although the judge had  referred  to
      the issue of the applicant's alleged bisexuality (reference  to  which
      was accepted to be an error on the part of the respondent) but not put
      that to her, it had no  effect  on  the  outcome  or  upon  the  other
      credibility findings because the reference was additional to the other
      findings and not substantive.

  13.   The respondent does not accept  that  she  failed  to  consider  the
      sister's witness statement, the cousin's statement, the psychiatrist's
      report and the social services report -and,  when  considered  in  the
      context of the credibility findings by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
      respondent submits that in the decision of 26th March 2015 she applied
      the correct legal test and  that  the  conclusion  that  the  material
      before her did not amount to a fresh claim was a decision to which she
      was entitled to come.

         The Law

  14.   The test for a fresh claim as set out in paragraph  353  Immigration
      Rules HC 395 as amended is well established - see WM [2006]  EWCA  Civ
      1495, AK (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ  447.   It  has  been  repeatedly
      confirmed that the respondent's decision on whether a claim amounts to
      a fresh claim can only be impugned on Wednesbury grounds.


  15. Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702 held:



             39. In our  view  the  second  Adjudicator  should  treat  such
                 matters in the following way.


              1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always be  the
                 starting-point.  It is the authoritative assessment of  the
                 Appellant's status at the time it was made.   In  principle
                 issues  such  as  whether  the   Appellant   was   properly
                 represented, or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to
                 this.


              2) Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination
                 can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.
                   If  those  facts  lead  the  second  Adjudicator  to  the
                 conclusion that, at the date of his  determination  and  on
                 the material before him, the appellant makes his  case,  so
                 be it.  The previous decision, on the material  before  the
                 first Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.


              3)   Facts   happening   before   the   first    Adjudicator's
                 determination but having no relevance to the issues  before
                 him  can  always  be  taken  into  account  by  the  second
                 Adjudicator.  The first  Adjudicator  will  not  have  been
                 concerned with such facts, and his determination is not  an
                 assessment of them.


           40.    We now pass to matters that could have  been  before  the
                 first Adjudicator but were not.


              4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were  not  brought  to
                 the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they  were
                 relevant to the issues before him, should be treated by the
                 second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.   An
                 Appellant who seeks, in a  later  appeal,  to  add  to  the
                 available facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable
                 outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the  point
                 of  view  of  credibility.   (Although  considerations   of
                 credibility  will  not  be  relevant  in  cases  where  the
                 existence of the additional fact is  beyond  dispute.)   It
                 must also be borne in mind  that  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination was made at  a  time  closer  to  the  events
                 alleged and in  terms  of  both  fact-finding  and  general
                 credibility assessment would tend to  have  the  advantage.
                 For this reason, the adduction of  such  facts  should  not
                 usually lead to  any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
                 reached by the first Adjudicator.


              5) Evidence of other facts - for example  country  evidence  -
                 may not suffer from the same concerns  as  to  credibility,
                 but  should  be  treated  with  caution.   The  reason   is
                 different from that in (4).  Evidence  dating  from  before
                 the determination of the first Adjudicator might well  have
                 been relevant if it had been tendered to him:  but  it  was
                 not,  and  he  made  his  determination  without  it.   The
                 situation in the Appellant's own country  at  the  time  of
                 that determination is  very  unlikely  to  be  relevant  in
                 deciding whether the Appellant's removal at the time of the
                 second Adjudicator's determination would breach  his  human
                 rights.  Those representing the Appellant would  be  better
                 advised to assemble up-to-date evidence  than  to  rely  on
                 material that is (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.


           41.    The final major category of case is where  the  Appellant
                 claims that his removal would breach Article 3 for the same
                 reason that he claimed to be a refugee.


              6) If before the second Adjudicator the  Appellant  relies  on
                 facts that are not materially different from those  put  to
                 the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by
                 what is in essence the same evidence as that  available  to
                 the Appellant at that time, the second  Adjudicator  should
                 regard the issues as settled  by  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination and make  his  findings  in  line  with  that
                 determination rather than allowing the  matter  to  be  re-
                 litigated.  We draw  attention  to  the  phrase  'the  same
                 evidence as that available to the Appellant' at the time of
                 the first determination.  We have chosen  this  phrase  not
                 only in order to accommodate guidelines (4) and (5)  above,
                 but also because, in respect of evidence that was available
                 to the Appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices
                 about how it should be presented.  An Appellant  cannot  be
                 expected to present evidence of which he has no  knowledge:
                 but if (for example) he chooses not to give  oral  evidence
                 in his first appeal, that does not mean that the issues  or
                 the available evidence in the second  appeal  are  rendered
                 any different by his proposal to give oral evidence (of the
                 same facts) on this occasion.


           42.    We  offer  two  further  comments,  which  are  not  less
                 important than what precedes then.


                 (7)   The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines  (4)
                 and (6) is greatly reduced  if  there  is  some  very  good
                 reason why  the  Appellant's  failure  to  adduce  relevant
                 evidence before the first Adjudicator should not be, as  it
                 were, held against him.  We  think  such  reasons  will  be
                 rare.  There is an  increasing  tendency  to  suggest  that
                 unfavourable decisions by Adjudicators are brought about by
                 error or incompetence on the part of representatives.   New
                 representatives  blame   old   representatives;   sometimes
                 representatives  blame  themselves   for   prolonging   the
                 litigation  by  their  inadequacy  (without,   of   course,
                 offering the public any compensation  for  the  wrong  from
                 which   they   have   profited   by   fees).    Immigration
                 practitioners  come   within   the   supervision   of   the
                 Immigration Services Commissioner under part V of the  1999
                 Act.  He has power to register, investigate and cancel  the
                 registration  of  any  practitioner,  and  solicitors   and
                 counsel are, in addition, subject to their own professional
                 bodies.  An Adjudicator should be  very  slow  to  conclude
                 that  an  appeal  before  another  Adjudicator   has   been
                 materially  affected  by  a   representative's   error   or
                 incompetence; and such a finding should always be  reported
                 (through arrangements made by the Chief Adjudicator) to the
                 Immigration Services Commissioner.



                 Having said that, we do accept that there will be
                 occasional cases where the circumstances of the first
                 appeal were such that it would be right for the second
                 Adjudicator to look at the matter as if the first
                 determination had never been made.  (We think it unlikely
                 that the second Adjudicator would, in such a case, be able
                 to build very meaningfully on the first Adjudicator's
                 determination; but we emphasise that, even in such a case,
                 the first determination stands as the determination of the
                 first appeal.)




                 (8)   We do not suggest that, in  the  foregoing,  we  have
                 covered  every  possibility.    By   covering   the   major
                 categories into which second appeals  fall,  we  intend  to
                 indicate the principles for dealing with such appeals.   It
                 will be for the second Adjudicator to decide which of  them
                 is or are appropriate in any given case.

         Conclusion


  16.   This is not an appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The
      applicant sought permission to appeal that decision and  was  refused.
      No renewed application for permission was sought, out  of  time,  when
      the record of proceedings was  disclosed  or  the  applicant's  former
      solicitors disclosed their attendance note together  with  a  strongly
      worded email stating that they had read the reasons for refusal letter
      to her.  It is possible, but I say no more  than  that,  that  had  an
      application been made out of time, setting  out  the  various  matters
      referred to in the various submissions made in these proceedings, then
      permission to appeal may have been granted. Although I raised this  as
      a hypothetical possibility in the context that perhaps judicial review
      was not an appropriate remedy I am satisfied for the purposes of  this
      application that the hypothetical possibility of permission to  appeal
      being granted out of time could not legitimately be  said  to  require
      such an application to be  made  when  removal  is  imminent  and  the
      submission of such an application would in  any  event  not  have  the
      effect of deferring removal pending a decision. I also  note  that  in
      any event the  Record  of  Proceedings  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      hearing was not obtained until after the commencement of  the  initial
      proceedings. The theoretical possibility of an out of time application
      for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  being  successful  is
      not, in my view, an adequate alternative remedy that must  be  pursued
      before bringing judicial review proceedings.


  17.   I am satisfied therefore that the issue  before  me  is  essentially
      whether the First-tier Tribunal hearing could have  been  vitiated  by
      procedural unfairness such that  the  findings  could  not  reasonably
      stand. If that is the case, as acknowledged  by  the  respondent,  the
      applicant is successful in her judicial review.

  18.    The  consideration  by  the  respondent  of  the  further  evidence
      submitted was undertaken by the respondent through the  prism  of  the
      credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge,  i.e.  applying
      Devaseelan. If that were the correct approach it  is  plain  from  the
      decision of  26th  March  2015  that  the  respondent  considered  the
      submissions and evidence  before  her  in  the  appropriate  way.  She
      addressed the information submitted and considered it  in  detail:  as
      regards the report by Andrew Zadel she drew attention to the fact that
      he had not been provided with all the  relevant  material;  she  noted
      that the applicant had not named the person she was now saying was her
      sister as a sibling when listing her family in the course of her claim
      but considered the statement as if she were her sister in  any  event;
      she considered the cousin's evidence but reasonably concluded  it  was
      of little weight because of when and how it was produced; she referred
      to a number of inconsistencies and discrepancies  in  the  applicant's
      various interviews for which she had not provided  an  explanation  at
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal although explanations  were
      now provided in her recent statement; she  reasonably  concluded  that
      the psychiatrist's report  had  been  prepared  on  the  basis  of  an
      acceptance of the applicant's account as being truthful whereas it had
      been found on the lower standard not to be; she considered the  social
      services reports submitted in relation to her  sister  in  conjunction
      with the  other  material  and  including  the  discrepancies  in  the
      accounts given. On the basis that there had been no procedural  error,
      the respondent had asked herself the correct questions as regards  the
      material presented and reached conclusions reasonably open to her that
      the submissions did not amount to a fresh claim.


  19.   The issue is therefore whether there was such procedural error as to
      reasonably cause the applicant's case to be one of  those  rare  cases
      where the credibility findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      stand as the starting point, thus resulting in  the  consideration  of
      the  submissions  by  the   respondent   to   have   been   Wednesbury
      unreasonable.

  20.   The applicant was unrepresented but had been represented up  to  and
      including the submission of her appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Being unrepresented does not of itself render a  hearing  procedurally
      unfair; the judge remains under a duty to ensure that the  hearing  is
      conducted in a manner that enables an unrepresented litigant to  argue
      her case. The applicant had an interpreter.

  21.   The applicant sought an adjournment. According to the  determination
      and the Record of Proceedings, this was to enable her to obtain  legal
      representation and to obtain an unspecified document from  her  sister
      who was not present although she was in the UK. There  is  nothing  in
      the papers which indicates that the refusal to grant an adjournment on
      that basis was procedurally unfair, even allowing for  the  fact  that
      she was unrepresented at short notice.

  22.   Of more substance are the assertions that the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter had not been read through to her, that there  were  significant
      errors in the reasons for refusal letter which were not put to her and
      that significant challenges  to  her  account  which  she  could  have
      explained were not put to her.  If  that  were  established  then  the
      applicant was being expected to pursue her appeal  in  person  without
      knowing what was the case she had to answer.

         Reasons for refusal letter

  23.   The First-tier Tribunal determination sets out in [12] to  [24]  the
      applicant's case. In [13] the judge states:


                 ....As the appellant was unrepresented I went  through  the
                 matters raised in the reasons for refusal letter  and  gave
                 the appellant the opportunity to  confirm  that  the  facts
                 were accurate or not.


  24.   The Record of Proceedings states that the judge  said  he  would  go
      through the reasons for refusal letter and the  applicant  could  tell
      him if it was correct. The judge asked questions of the applicant with
      regard to her claim framed as,  for  example,  'who  were  you  living
      with', but he did not put the assertions of inconsistencies to her nor
      did he ask her if she had an explanation.  In particular, she was  not
      invited to deal with the asserted inconsistency as to  with  whom  she
      was living, whether she had recommenced her extra-marital relationship
      and the claim that she was bi-sexual. The respondent accepts that  the
      applicant had not claimed to be bi-sexual and that  the  reference  to
      this in the reasons for refusal letter was an  error.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge in his decision refers to the claim of  bisexuality  as
      being  part  of  her  case  and  although  he  had,  earlier  in   the
      determination reached a conclusion that she was not  credible,  it  is
      plain that as an experienced judge he would have considered all of the
      evidence before him in reaching his decision and that evidence,  which
      was not put to her, include the reference to her being bi-sexual. This
      is cogent evidence to support the assertion  that,  despite  what  was
      written in the record of proceedings, the judge did  not  in  fact  go
      through the refusal letter with the applicant. If he had done so  then
      he would  have  recorded  in  the  determination  a  more  appropriate
      response  being  made  by  the  applicant  concerning  the   erroneous
      categorization of her sexuality.


  25.   The applicant's former solicitors, also experienced, state  in  very
      strong terms that the reasons for refusal letter was read to  her  via
      an interpreter. The attendance note produced by  those  solicitors  of
      the  2  hour  50  minute  conference  on  27th   February   2013   is,
      unfortunately very short (11 lines) and only records  the  outcome  of
      the assertion in the reasons for refusal letter that she is  bisexual.
      It records that the applicant states that she is a  lesbian  but  does
      not want this referred to in  the  appeal.  It  does  not  record  her
      response  to  the  various  other  significant   inconsistencies   and
      discrepancies set out in the reasons for refusal letter or the  advice
      given to her.

  26.   The hearing of the appeal took place on 7th March 2013 - some 8 days
      after her conference with the  solicitors.  The  reasons  for  refusal
      letter is 7 pages long, 3 � pages of which deal with  the  substantive
      and significant elements of her claim and credibility  challenges.  It
      cannot reasonably be concluded that this applicant knew the  basis  of
      the refusal of international protection or that she had  a  reasonable
      opportunity to put her case to the First-tier  Tribunal  judge.  Given
      that this international  protection  claim  is  based  upon  the  very
      personal nature of her circumstances, it was incumbent upon the First-
      tier Tribunal judge to ensure that the  applicant  was  aware  of  the
      nature and extent of the challenges to her credibility and not  merely
      restrict her evidence to answering  questions  on  her  circumstances.
      Unless and until she was aware that particular elements of her account
      were not accepted and the reasons why  they  were  not  accepted,  the
      applicant could not address those in her evidence. It may be that  the
      applicant's former solicitors identified  those  matters  to  her  and
      obtained her explanation. But that is not apparent from the attendance
      note. The judge did not ask the applicant whether anyone had read  the
      reasons for refusal letter to her and did not read it to  her  himself
      or put the points to her. It is unsafe in a protection claim where the
      consequences could, if her account were accepted, be such as to result
      in her  being  granted  protection,  to  find  that  the  respondent's
      reliance on the credibility findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      legally sustainable.


  27.   Accordingly I am satisfied that the fundamental premise  upon  which
      the respondent considered the applicant's submissions was unlawful.

  28.   The applicant succeeds in her application for judicial review of the
      respondent's decision dated 26th March 2015,  which  therefore  cannot
      stand.

  29.   Although the respondent did not seek permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal I am however required  by  rule  44  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to consider  whether  permission
      should be granted. I am satisfied that there is no arguable  point  of
      law capable of affecting the outcome of this judgment  and  permission
      to appeal is therefore refused.
        [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
