
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |       Determination         |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On: 3rd May 2017                              |       On: 28th June 2017    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     ZMM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A. Pipe, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Singh, Counsel instructed by the Government
                       Legal Department





   The violence in Libya has reached such  a  high  level  that  substantial
   grounds are shown for believing that a returning civilian  would,  solely
   on account of his presence on the territory of that  country  or  region,
   face a real risk of being subject to a threat to his life or person.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Table of Contents


    |                                                      |               |
|Description                                           |Paragraphs     |
|Introduction                                          |1-7            |
|The Country Guidance Questions                        |3              |
|Abbreviations                                         |7              |
|                                                      |               |
|The Legal Framework                                   |8-22           |
|                                                      |               |
|The Evidence                                          |23-69          |
|Key Documents                                         |24             |
|The Political Background                              |26-36          |
|The Economy                                           |37-41          |
|The Humanitarian Situation                            |42-46          |
|Indiscriminate Violence in a Situation of Internal    |47-62          |
|Armed Conflict                                        |               |
|Violent Crime                                         |63-65          |
|Travel                                                |66-69          |
|                                                      |               |
|Discussion and Findings                               |70-95          |
|The Numbers                                           |72-82          |
|The Context                                           |83-88          |
|The Future                                            |89-90          |
|The Risk                                              |91-95          |
|                                                      |               |
|Decisions                                             |96-98          |
|                                                      |               |
|Appendix A                                            |               |
|Error of Law Decision                                 |               |
|                                                      |               |
|Appendix B                                            |               |
|List of materials considered by Tribunal              |               |




















    Introduction


 1. On the 14th July 2014 the Upper Tribunal promulgated the decision in AT
    & Others (Article 15c; risk categories)  Libya  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00318
    (IAC). That case had been convened in November  2013  to  give  country
    guidance on the risks arising in post-Gaddafi Libya. The Tribunal heard
    from three experts and had regard to a  wide  range  of  evidence.  The
    Tribunal found that the power vacuum left by the collapse of the regime
    had been filled by militias, and  that  in-fighting  amongst  them  was
    resulting in some violence. The position at the date of the hearing was
    not such however, that the Tribunal could be satisfied that there was a
    real risk of harm to the population at large. There was  a  government,
    an army and a  police  force  in  place.  Although  these  institutions
    remained weak, the evidence  indicated  that  they  could,  in  general
    terms, provide a sufficiency of protection.


 2. On the 15th July  2014  Tripoli  airport  was  forced  to  close  after
    skirmishes on the perimeter escalated to full scale rocket  attacks  on
    the runway. Defending the airport were a militia from the western  city
    of Zintan which had declared  allegiance  to  the  man  who  had  taken
    effective control of the east, General Khalifa  Haftar.  Attacking  the
    installation were a coalition of Islamists and militiamen from Misrata,
    fighting under the banner 'Libya Dawn'.  The lines were drawn. The  two
    sides that fought the battle for Tripoli airport continue to define the
    political landscape in the country today, forming the backbone of rival
    'governments'. Add to  this  a  third  entity,  the  only  'government'
    recognised by the international community, forced  to  operate  from  a
    heavily fortified naval base off the Tripoli coast. The country is  now
    home to many hundreds of militias and heavy fighting has taken place in
    several cities as these  forces  compete  for  economic  and  political
    control.


 3. These bare facts illustrate two things. First, the political  situation
    in Libya today is very different from that considered in AT  &  Others:
    FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT  00413  (IAC).  Second,  the
    security situation moves fast, and  in  an  unpredictable  way.   These
    matters are at the forefront of our  minds  as  we  endeavour  to  give
    country guidance on the following issues:


        i) Is the Appellant at risk under  Article  15(c)  if  returned  to
           Libya?


       ii) If Article 15(c) does apply, can the Appellant relocate to,  and
           reasonably be expected to stay in, another part of  the  country
           in which he would not face such a risk?


 4. It will be observed that our enquiry is confined to  whether  ZMM,  and
    other Libyans in the UK, should be granted humanitarian protection.  We
    do not intend to give guidance on claims falling within the  rubric  of
    the Refugee Convention. Decision-makers should continue to refer to the
    guidance given in AT & Others in respect of individual risk categories,
    whilst of course having regard to any up to date evidence  relied  upon
    in the individual case before them.


 5. This appeal has been selected as country  guidance  because  ZMM  could
    fairly be described, with  no  disrespect  intended,  as  ordinary  and
    unremarkable. He is male, he is healthy, he speaks Arabic  and  he  was
    originally from Tripoli. He does not have  a  family  for  whom  he  is
    responsible,  and  as  far  as  we  are   aware   has   no   particular
    vulnerabilities.   He has been in the United Kingdom since 2014.


 6. The  hearing  took  place  over  a  single  morning,  when  we  had  an
    opportunity to hear very  helpful  and  informative  evidence  from  Ms
    Alison Pargeter, an analyst  specialising  in  political  and  security
    issues in North Africa. Ms Pargeter is a Senior Research  Associate  at
    the Royal United Services Institute and a  Senior  Visiting  Fellow  at
    Kings College London. The Respondent does not challenge her  expertise,
    and accepts that her evidence is helpful in  setting  out  the  current
    situation in Libya.  Preparation of this  judgment  was  subject  to  a
    short delay whilst the parties answered some  additional  questions  in
    writing.


 7. There are, we are told, as many as 14 different spellings in English of
    the name 'Gaddafi'. This gives  some  indication  of  the  complexities
    faced by Arabists attempting accurate transliteration. We have tried to
    use  standard  forms  of  names  throughout  this  determination;   our
    apologies to experts if our choices result in inconsistency. We use the
    following abbreviations throughout the determination:


      DBB              Defend Benghazi Brigades

      ERW        Explosive Remnant of War

      GNA        Government of National Accord (the internationally
            recognised government based in Abu Sitta naval base, Tripoli)

      GNC              General National Congress (the interim government
                             formed after  the  overthrow  of  Gaddafi,  now
defunct)

      HOR              House of Representatives ('Tobruk government',  based
in
                             Tobruk and al-Bayda)

      IDP              Internally Displaced Person

      IS               Islamic State

      LPA    Libyan  Political  Agreement  (signed  in  December  2015,  the
                       current framework for talks)

        NSG                National   Salvation   Government    (alternative
government
                             based in Tripoli)

      OCHA              UN  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian
Affairs

      PC               Presidency Council (executive branch of the GNA)

      SCBR             Shura Council of Benghazi Revolutionaries

      UNSMIL           United Nations Support Mission in Libya




    The Legal Framework


 8. Article 2 (e) of the Qualification Directive defines  persons  who  are
    eligible for subsidiary protection:


         "(e) 'person eligible for  subsidiary  protection'  means  a  third
         country national or a stateless person who does not  qualify  as  a
         refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been  shown
         for believing that the person concerned, if returned to his or  her
         country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his  or
         her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of
         suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article 15,  and  to  whom
         Article 17(1) and (2) do not apply, and is unable,  or,  owing  to
         such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the  protection
         of that country;"


 9. 'Serious Harm' is defined at Article 15, the relevant  sub-section  for
    the purpose of this appeal being (c):
         Serious harm consists of:
         (a) death penalty or execution; or
         (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of an
         applicant in the country of origin; or
         (c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict.
10. There are therefore three limbs to this test. In the  context  of  this
    appeal the Appellant must demonstrate that there is in Libya:


           a) an internal armed conflict;
           b) indiscriminate violence; and
           c) that as a result there is a serious and individual threat  to
              his life or person.


11. In Diakit� v Commissaire general aux refugies [2014] WLR(D) 37 the CJEU
    dispensed with the need to conduct a detailed  legal  analysis  of  the
    conflict itself [at 35]:
         "[...] on a proper  construction  of  Article  15(c)  of  Directive
         2004/83, [...] an internal armed conflict exists, for the  purposes
         of applying that provision, if a State's armed forces confront  one
         or more armed groups or if two or more armed groups  confront  each
         other. It is not necessary for that conflict to be  categorised  as
         'armed  conflict  not  of   an   international   character'   under
         international humanitarian law; nor is it necessary to  carry  out,
         in addition to an appraisal of the level of violence present in the
         territory concerned, a separate assessment of the intensity of  the
         armed confrontations, the level of organisation of the armed forces
         involved or the duration of the conflict."
12.  Thus  the  words  'internal  armed  conflict'   do   not   attract   a
    sophisticated, complex construction. Rather they are to be given  their
    ordinary and natural meaning. This was a rejection of the international
    humanitarian law paradigm postulated  in,  for  instance,  KH  (Article
    15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00023  (IAC).   The
    war need not involve breaches of international law, nor do the  parties
    need to adopt a formal military identity. It is enough that  there  are
    one or more of them confronting each other in the territory:  see  also
    paras 14-18 of QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 620.


13. The violence can be said to be indiscriminate  where  it  could  affect
    people in that country regardless of their  circumstances.  In  HM  and
    others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00409  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    held that attacks could be properly regarded as indiscriminate:


        "in the sense that,  albeit  they  may  have  specific  or  general
        targets, they inevitably expose the ordinary civilian  who  happens
        to be at the scene to  what  has  been  described  in  argument  as
        collateral damage. The means adopted may be bombs, which can affect
        others besides the target, or shootings, which produce a lesser but
        nonetheless real risk of collateral damage"


14.  The  matter  in  issue  in  this  appeal  is  the  nexus  between  the
    indiscriminate violence and the threat to the individual. In Elgafaji v
    Straatsscretaris van Justitie [2009]  1  WLR  2100  the  CJEU  found  a
    distinction between the level of harm necessary  to  establish  a  case
    under Article 15(a) and (b) on the one  hand,  where  a  real  risk  of
    specific harm must be established, and (c), where the applicant fears a
    "more general risk of harm":


         "43. Having regard to all  of  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
         answer to the questions referred  is  that  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Directive, in conjunction with Article 2(e) of the Directive,  must
         be interpreted as meaning that: the  existence  of  a  serious  and
         individual threat to  the  life  or  person  of  an  applicant  for
         subsidiary protection is not subject to  the  condition  that  that
         applicant adduce evidence  that  he  is  specifically  targeted  by
         reason of factors particular to  his  personal  circumstances;  the
         existence of such a threat can exceptionally be  considered  to  be
         established   where   the   degree   of   indiscriminate   violence
         characterising the armed conflict  taking  place  assessed  by  the
         competent national authorities  before  which  an  application  for
         subsidiary protection is made, or by the courts of a  Member  State
         to which a  decision  refusing  such  an  application  is  referred
         reaches such a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown  for
         believing that a civilian, returned to the relevant country or,  as
         the case may be, to the relevant region, would, solely  on  account
         of his presence on the territory of that country or region, face  a
         real risk of being subject to that threat."


15. The term 'exceptional' should be understood in the same way as it is in
    the context of our domestic jurisprudence relating to Article  8  ECHR:
    it expresses an expectation of how often these situations  will  arise,
    rather than introducing a hurdle to be surmounted. See QD at  paragraph
    25:


         "....The Court  did  not,  as  it  might  have  done,  decide  that
         "individual" was there simply to exclude persons who  enjoyed  some
         form of protection  from  the  violence  faced  by  the  population
         generally. Nor, however, has the judgment introduced an  additional
         test of  exceptionality.  By  using  the  words  "exceptional"  and
         "exceptionally" it is simply stressing that it is not  every  armed
         conflict or violent situation which will attract the protection  of
         article 15(c), but only one where the level  of  violence  is  such
         that,  without  anything  to  render  them  a  particular   target,
         civilians face real risks to their life or personal safety".


16. As to the apparent difficulties with a test that requires there to be a
    'real risk of a threat', the courts have made two related points.


17. The first is that whilst the individual does not have to establish that
    he will suffer specific acts of violence against his person  he  cannot
    succeed by claiming a fanciful fear or remote threat: as the  Court  of
    Appeal put it in QD: "when Article  15(c)  speaks  of  a  threat  to  a
    civilian's life or person it is concerned not with fear alone but  with
    a possibility that may become a reality".


18. The second point is that the threat itself,  if  sufficiently  serious,
    can cause serious harm sufficient to reach the required  threshold.  In
    HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) ('HM II')
    the Tribunal emphasised that  when  focusing  on  civilian  deaths  and
    injuries it is necessary to take account of the impact  of  threats  of
    violence as well as the physical violence itself [at 272].  The  feared
    harm can therefore be physical or mental, but it must be serious. In HM
    the Tribunal considered that as a benchmark, it would have to  be  harm
    serious enough to merit medical treatment [at 45], for  instance  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.


19. The general  level  of  indiscriminate  violence  necessary  for  these
    conditions to be met must  be  high;  but  the  violence  need  not  be
    directly inflicted by one of the parties to the conflict. It could  for
    instance result from the breakdown of law and order,  but  it  must  be
    established that there is a causal  nexus  between  the  harm  and  the
    conflict.  Assessment of the feared harm should be  an  inclusive  one,
    taking account of all  relevant  metrics.   In  HM  (II)  the  Tribunal
    suggested that relevant metrics would include: the number of physically
    injured, the size of  population  displacement,  the  degree  of  state
    failure, and the economic/humanitarian situation.


20.  Article  7  of  the  Qualification  Directive   defines   'actors   of
    protection':



         "1.  Protection can be provided by:




   a) the State; or

   b)  Parties  or  organisations,  including  international  organisations,
      controlling the State or a substantial part of the  territory  of  the
      State.

         2.   Protection is generally provided when the actors mentioned in
         paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to prevent  the  persecution  or
         suffering of serious harm, inter alia, by  operating  an  effective
         legal system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  acts
         constituting persecution or serious harm,  and  the  applicant  has
         access to such protection.

         3.   When assessing whether an international organisation controls
         a State or  a  substantial  part  of  its territory  and  provides
         protection as described in paragraph 2, Member States  shall  take
         into account any guidance which may be provided in relevant Council
         acts."




21. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive  is  concerned  with  internal
    protection:




         "1.   As  part  of  the  assessment  of   the   application   for
         international protection,  Member  States  may  determine  that  an
         applicant is not in need of international protection if in  a  part
         of the country of origin there is no  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted or no real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and  the
         applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of  the
         country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.

         3.   Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles to
         return to the country of origin."


22. As to whether the Appellant can "reasonably" be expected to stay  in  a
    part of the country where he will not face a real  risk  of  harm,  the
    Tribunal must conduct an inclusive and holistic evaluation  of  all  of
    the relevant factors, including his personal characteristics, the socio-
    economic and security situation prevailing in  the  place  of  proposed
    residence. Regard must also be had as to how he will get there.  In AMM
    and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal declined to  deem  the  safety  or
    reasonableness of routes of return a "technical obstacle" and  held  it
    to be an inherent part of the risk assessment:  "travel by land  across
    southern and central Somalia to  a  home  area  or  proposed  place  of
    relocation is an issue that falls to be  addressed  in  the  course  of
    determining claims to international protection. Such travel  may  well,
    in general, pose real risks of serious harm, not  only  from  al-Shabab
    checkpoints but also as a result of the present  famine  conditions..."
    [see paragraph 10 of the headnote].  See also AT & Others  [83-88].  We
    note that this approach accords with that taken in the recast Article 8
     (2011/95/EC):


         "As part of the assessment of  the  application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin, he or she:


         (a) has no well-founded fear of being persecuted or is not at  real
         risk of suffering serious harm; or


         (b) has access to protection against persecution or serious harm as
         defined in Article 7,


         and he or she can safely and legally travel to and gain  admittance
         to that part of the country  and  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
         settle there."


    It is arguable that this recast text simply reflects the  meaning  that
    the original sought to convey.

    The Evidence


23. There was a great deal of evidence before us, and we have had regard to
    everything to which we were referred. It  has  not  been  necessary  or
    appropriate to discuss all of that evidence  in  this  judgment,  since
    much of it is not  in  issue.  As  we  note  in  the  introduction,  Ms
    Pargeter's evidence was in substance unchallenged  by  the  Respondent,
    albeit that Mr Singh considered that she might have  a  "possibly  over
    gloomy" outlook  on  the  future  for  Libya.   The  remainder  of  the
    evidence, to all of which we have had regard, consisted of  reports  by
    UN bodies and human rights organisations, articles in  the  Libyan  and
    international press, and commentary by political analysts.


    Key Documents


24. The key documents before us were:


              i) The report of Alison Pargeter dated 25th  March  2017,  her
                 response to questions put by the Respondent dated  the  7th
                 April 2017 and her short  addendum  report  dated  9th  May
                 2017.


             ii) The Home Office Country Policy and Information Notes Libya:
                 Security and Humanitarian Situation  published  in  January
                 2017 and Libya: Actual or Perceived  Supporters  of  Former
                 President Gaddafi published in March 2017


            iii) Monthly UNSMIL reports dated 2016 to 2017


             iv) The Amnesty International (AI) response  to  Ms  Pargeter's
                 report, authored by Mr Tom Southerden  and  issued  by  the
                 United Kingdom Section on the 13th April 2017


              v) 'The Challenge of Violent Extremism in  North  Africa:  the
                 Case of Libya', testimony by  Dr  Frederic  Wehrey  of  the
                 Carnegie  Endowment  to  the  US  House   Subcommittee   on
                 Counterterrorism and Intelligence


             vi)  'Internal  Displacement  in  Libya  -  2016   in   Review'
                 (Displacement Tracking Matrix Rounds 1-7) published by  the
                 International Organisation for Migration (IOM)


            vii) 'Libya's IDP and Returnee Report  -  January-February  2017
                 (Displacement Tracking Matrix Round  8)  published  by  the
                 International Organisation for Migration (IOM)


           viii) Report of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations
                 Support Mission in Libya, 4th April 2017


             ix) International Crisis Group, 2017 Watch List, Libya excerpt

25. The evidence broadly  falls  into  two  parts.  There  is  the  general
    background  material  on  the  political,  economic  and   humanitarian
    situation in Libya, which provides the context. Then there is the data,
    such that it is, on human rights abuses,  disorder  and  indiscriminate
    violence.


    The Political Background


26. The current situation is summarised by Ms Pargeter as follows:


         "1.1 Ever since the revolution that toppled Libyan leader,  Colonel
         Muammar Qadhafi, in 2011, Libya has been mired in deep crisis.  The
         political scene is in complete chaos and there are currently  three
         competing governments, all claiming that they are Libya's  rightful
         executive power, and none of which has any proper authority on  the
         ground. The security situation is equally  catastrophic.  There  is
         ongoing violence across the country and real power continues to lie
         with  the  array  of  militias  and  revolutionary  brigades   that
         proliferated during and after the revolution. Indeed,  the  country
         has fragmented beyond recognition and comprises a  broad  array  of
         local power brokers,  ranging  from  militias,  tribes,  towns  and
         Islamist  groups,  all  of  whom  are  competing  for  control  and
         dominance."


27. Of the three competing governments of which Ms  Pargeter  speaks,  only
    one  is  recognised  by  the  international  community.  This  is   the
    'Government of National Accord'  (GNA)  installed  in  March  2016  and
    headed  by  the  'Presidency  Council'  (PC).   The  PC  had  initially
    comprised  nine  representatives  but  splits  and  factionalism   have
    weakened the council; in Ms Pargeter's estimation it is now reduced  to
    a functioning body of two men, Prime  Minister  Fayez  Sarraj  and  his
    deputy.  They are based, as they  have  been  since  their  arrival  in
    Libya, in a heavily fortified naval base called Abu Sitta.  Ms Pargeter
    stated that the PC has very little legitimacy in the eyes  of  ordinary
    Libyans. It is able to exercise 'control' only inasmuch  as  there  are
    certain militias in Tripoli who have pledged  allegiance  to  it.    Ms
    Pargeter describes that allegiance as opportunistic and fragile:


         "3.3 ...Although these militias,  such  as  the  Special  Deterrent
         Force that is led  by  Islamist  commander,  Abdelraouf  Kara,  now
         consider themselves to be part of the official forces of the state,
         they continue to act as they see fit. As the  GNA  Prime  Minister,
         Fayaz Serraj told the media in November 2016, "They [the  militias]
         do as they please as we have sadly seen in Zawia in the last  three
         days and as we saw the militia clashes between Ghainawa or  Haitham
         Tajuri or whoever. Whenever they want to go  out  and  fight,  they
         don't ask us and we end up firefighting these battles.''


28. The alternative government in Tripoli is now  known  as  the  'National
    Salvation Government' (NSG). It was established by those members of the
    General  National  Council  (GNC)  who  rejected  the  Libya  Political
    Agreement (LPA), an accord signed in Skhirat, Morocco in 2015.   It  is
    headed by Khalifa Al-Ghweill and consists mainly of  hardline  Islamist
    militias who  follow  the  teachings  of  the  Grand  Mufti  of  Libya,
    described by Ms Pargeter as  "ultraorthodox".   The  NSG  continues  to
    present a serious challenge to the legitimacy of  the  PC/GNA  and  has
    launched a number of attacks against it in recent months.  Ms  Pargeter
    reports that in October 2016 the NSG seized a number of ministries  and
    government buildings; in January 2017 it took the Defence,  Labour  and
    Martyrs' Ministries; and in February 2017 there  was  an  assassination
    attempt against Fayaz Serraj, believed to have been carried  out  by  a
    militia loyal to the NSG.  In the  same  month  a  number  of  Misratan
    militias loyal to the NSG deployed in the city.


29. The power in the east of the country lies with Field  Marshall  Khalifa
    Haftar (more commonly known as General Haftar) a former soldier in  the
    Gaddafi army who defected during the Chad war.   He spent many years in
    exile in the United States and returned after Gaddafi  was  deposed  to
    become one of the key players in the current conflict. He is  the  head
    of the self-styled Libyan National Army, a military force  made  up  of
    numerous different militias.   General Haftar purports to serve at  the
    behest of the House of Representatives (HOR), the 'government'  elected
    in 2014,  now  based  in  Tobruk  and  al-Bayda.    General  Haftar  is
    described in some of the country background material as "secular";   Ms
    Pargeter did not consider that to be an  accurate  label  in  a  deeply
    religious country. She confirmed that he is not ideologically  Islamist
    in orientation, but stated that this position can fluctuate because  of
    his  dependence  upon  Salafist  militias,  particularly  in  Benghazi.
    Haftar and the House of Representatives are believed to  be  backed  by
    Egypt, Russia, France and the UAE.


30. In respect of whether any of these rival authorities is able to act  as
    an Actor of Protection, as defined by Article 7  of  the  Qualification
    Directive, the Respondent's latest Country Policy and Information  Note
    (CPIN) (March 2017) summarises the position:


         "2.5.2 The Libyan authorities rely largely on unregulated, armed
         militias to provide security and law enforcement and the rule of
         law is largely absent. The internationally recognised government of
         Libya based near Tripoli is therefore unable to provide a
         reasonable level of protection to a person who can demonstrate a
         real risk of persecution or serious harm."


    The same document describes the domestic  criminal  justice  system  as
    "dysfunctional, offering no prospects for accountability"  [at  4.3.5].
    In their 2016-2017 country report Amnesty International advise that the
    "judicial system  remained  in  a  state  of  collapse".   Ms  Pargeter
    testified that it is unclear from one day to the next which government,
    or militia, is in control of which ministry,  but  that  the  truth  is
    almost  irrelevant,  since  few  if  any  government  departments   are
    functioning effectively. In their April 2017 response to Ms  Pargeter's
    report Amnesty  International  suggest  that  General  Haftar  has  the
    strongest claim to effective control on the ground, but are damning  in
    their condemnation of how this is implemented:  the  forces  under  his
    command are said to be committing gross human  rights  violations  with
    impunity. General  Haftar's  ability  to  govern  effectively  is  also
    substantially impeded by the fact that he is still fighting on  several
    fronts. In Benghazi fighting continues in several neighbourhoods, where
    opposing militia, the Shura Council of Benghazi Revolutionaries (SCBR),
    are entrenched.


31. In addition to these three main powers, there is a myriad of  different
    militias in  operation.  Ms  Pargeter  explained  that  some  of  these
    militias represent towns or  urban  neighbourhoods,  some  have  tribal
    identities  and  some  are  ideologically  driven:  for  instance,  the
    aforementioned SCBR are Islamists believed to have some affiliation  to
    al-Qaeda.  That said, she did not consider the  primary  motivation  of
    any of the players in this conflict to  be  ideology:  "this  is  about
    power...it's a turf  war".    The  consequence  of  this  are  shifting
    loyalties and agendas that can  "produce  significant  changes  on  the
    ground very quickly": AI  (April  2017).   In  its  2014  'Position  on
    Returns to Libya' UNHCR cite figures (attributed to the BBC) that there
    could be as many as 1700 different armed groups in Libya.


32. Until recently this number included so-called 'Islamic State' (IS)  who
    had taken hold of Siirte and other coastal towns.  Ms  Pargeter  agreed
    that one positive story to come from Libya in  recent  months  was  the
    defeat of IS, who were comprehensively driven out of Siirte in December
    2016, primarily by an alliance of militias from Misrata. Although IS no
    longer holds any territory, Ms Pargeter does caution that it may be too
    early to tell whether they will continue to feature in the conflict. An
    American airstrike killed an estimated 80 IS fighters in a  base  south
    of Siirte in January but concerns have been  expressed  by  experienced
    analysts that those fighters who were able to escape have headed  south
    into the desert, where they may re-emerge or change tactics  to  launch
    terrorist  operations  (rather  than  attempting  to  seize  and   hold
    territory).


33.   On   29th  March  2017  Dr  Frederic  Wehrey,  an  American  academic
    specialising in security issues in North  Africa,  told  the  US  House
    Subcommittee on  Counterterrorism and Intelligence that "scattered ISIS
    members  are  regrouping  and  al-Qaeda  affiliated  fighters  who  had
    defected to ISIS are now returning back to al-Qaeda linked groups, more
    experienced  and  battle-hardened.  Vast  portions  of  [the]  southern
    deserts remain a thoroughfare for the movement of fighters and arms  to
    the Sahel and beyond".


34. What are the prospects of political  consensus  among  these  different
    factions? At present the international community is pinning  its  hopes
    on the LPA, the accord which it managed to persuade individual  members
    of the HOR and the GNC (the predecessor to the NSG) to sign in December
    2015. It was this agreement that paved the way for the establishment of
    the PC/GNA.  Ms Pargeter explains that from the outset the LPA was  not
    well received  in  Libya.  Many  militias  on  the  ground  refused  to
    recognise it and the leadership of both the HOR and the  GNC  voted  to
    reject it. Prolonged negotiations to try and salvage the agreement have
    so far ended in failure. Today the success of this project depends,  in
    the terms of the LPA  itself,  on  the  endorsement  of  the  House  of
    Representatives, which has thus far not been forthcoming. The principal
    stumbling block, in Ms Pargeter's view, is that the HOR  are  demanding
    that General Haftar be appointed the national head of the armed  forces
    and security, something that his opponents have not  been  prepared  to
    countenance.


35. There has been some very recent progress in this regard.  On  the  19th
    April 2017 the UN Secretary General's Special Representative  in  Libya
    Mr Martin Kobler reported to the Security Council that all three of the
    main blocs continue to support the LPA framework:


         "The Prime Minister, The President of the House of  Representatives
         both confirmed their commitment, as did the Commander of the Libyan
         National Army, Field  Marshall  Haftar,  during  our  meeting  last
         Thursday in Benghazi. The Head of the State Council  expressed  his
         agreement,  as  have  almost  all  representatives  of  significant
         institutions and constituencies.


         The agreement is not perfect. There is a consensus that  amendments
         are needed."


    In her oral evidence Ms Pargeter emphasised that amendments would  need
    to be made before there could be a workable consensus, which at present
    appears remote. She was however able to update  the  position  further.
    She said that in the days before the hearing a meeting had taken  place
    in the UAE between General Haftar and Fayaz Sarraj, the Prime  Minister
    of the PC. No formal communiqu� had been  issued  but  leaks  suggested
    that there had been some rapprochement between the  two  men  and  that
    this was grounds for cautious optimism. Ms Pargeter was  not,  however,
    "holding her breath for any real  breakthrough".  Any  agreement  would
    need to be debated and approved in the HOR and the GNA and  there  were
    factions in both that would be implacably opposed  to  agreement.   She
    considered it very doubtful that most Misratan militias would agree and
    said that there were certainly powerful elements in Tripoli that  would
    be opposed to it.  Ms Pargeter's assessment would appear to  be  shared
    by Mr Kobler himself, who in the same address warned that the "optimism
    and confidence of Skhirat has faded".


36. Given that the talks were continuing on the day of the  hearing,  leave
    was given to the parties to submit further evidence  during  a  limited
    period. Nothing has materialised.


    The Economy


37. In his latest statement to the Security Council (19th April 2017)  SGSR
    Martin Kobler said this:


         "Public  services,  including  access   to   electricity,   health,
         education, water are failing many.


         The economy continues to decline. The GDP has lost  over  half  its
         value since 2012.


         The  lack  of  liquidity  prevents  Libyans  from  accessing  their
         salaries.  The dinar  is  losing  value.  The  shadow  economy  and
         rampant corruption are growing.


         Political divisions also threaten the cohesiveness of the sovereign
         financial institutions such  as  the  Central  Bank,  National  Oil
         Corporation and the Libyan Investment Authority.  It  is  difficult
         to produce a realistic common budget for the whole of Libya."


38. We were provided  with  a  report  dated  24th  February  2017  by  the
    International Crisis Group (ICG) which includes Libya as one of the ten
    countries on its '2017 watch list'.  ICG's conclusions on the  economy,
    and its relationship with the conflict were as follows:


         "Whatever is ideological and geopolitical dimensions, the  conflict
         is largely about control of hydrocarbon  resources  and  access  to
         state funds.  According to the National Oil Corporation (NOC),  oil
         sector closures have cumulatively cost over a $100 billion in  lost
         revenues from oil exports since 2013, resulting, according  to  the
         Central Bank of Libya, in a fiscal deficit of 56 per  cent  of  GDP
         for both 2015 and 2016.  The bank's foreign currency  reserves  are
         estimated to have fallen below $40 billion, compared to $75 billion
         in March 2015.  Oil production has increased since September 2016 -
         when Haftar-aligned forces seized most oil facilities in  the  Gulf
         of Siirte - from around 250,000 barrels per day  (b/d)  to  700,000
         (still far below the 1.8 million b/d of 2010).  Even if  production
         reaches 1 million b/d  by  the  end  of  March  2017,  as  the  NOC
         projects, the economic  outlook  remains  bleak.   With  crude  oil
         prices $50 a barrel production increases will  not  cover  expected
         government expenditure of around $40 billion in 2017.  Libya  could
         be bankrupt by the end of the year."


39. These rather bleak assessments of the  economy  were  supported  by  Ms
    Pargeter. Oil production has recently risen, reaching  720,000  barrels
    per day by January 2017, but it is difficult to  predict  whether  that
    level can be maintained, or whether it will have  any  direct  positive
    benefit to ordinary Libyans. Multiple problems are  identified.  First,
    the oil infrastructure itself is a significant prize in the 'turf  war'
    being fought by the opposing parties. By way  of  example  Ms  Pargeter
    explained that a number of export terminals in the east were seized  by
    General Haftar in September 2016, only  to  lose  them  to  the  Defend
    Benghazi Brigades (DBB) in early 2017; a matter of  weeks  ago  General
    Haftar's forces managed to win them back. A similar pattern can be seen
    in the west, albeit with different militias involved.


40.  Second, the political stalemate, and the continuing dispute  over  who
    the legitimate government might be, has left the banks with  a  serious
    liquidity crisis. Where for  instance  teachers  and  hospital  workers
    continue to receive their salaries by  automatic  bank  transfer,  they
    find that they cannot actually access the money.  Long  queues  can  be
    seen outside banks and many Libyans have simply given up  depending  on
    being able to access their salaries.  Ms Pargeter's contacts  in  Libya
    have told her that even in the cities people have started to grow their
    own vegetables and keep chickens.   Services that Libyans had  hitherto
    taken  for  granted,  such  as  basic  utilities,  have  been  severely
    affected.  For instance, in January 2017 a major blackout, caused by  a
    lack of fuel and damage to some power plants, lasted for  several  days
    and affected the whole of the south and west of the country, as well as
    some parts of the east.   Power cuts are  now  a  feature  of  everyday
    life.


41. Ms Pargeter testified that as a result of this liquidity crisis,  basic
    services such as health and education were severely  compromised,  even
    in places relatively unaffected by fighting.  The  health  service  had
    been largely dependent upon foreign workers who left  in  huge  numbers
    after the collapse of the Gaddafi regime. In areas affected by fighting
    many hospitals had closed altogether, and the few  that  remained  open
    were in a  "dire"  state.   In  their  April  2017  commentary  Amnesty
    International  concurred  with  this  view,  citing  the  World  Health
    Organisations  assessment  that  the  health  system   has   "virtually
    collapsed".  There is a serious shortage of fuel,  medicine  and  other
    basic supplies. Some  schools  are  occupied  by  internally  displaced
    persons and others continue to operate on an ad  hoc  basis.  The  fact
    that none of the ministries is  functioning  effectively  means  it  is
    difficult to get a clear picture of what public services  are  actually
    available and functioning.






    The Humanitarian Situation


42. We were shown various figures in respect of the numbers  of  internally
    displaced persons (IDPs). While in  January  2017  Human  Rights  Watch
    reported that there are now approaching 500,000 IDPs within Libya, that
    figure was not particularised and its origins were not explained.   The
    most detailed evidence on IDPs  was  that  produced  by  the  IOM.  The
    results of round 8  of  the  IOMs  Displacement  Tracking  Matrix  were
    published on 15th March 2017. These showed "relatively steady"  figures
    on the number of internally displaced persons, with a total of  303,608
    individuals identified. This  was  a  small  decrease  in  the  numbers
    recorded in round 7, and a significant decrease from round 3  published
    in March 2016 when there were found to be 417,123.   These  figures  do
    not include the numbers of non-Libyans, mainly migrants from  the  sub-
    continent, who have been affected by the violence within the country.


43. There was also evidence of  temporary  displacement,  for  instance  of
    families who fled fighting in the Tripoli suburbs, returning some  time
    later. If they returned home within the reporting period they were  not
    included in the figures. According to 91% of informants the main driver
    of displacement was the threat from general conflict and  armed  groups
    while 74% said that this remained the reason that they were  unable  to
    return home.  Other obstacles  to  return  were  identified  as  'other
    security  issues',  the  presence   of   explosive   hazards,   damaged
    infrastructure and in 2% of cases, economic factors.


44. The most positive developments recorded in round 8 were the  return  of
    some 132,050 persons to Benghazi and the defeat of IS in Siirte,  which
    allowed 2550 people to return to the city between mid - January and mid
    - February 2017. This number had increased to 50,700  by  the  date  of
    publication. The main obstacles preventing further returns to  Benghazi
    were the fact that much  of  the  infrastructure  was  heavily  damaged
    (resulting for instance in a lack of water), many homes  destroyed  and
    there was a "lack of functionality" in schools and hospitals.   Similar
    problems were reported in Siirte, with additional  concerns  about  the
    danger presented by 'explosive remnants of war' (ERWs).


45. In November 2016 the UN Office for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian
    Affairs (OCHA) reported that there are 1.3 million people  in  need  of
    urgent humanitarian assistance in Libya today.   The  assistance  being
    provided by the UN includes essential medicines, food, water,  hygiene,
    sanitation, shelter and education.


46. It is against that political and economic background that the  evidence
    on violence must be assessed.








    Indiscriminate Violence in a Situation of Internal Armed Conflict


47. All of the evidence  establishes  beyond  peradventure  that  there  is
    conflict in Libya and that the participants  are  using  indiscriminate
    violence which is having an impact on  the  civilian  population.   The
    nature of that violence is summarised in the  Respondent's  March  2017
    CPIN  [at 4.2.5]:


         "Forces  aligned  with  all  governments  and  dozens  of  militias
         continued to clash, exacerbating a humanitarian crisis  with  close
         to half-a-million internally displaced people...


         'Militias and armed forces  affiliated  with  the  two  governments
         engaged  in  arbitrary  detentions,  torture,  unlawful   killings,
         indiscriminate attacks, abductions,  and  forcible  disappearances.
         Criminal gangs and militias abducted politicians, journalists,  and
         civilians-including children-for political and monetary gain."

48. The January 2017 CPIN [at 8.1.2]  cites  similar  findings  by  the  UN
    Deputy High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights,  Ms  Kate  Gilmore,  who
    addressed the Human Rights Council on the 27th September 2016:


         "Warring factions continue to  show  little  regard  for  civilians
         -failing to  take  steps  needed  to  avoid  or  minimise  civilian
         casualties and protect civilian objects from damage...


         In residential areas across Libya, heavy weaponry has been deployed
         without ensuring sufficient precautions and this  is  true  of  all
         parties...


         Armed groups act with  complete  impunity,  continuing  to  abduct,
         torture and kill civilians on  the  basis  of  their  perceived  or
         actual family links, origin or political affiliation. In July,  for
         example, 14 bodies were discovered dumped  at  a  Benghazi  rubbish
         tip. It was clear that the victims, some of whom had been  abducted
         by armed groups earlier in the month, had been  tortured  and  then
         killed. In June, 12 prisoners  were  released  from  Tripoli's  Al-
         Ruwaimi prison, in compliance with a  court  order.  But,  just  24
         hours later, their families confronted the grim task of identifying
         their bodies. The 12  had  been  beaten,  shot  and  killed.  Those
         responsible remain unidentified in both instances...


         Human rights defenders and  media  professionals  have  also  faced
         abductions and attacks. Thanks to repeated intimidation and  attack
         against their staff, the National Council for Civil  Liberties  and
         Human Rights in Tripoli remains effectively shut  down.  In  March,
         prominent human rights advocate Abdul Basit Abu-Dahab,  was  killed
         in Darna when a bomb placed in his  vehicle  exploded.  Many  other
         human rights defenders  have  fled  the  country,  curtailed  their
         activities or gone into hiding...


         Civilian objects are not spared. In 2016, homes have been attacked,
         looted and  destroyed,  including  in  Benghazi,  Zawiya  and  most
         recently in Misallata. From  May  to  July,  the  Benghazi  Medical
         Centre was shelled on four separate occasions. In June, a car  bomb
         exploded at the entrance of  the  Al-Jala'  Hospital  killing  five
         people, and injuring 13 others, including two children."


49.  The  assessment  of  the  United  Nations  Support  Mission  in  Libya
    ("UNSMIL") is set out at paragraphs 9.1.1-9.1.2 of its report:


         "Libya continues to be embroiled in deadly  violence  and  multiple
         armed conflicts, non-international in character, affecting  several
         regions, and contributing to a general breakdown of law and  order.
         All parties to the  conflicts  continue  to  commit  violations  of
         international human rights and  humanitarian  law,  and  abuses  of
         human  rights,  including   indiscriminate   and   disproportionate
         attacks; summary executions and other unlawful killings;  arbitrary
         deprivations of liberty; and torture and other  cruel,  inhuman  or
         degrading treatment (ill-treatment).


         ...


         Across Libya, warring factions showed little regard for avoiding or
         minimizing loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to
         civilian objects. They have used  imprecise  weaponry  in  densely-
         populated   residential   areas   in   what   often   amounted   to
         indiscriminate attacks, leading to civilian fatalities  and  damage
         to civilian infrastructure..."

50. One of the central questions for the Tribunal is the  extent  to  which
    the civilian population has been affected thus far. In respect of  this
    Mr Singh relied heavily on figures produced by UNSMIL in their  monthly
    'Human Rights Report  on  Civilian  Casualties'.  The  following  note,
    reproduced in each report, explains the methodology:


         "The figures for civilian casualties set  out  above  only  include
         persons killed or injured in the course of hostilities and who were
         not directly participating in the hostilities. The figures  do  not
         include  those  casualties  that  are  not  a  direct   result   of
         hostilities, for  example  executions  after  capture,  torture  or
         abductions, or casualties caused  as  an  indirect  consequence  of
         hostilities. The  figures  are  based  on  information  UNSMIL  has
         gathered and cross-checked from a broad range of sources in  Libya,
         including human rights defenders, civil society, current and former
         officials, employees of local governments,  community  leaders  and
         members, witnesses, others directly affected and media reports.  In
         order to assess the  credibility  of  information  obtained,  where
         possible,  UNSMIL  reviewed  documentary   information,   including
         medical records, forensic reports and photographic evidence.

         The figures are only those that UNSMIL was able to document in  the
         reporting period.  They are not  likely  to  be  complete  and  may
         change  as  new  information  emerges  about  incidents   involving
         civilian casualties that took place during this period.


         Similarly, while UNSMIL has systematically tried to ensure that the
         cases it documented are  based  on  credible  information,  further
         verification would be required  to  attain  a  higher  standard  of
         proof. Due to the security situation, UNSMIL has not been  able  to
         carry out direct  site  visits  in  Libya  to  obtain  information.
         Disruption in communications  especially  in  areas  controlled  by
         groups pledging allegiance to the Islamic State  in  Iraq  and  the
         Levant (ISIL) and fear of reprisals against sources further  hamper
         information gathering."

51.  The  resulting  statistics,  from  airstrikes,   shelling,   gunshots,
    improvised explosive devices (IEDs), explosive remnants of  war  (ERWs)
    are as follows:


    September 2016     7 deaths              4 injured
    October 2016       29 deaths             73 injured
    November 2016      38 deaths             51 injured
    December 2016      3 deaths              7 injured
    January 2017       16 deaths             12 injured
    February 2017           28 deaths              38 injured
    March 2017         20 deaths             4 injured
    April 2017         26 deaths             2 injured

52. As the methodology note explains, the 'civilian  casualty'  figures  do
    not include, for  instance,  casualties  resulting  from  human  rights
    abuses or criminality that  has  been  permitted  to  flourish  in  the
    absence of a  functioning  state.   Under  a  separate  heading  "other
    casualties" the UNSMIL  notes  do  give  examples  of  those  kinds  of
    incidents: in October 2016, for example, ten bodies  were  found  in  a
    rubbish dump in Benghazi. The men had been shot with their  hands  tied
    behind their backs.


53. Ms Pargeter opined that all figures should be treated with considerable
    caution.  She pointed out that no one knows the true figures  and  that
    many incidents are not reported. She had recently read  a  report  that
    between June 2015 and June 2016 up to 6,500 civilians had  been  killed
    in Benghazi. While this was  reported  in  the  Libyan  press  and  the
    conclusions of research conducted by a group of NGOs in  the  city,  it
    was incapable of being verified. Taking into account other  reports  Ms
    Pargeter considered that  the  figure  of  6,500  was  very  likely  an
    exaggeration.   As for the size of the  population  overall,  this  was
    also a moot point.  There had not been a census since 2006 and  no  one
    could know the true figure. She thought it was  most  likely  somewhere
    between 5 million (Jane's Sentinel's estimate)  and  6.5  million  (the
    CIA's), but neither of those figures took into account the huge numbers
    who have left the country. She had for  instance  heard  it  said  that
    there are a million Libyans living in Tunisia at present.  Many  others
    had gone to Europe. Again, she stressed that this figure could  not  be
    verified and one should treat even official statistics provided by  the
    Tunisian government as estimates.  Other  sources  suggest  that  there
    could be up to two million Libyans living outside the country.


54. Ms Pargeter provided a short addendum report to deal with the  Benghazi
    figures that she had mentioned in her live evidence. Her  sources  were
    articles that appeared in the Egyptian and Tunisian press. An  item  on
    an Egyptian news site Al-Wafd Gate, for instance, cites a study carried
    out by Libyan civil society and human rights groups and shows  a  table
    of figures detailing casualties in Benghazi  from  June  2014  to  June
    2015. This asserts that the overall number of  casualties  in  Benghazi
    during this period was 13365, including 6559 civilian  casualties.   As
    she had emphasised in her live evidence, Ms Pargeter was unable to  say
    whether the figures in this report were remotely accurate. Due  to  the
    "chaotic situation in Libya and the lack of any proper  authorities  it
    is impossible to verify these figures". The reports  did  not  identify
    which NGOs were involved, so Ms  Pargeter  was  unable  to  pursue  the
    matter. She did note that Abdulhakim Matouq, a former spokesman of  the
    Al-Bayda government, was quoted in the Libyan  media  as  stating  that
    General Haftar's forces alone had lost 10,000 fighters since the  start
    of the Dignity Operation in Benghazi in May 2014.


55. Ms Pargeter agreed that there  are  some  places  in  Libya  where  the
    conflict is less intense than others. The situation in Siirte  is  much
    better since IS have been driven out of the city, but the peace remains
    precarious:  both  General  Haftar  and  the  Misratans  had  appointed
    military commanders for the city and the city was tense, with returning
    IDPs facing destroyed homes, and a lack  of  basic  utilities  such  as
    water and electricity.    There was no  way  of  telling  if  and  when
    fighting might be sparked between these rival  factions  in  the  city.
    General Haftar was already fighting a proxy war against  the  Misratans
    in the south of the country, which Ms Pargeter described as "a mess - a
    vast ungoverned space" characterised by well-armed  militias   engaging
    in inter-tribal violence.


56.  In Benghazi the situation was particularly grave during the past  year
    but there are now pockets of peace, since General  Haftar  consolidated
    his position. That does not mean however that the  civilian  population
    is safe. There remains fighting in some suburbs and a  famous  landmark
    in the city, the Safina Building, had been destroyed in fighting just a
    few days before the hearing. The SCBR  are  dug  in  heavily  and  have
    deployed snipers. In the parts  of  the  city  taken  over  by  General
    Haftar's forces there are reports of human rights abuses.  These  range
    from  Salafist  militias  banning  books  and  ordering  women  to   be
    accompanied to local people being abducted and tortured on suspicion of
    support for the SCBR.    In both Siirte and Benghazi  there  remains  a
    risk to civilians from ERWs. In his 1st December  2016  report  to  the
    Security Council the  Secretary-General  expressed  his  concern  about
    unexploded mines, describing the risk of injury and death to  civilians
    and to humanitarian actors as "high".


57. Ms Pargeter described Tripoli  as  "chaos".    The  power  vacuum  that
    ensued after Gaddafi fell is very pronounced in the  city,  where  each
    neighbourhood has its own militia. The civilian population  don't  know
    from one day to the next who is in control in their area. She  gave  an
    example of a conversation she had had with a friend in  Tripoli  a  few
    days before the hearing. He had said that near his  home  there  was  a
    checkpoint at a traffic light that had been there for some time. It had
    been run by a certain militia and local people knew who they  were  and
    what to say to get through it without  difficulty.  Then  overnight  it
    changed hands and a completely different group of young men  with  guns
    were in control. These  militias  are  committing  gross  human  rights
    violations with total impunity. The militias in Tripoli  are  operating
    their own prisons and makeshift detention centres and there is no trial
    or recourse if one is "arrested".


58. Ms Pargeter further  cites  various  Amnesty  International  and  Human
    Rights Watch  reports  of  people  being  tortured,  "disappeared"  and
    unlawfully killed in the city. The PC/GNA has  failed  to  enforce  its
    authority and even militias ostensibly under their control continue  to
    fight with rivals. This led to significant clashes in June 2016 in  the
    Abu Salim area in which ten militiamen were killed. Clashes  elsewhere,
    said to involve Misratans versus locals,  left  40  dead  in  the  same
    month. October 2016 saw indiscriminate shelling and in  November  there
    was open fighting in the city centre.


59. Ms Pargeter said that this fighting has become "more frequent and  more
    intense" in recent  months.  The  rivalry  between  the  two  different
    governments in Tripoli is being reflected on the  ground.  On  the  one
    side, there are the militant Islamist forces led by Khalifa  Al-Ghweill
    who are associated with the Grand Mufti. On the other, are  the  groups
    who have pledged allegiance to the PC/GNA, who  tend  to  be  "Salafist
    Madkhalist" in orientation. The competition between  these  two  groups
    has resulted in heavy clashes in recent months. In her original  report
    Ms Pargeter summarises recent events in the following terms:


         "The violence, which left ten dead and scores more injured, appears
         to have been sparked in part by the emergence on the Internet of  a
         video showing a Salafist fighter, who is purported to be  from  the
         Special Deterrent Force, confessing to the abduction and killing of
         the Grand Mufti's deputy, Sheikh Nadir al-Omrani,  who  disappeared
         from the al-Hadaba area of Tripoli in October 2016.  However, while
         al-Omarni's killing may have been the trigger for this  fight,  the
         conflict was primarily  about  who  controls  which  areas  of  the
         capital. The violence was such that both sides used heavy  weapons,
         forcing the shutdown of whole areas of  Tripoli.  The  trouble  was
         only contained after tribal elders stepped  in,  demonstrating  the
         impotence of the Presidency Council that did little more than issue
         a statement expressing its regret at the loss of life.


         There were further heavy clashes on 8 February 2017, when  brigades
         loyal to the GNA fought with those who reject it in  the  Al-Hadaba
         area of the capital. Further heavy violence erupted on  23  and  24
         February when competing Islamist brigades battled  it  out  in  the
         densely populated Abu Slim neighbourhood. The violence, which  left
         at least ten dead and several injured, prompted terrified residents
         to flee as shops, houses and other private  properties  came  under
         random shelling. There was further trouble on 8 March when the head
         office of the Aman Bank in  the  Gurji  district  in  the  west  of
         Tripoli was attacked and set alight by angry crowds after a  member
         of the militia guarding the bank shot  a  customer  dead  during  a
         fracas that had broken out as customers  queued  to  get  into  the
         building. This  incident  provoked  further  violence  because  the
         militia guarding the bank was from Misrata, while the man  who  was
         shot was originally from Zintan. On 13 March 2017, armed  residents
         from Gurji and Hay Andalous attacked Misratan and Amazigh  (Berber)
         forces, before a  host  of  other  forces,  including  the  Tripoli
         Revolutionaries' Brigade and the Special Deterrence  Force,  joined
         in. The violence soon spread to the Ghut Shaal, Hay Al-Islamiya and
         Gargaresh neighbourhoods. Then on 14 March 2017, the clashes spread
         towards Suq Al-Thalatha, prompting the evacuation of staff  working
         at several buildings in the city's main business area. Later in the
         day the children's ward of Tripoli's  Al-Hadaba  Hospital  was  hit
         when the fighting moved to  the  area  around  the  Rixos  complex.
         Missiles also hit the headquarters of the Waha Oil Company  in  the
         Bulayla Tower, and the Marriott Hotel.


      It is clear, therefore, that clashes between  rival  militias  are  a
         regular occurrence and often take place in residential areas.  This
         is prompting real fear and anger among local citizens.  Indeed,  on
         17 March 2017, angry locals  staged  a  protest  in  the  heart  of
         Tripoli calling for the militias to leave the capital. However, the
         situation turned violent after members  of  the  Special  Deterrent
         Force, as well as of the Al-Nawasi and Al-Bouni Brigades, which are
         all part of the GNA's forces, stormed the square where the  protest
         was taking place, shooting in the air."


60. In his 4th April 2017 briefing to the Security Council  the  Secretary-
    General of the UN reported that  "....  although  consensus  is  slowly
    emerging on the issues that need to be addressed in  order  to  restore
    political transition",  since December 2016  "... the overall  security
    situation had deteriorated significantly".  In the east of the  country
    fighting continued in various locations, in particular in Benghazi.  In
    the south, the situation remained fragile, characterised by a build  up
    of rival military forces "including the Misratan Third Force, Battalion
    12 of the Libyan National Army and armed  groups  affiliated  with  the
    Awlad Sulayman, Qadhadhfa and Tebu tribes, which are competing for  the
    control of strategic infrastructure amid ongoing tribal tensions".   Of
    the capital city, the Secretary-General said this:


         "14. The security  situation  in  Tripoli  remained  volatile.  The
         capital continued to be under the control of multiple armed groups,
         some of them aligned with the Presidency Council and others opposed
         to it. Several of these groups sought to  expand  their  influence,
         provoking increased clashes in contested areas  throughout  Tripoli
         and in its environs.


         15. In early  December  2016,  armed  groups  clashed  in  downtown
         Tripoli with militants loyal to the former Government  of  National
         Salvation, leaving 20 people dead and many more injured,  including
         civilians. To the west of the capital, armed groups from Janzur and
         the neighbouring Warshafanah area clashed in early  February  2017.
         At least four people died. In the east  of  Tripoli,  eight  people
         were killed in clashes between groups from the towns  of  Qasr  al-
         Qarahbulli and Tarhunah. On 21 January, an aborted car bombing near
         the Italian embassy in Tripoli resulted in the death of two of  the
         perpetrators. Furthermore, ordinary crime and  lawlessness  spread,
         with kidnappings and robberies severely affecting citizens' freedom
         of movement. Further clashes took place in southern Tripoli in mid-
         and late February between  groups  from  the  Abu  Salim  area  and
         Misratah, leaving at least 17 people dead."


61. Whilst we were referred to the available  statistics  on  injuries  and
    deaths, we were also shown numerous reports in the Libyan  media  about
    incidents that do not appear to have featured  in  the  UNSMIL  monthly
    round-ups.  For instance, on 14th March 2017 the Libya Herald  reported
    that fighting around the Rixos Hotel complex in Tripoli resulted  in  a
    missile striking the children's ward of Habda Hospital, starting a fire
    which was  brought  under  control  by  staff.  This  incident  is  not
    mentioned in the UNSMIL  report,  which  lists  two  other  strikes  on
    different hospitals, on different days,  under  the  heading  'civilian
    facilities'.  The same article  quotes  local  residents  hearing  "the
    terrific noise of heavy weapons".  The Tripoli Herald, reporting on the
    same round of fighting, gives a flavour of how life continues in  these
    circumstances:


         "Many residents have not dared leave their homes. Clashes sometimes
         calm down but then they flare up again. 'Many of  our  streets  are
         blocked as armed men are spreading  out  everywhere'  one  resident
         told us by telephone."


62.  Similarly,  The  Africa  News  Portal  described  life  for   civilian
    population in Tripoli in January 2017:
         "[F]amilies are suffering from harsh living conditions,  insecurity
         and arbitrary arrests, in a scene that reflects the  chaos  between
         militias...despite the PC having commenced functioning, the capital
         Tripoli is still under the control of militias, amid the absence of
         clear rule by the  state.  And  it  is  often  transformed  into  a
         battleground of  clashes  between  conflicting  troupes,  employing
         murders or kidnapping, over control of some of the vital  sites  in
         the city."
    Violent Crime


63. A different, but related, problem identified in  the  evidence  is  the
    rise in crime. Ms Pargeter  explained  that  ordinary  Libyans,  having
    previously lived in a very centralised and authoritarian  country,  now
    find crime to be rife and are living in fear of it all of the time.  In
    her oral evidence she gave the example of a friend who knows a 13  year
    old boy who was recently kidnapped in Zawia. His father dropped him  at
    the school gate and within hours received a call demanding  money.  The
    money was paid and the boy was released unharmed but many  are  not  so
    lucky. In the absence  of  any  law  and  order  this  has  become  big
    business, funding militias and criminals alike.    She pointed out that
    the lines between criminal gangs, whose motivation might be thought  to
    be pure financial gain, and the militias, who are ostensibly political,
    are becoming increasingly blurred.   It is all too easy  for  civilians
    to get caught in the way of their activities.


64. All the sources cited by Ms Pargeter  indicate  that  kidnappings  have
    increased considerably in the past year. Two media outlets,  the  Libya
    Akhbar website and the  Libya  Herald  newspaper,  have  cited  figures
    provided by a GNA-run ministry and police services in Tripoli.   In the
    first quarter of 2016 there were said to be  221  reported  kidnappings
    (up from 97 in the comparable period in 2015); in a two week period  in
    October examined by the Investigative Office of the  Interior  Ministry
    there were found to be 19 kidnappings, 29 armed robberies and  37  car-
    jackings, in six of which the owner of the car was  killed.   The  same
    office released the following figures in respect of the six and a  half
    weeks between the 15th December 2016 and the  31st  January  2017:  293
    kidnappings (including 32 females), the bodies  of  188  corpses  being
    found on the streets and 683 armed robberies, of which 23 resulted in a
    death. She concurs with the view expressed in the Libyan media that the
    true number of crimes is likely to be much higher,  since  many  crimes
    are  not  registered,  with  relatives  believing  that  informing  the
    authorities could make the situation worse:


         "It is clear that in the absence of  effective  central  authority,
         kidnappings and violent crime have become everyday  occurrences  in
         the capital, with ordinary civilians the victims of  such  attacks.
         As the Libya Herald reported October  2016,  "General  criminality,
         extortion, car-jackings and kidnappings have  become  the  norm  in
         Tripoli with anyone deemed to be wealthy or with a well-paying  job
         liable to be kidnapped at any time. Having a car is  sufficient  to
         make you susceptible to a  daytime  car-jacking.  The  increase  of
         daytime kidnappings is evidence of the confidence of criminals that
         there is no deterrence or possibility of retribution  from  central
         authorities in the  capital."  It  continues,  "Victims  and  their
         families have no legitimate state institutions  to  revert  to  for
         help, and have to rely on their own efforts, any one  of  the  many
         Tripoli-based militias such  as  Rada  [Special  Deterrent  Force],
         informal networks or tribal connections  in  order  to  seek  their
         kidnapped relative."

65. In his 4th April 2017 briefing to the Security Council  the  Secretary-
    General described crime as "endemic", and attributed  the  increase  to
    the  "state  of  general  lawlessness  and  the  weakness  of  judicial
    institutions". In common with Ms Pargeter, the SG was unable to make  a
    distinction  between  'pure'  crime,  and  that  perpetrated  to   fund
    ostensibly political activity:  "Armed groups from all sides  continued
    to abduct, torture and kill civilians. Individuals  were  targeted  for
    their political opinions, affiliations, family or tribal identity,  and
    also for ransom or prisoner exchange.


    Travel


66. At the hearing we invited submissions on the ability of Libyan citizens
    to travel to and from, and around the country.


67. The Tribunal was informed that the Secretary of State is not  currently
    making "escorted returns", i.e. forced removals.  We  were  invited  to
    determine the appeal on the notional basis that ZMM would  be  able  to
    return to Libya on his own. By way of letter dated  5th  May  2017  the
    Respondent stated that there are a  "small  number  of  airports"  that
    remain open in Libya and that although there  are  no  direct  flights,
    transit  options  are  available  via  Egypt,   Jordan   and   Tunisia.
    Individuals may also travel overland from Tunisia.  The letter provided
    a link which suggested to the reader that it would  provide  statistics
    on how many Libyans have  voluntarily  returned  to  their  country  of
    nationality in recent years; in fact the table simply reflects  overall
    removal figures.


68. Ms Pargeter did deal briefly in her oral evidence with  the  Tribunal's
    question relating to the ability of civilians to move freely within the
    country. She testified that internal travel is possible, but dangerous.
    She provided further information in her  addendum  dated  the  9th  May
    2017:


         "The only airport currently operating in Tripoli is Mitiga airport,
         which used to be the capital's domestic airport but  that  switched
         to being its  international  airport  after  Tripoli  International
         Airport was destroyed in the fighting of the summer of 2014.


         Mitiga airport is currently under the  control  of  militia  forces
         that are allied to the  Presidency  Council  in  the  form  of  the
         Special Deterrent Force that is led by Abdelrouaf Kara and that  is
         largely Salafist Madkhalist in orientation.  Indeed,  this  airport
         has been the main base of some  of  the  more  hard  line  Islamist
         militias since the revolution and the militias still  run  a  large
         detention facility at the site. The Special Deterrent Force has its
         main headquarters located inside the Mitiga complex.


         Although the day to day functioning of the airport itself is run by
         Libya's airports authority, these militia forces, which control the
         area in which the airport is located, have intervened  directly  in
         the airport's functioning. In April  2017,  for  example,  passport
         officers went on strike after one of their colleagues was beaten up
         by a group of militiamen. In the same month a number of immigration
         officials quit their  posts  at  the  airport  in  protest  at  the
         smuggling and extortion rackets being run by these militias through
         the facility.


         On 26 August 2016, it was reported on Twitter that militia  leader,
         Haitham Tajouri, had kidnapped  two  people  from  Misrata,  Ashraf
         Lamin and Taha Jamal, from inside the airport, although  they  were
         later released.


         In  December  2016,  meanwhile,  an  Afriqiyah  Airways  plane  was
         withdrawn from service after it was randomly shot at while  on  the
         ground at Mitiga airport.


         The main airport  in  Benghazi  (Benina)  is  not  functioning  for
         civilian flights because of the security situation.  Sebha  airport
         is also closed for the same reason. Misrata airport is open  as  is
         the Labraq airport at Al-Baida."


69. As to the possibility of overland travel Ms Pargeter said this:


         "Anyone travelling overland from Tunisia to Tripoli would  need  to
         travel along the main coastal road which  runs  from  the  Tunisian
         border to the capital. They would first need to  pass  through  the
         border crossing at Ras Jedir. This is a notorious trouble spot that
         is subject to repeated protests and shutdowns. As the most US State
         Dept travel advice on Tunisia that was issued on 2 May 2017  notes,
         'Developments in Libya continue to affect  the  security  situation
         along the Tunisian-Libyan border in areas such  as  Ras  Jedir  and
         Dehiba along with the cities of  Ben  Guerdan  and  Medenine.   The
         Libyan border is frequently closed to all traffic with short notice
         for extended periods.'


         In addition, this coastal road that runs from the  Tunisian  border
         to Tripoli is a notorious stretch of road that has  been  subjected
         to repeated attacks and closures over the past  months  and  years,
         particularly around the area to the west of  the  capital,  between
         Zawia and Janzour (the latter of which is Tripoli's western  gate).
         This is because of the  ongoing  conflict  between  Wershefana  and
         Zawia, which manifests itself when members of militias  from  these
         areas try to wrestle control of  the  stretch  of  road.  With  the
         exception of a three week period, this  section  of  the  road  was
         closed."

    Discussion and Findings


70. Applying the approach taken in Diakit�, we are satisfied that there are
    today two or more armed groups confronting one  another  within  Libyan
    territory and that there is  therefore  an  'internal  armed  conflict'
    within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  We
    are further satisfied, having regard to the evidence before us, that  a
    feature of that conflict is indiscriminate violence.  We  need  say  no
    more about those prerequisites, since  neither  was  contested  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The question is whether that violence has  reached
    a scale and intensity whereby the Appellant,  or  any  other  returning
    civilian, would by his presence alone face  a  serious  and  individual
    threat to his life or person.


71. In our assessment of that question we remind ourselves that in order to
    succeed  the  Appellant  cannot  simply  rely  on  an   unsubstantiated
    subjective fear.  When Article 15(c) speaks of a threat to a civilian's
    life or person  it  is  concerned  not  with  fear  alone  but  with  a
    possibility that may become a reality.  We  are  required  to  take  an
    inclusive approach to the assessment  of  risk:  our  enquiry  must  be
    qualitative as well as quantitative.   We propose therefore to  examine
    the evidence of death and injury, both physical and mental, the general
    political and security situation  as  well  as  the  prevailing  socio-
    economic conditions.  We remind ourselves that civilians on the  ground
    are unlikely to distinguish between 'direct' or 'indirect' human rights
    violations: we weigh into the balance all potential  harms  that  arise
    from this conflict


    The Numbers


72. Mr Singh based his case squarely on the statistics, such as  they  are,
    of fatalities and injuries recorded amongst the civilian population. He
    asked us to take as our starting point the overall  population  figures
    given in the CIA World Fact Book (2015) of 6,541,948 people.   Adopting
    the UNSMIL estimates of civilian casualties, he  submitted  that  there
    were 318 deaths between 1st January 2016 and  30th  April  2017  and  a
    further 370  physical  injuries.  Expressed  as  a  proportion  of  the
    population the number  affected  is,  in  Mr  Singh  submission,  "very
    small", and certainly insufficient to engage Article 15(c).


73. We agree that the figures of the dead  and  injured  are  obviously  an
    important indicator of current or future risk to civilians returning to
    Libya. They cannot, however, be the only metric. We must have regard to
    all of the available evidence, all the more so where  is  it  is  clear
    that the data are not reliable.


74. The first challenge we face in assessing the numbers is that we  cannot
    be at all confident about the baseline  population  figure.  The  CIA's
    strikingly precise number of 6,541,948  seems  incongruous  given  that
    there has not been a census in Libya since 2006.  The  CPIN  gives  the
    alternative figure of 5,000,000, that  being  the  estimate  of  Jane's
    Sentinel.  Ms Pargeter thought it likely to be  somewhere  between  the
    two. It is unclear what  proportion  of  that  number  is  made  up  of
    migrants, who seek to take advantage of the security vacuum and use the
    country as a conduit to Europe: the CIA estimates it to be  12%.   That
    is important because the figures  we  have  been  shown  on  casualties
    expressly  do  not  include  migrants.   Nor   does   either   of   the
    aforementioned population estimates take into account  the  numbers  of
    Libyan citizens who have left the country as a result of the  conflict.
     Some estimates put the total at 1 million, some  at  2  million.   The
    media and government in Tunisia claim that there are 1 million  Libyans
    in their country alone; the true number is impossible to  quantify  due
    to lack of accurate reporting  systems.     Taking  all  of  that  into
    account we are unable to accept that our starting  point  should  be  a
    population of 6,541,948 Libyans. We find as  a  matter  of  probability
    that the true figure, of those actually present in the country, must be
    considerably lower. For the purpose of this determination we accept  Ms
    Pargeter's 'best guess' of a midway point between  the  two  estimates:
    that would be 5,750,000.


75. We can be even less confident about the true figures of  the  dead  and
    physically  injured.    We  are  satisfied,  having   regard   to   its
    methodology, that the deaths and injuries recorded by UNSMIL are likely
    to have occurred.   By their own admission, however,  their  statistics
    in respect  of  those  killed  in  indiscriminate  shelling,  shooting,
    bombing and other explosions are "not likely to  be  complete".    They
    could not include, for instance, persons who receive  injuries  but  do
    not attend hospital, or report it to any other body. They are  unlikely
    to include  all  of  those  killed  or  injured  in  remote  areas,  or
    "disappeared" on the road between cities.


76. More importantly the UNSMIL statistics expressly exclude a large number
    of casualties relevant to  our  enquiry,  since  they  do  not  include
    persons harmed  as  an  "indirect"  result  of  hostilities,  including
    "executions after capture, torture or abductions".   By way of example,
    the report dated 1st December 2016 states that in the  preceding  month
    12 civilians were killed in air strikes, 11 people were fatally shot, 9
    were killed by shelling and 6  died  after  coming  into  contact  with
    "vehicle borne improvised devices". It  makes  no  mention  of  the  26
    persons reported  abducted  in  Tripoli  in  the  first  two  weeks  of
    November, nor of the 19 corpses bearing  signs  of  torture  that  were
    found on the city's streets in the same period. Although  the  relevant
    agencies are unanimous that such human rights abuses by  armed  parties
    to this conflict are frequent and widespread, none  has  been  able  to
    collate  figures.  There  is  likely  to  be  a  very  high   rate   of
    underreporting of these matters, not least because there is no  central
    authority to take such reports to.


77.  In recognition of these difficulties Mr Singh suggests that  we  could
    multiply the UNSMIL casualty figures by five,  or  ten,  to  allow  for
    underreporting and the "indirect" injuries.   We  find  that  the  true
    figure is likely to be considerably higher  than  that.  The  evidence,
    including that provided by UNSMIL, establishes that all parties to  the
    conflict are violating international human rights and humanitarian law.
    The evidence demonstrates such violations to be routine: in the absence
    of the rule of law these heavily armed men are accountable to no-one.


78. A third important group of physical casualties not documented by UNSMIL
    are victims of "ordinary" crime.  We have no doubt, notwithstanding  Ms
    Pargeter's  characterisation  of  life   under   Gaddafi   as   "highly
    centralised and authoritarian", that crime did exist in Libya prior  to
    October 2011.  What  appears  to  be  certain  is  that  it  has  grown
    exponentially as law and order has  collapsed.  Although  the  evidence
    before us suggested that some  governmental  institutions  continue  to
    operate (for instance in the collation of  crime  figures  by  the  GNA
    controlled Investigative Office of the Interior  Ministry)  we  see  no
    reason to reject the assessment in the Respondent's  most  recent  CPIN
    that "the rule of law is largely absent" and that  the  internationally
    recognised GNA is unable to provide a reasonable  level  of  protection
    where an individual faces a real risk of harm. This  accords  with  the
    view expressed by Ms Pargeter and the UN Secretary General.


79. The most recent statistics we were shown relate to the six weeks to the
    end of January this year. The Investigative Office  reported  there  to
    have been, in Tripoli alone, 293 kidnappings and 683 robberies in  that
    period, entailing the deaths of  23  robbery  victims.  A  further  188
    bodies were found in the streets. It  is  of  course  not  possible  to
    determine  whether  the  188  bodies  were  those  of  kidnap  victims,
    militiamen or others. Even excluding those deaths entirely  there  were
    some 50 kidnappings per week and well over double that number of  armed
    robberies. We accept Ms Pargeter's evidence that many more such  crimes
    go  entirely  unreported,  with  relatives  and  victims  fearing   the
    consequences of reporting.   Her assessment that "general  criminality,
    extortion,  car-jackings  and  kidnappings  have  become  the  norm  in
    Tripoli" finds support in the statistics.

80. The data  that  has  been  available  to  us  excludes  the  deaths  of
    combatants. We were, for instance,  urged  to  disregard  the  work  of
    'Libya Body  Count',  who  do  not  distinguish  between  fighters  and
    civilians. Whilst that is obviously an important line to draw,  we  are
    not satisfied that the deaths of combatants  are  entirely  irrelevant.
    That is because these fatalities can give  a  good  indication  of  the
    intensity of conflict that is occurring,  and  the  evidence  indicates
    clearly that the nature of the conflict is indiscriminate in respect of
    those caught up in it. For instance, the figures latterly  obtained  by
    Ms Pargeter in respect of Benghazi serve as a  potent  illustration  of
    what the words "heavy shelling" actually mean in practice: by the HOR's
    own admission General Haftar lost 10,000 troops in the battle  for  the
    city. Even if that is an exaggeration, it would tend to  indicate  that
    the tens of thousands of civilians who fled did so for good reason, and
    that  those  who  remained  did  so  under  the  most  challenging   of
    conditions. Most of the fighting in this conflict is  taking  place  in
    densely populated urban areas.  Whilst  this  obviously  increases  the
    chances of physical casualties in the civilian population, we  find  it
    also likely to  increase  the  prospect  of  significant  psychological
    damage.


81. This brings us to the last  group  of  casualties  with  which  we  are
    concerned, a group wholly unreflected in the statistics: those who have
    suffered serious mental harm as a result of  hostilities  so  far.   Mr
    Singh submitted that there was no evidence at all about whether any  of
    the civilian population was suffering from mental conditions associated
    with trauma.   With respect, we find it hard to imagine that  they  are
    not. Take for instance the events of 14th March 2017 when media reports
    spoke of civilians in central Tripoli cowering in their homes from  the
    "terrific" noise of heavy weaponry outside.   A missile landed a direct
    strike on the children's ward in the hospital, setting the building  on
    fire.  In our judgement there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  that  those
    civilians present in the ward, and hiding in their homes, apprehended a
    serious and individual threat to their life or person.   There  was  no
    evidence  before  us  to  indicate  that  Libyans  have  a   particular
    resilience to such events.


82. Whilst mindful of the need to avoid double counting we  have  also  had
    regard to the numbers  of  the  internally  displaced.  Although  Human
    Rights Watch put the figure at 500,000, we are satisfied that the  most
    reliable estimate of the number of IDPs in the country is that provided
    by the IOM using their Displacement Tracking Matrix. The 8th  round  of
    this multi-tool tracking device showed that there were  303,608  Libyan
    nationals identified as IDPs as of March 2017.  This  figure  does  not
    include the many thousands of migrants currently  in  the  country,  or
    those deemed to be "temporarily displaced", such as  the  residents  of
    Abu Salim who were  able  to  return  to  their  homes  after  fighting
    subsided  in  the  suburb.  This  figure   nonetheless   represents   a
    significant decrease on the figures seen in preceding years, with  some
    130,000 people having returned to Benghazi and over 50,000  going  back
    to Siirte by the middle of the month.  We note that  these  people  are
    not seeking to avoid civil unrest, or socio-economic deprivation. There
    is a clear correlation between the internal  movement  of  persons  and
    conflict:  of those interviewed by IOM, 91% said  that  they  had  been
    displaced by conflict and armed groups. Seventy-four percent said  that
    this remained the reason that they were unable  to  return  home.   The
    other main obstacles to  return  were  identified  as  'other  security
    issues', the presence of explosive hazards and damaged infrastructure.


    The Context


83. In her written submissions the Respondent accepted that there is  grave
    political and economic instability in Libya.   It is her  case  however
    that this could not assist the Appellant in establishing his. The  fact
    that the country is in turmoil does not necessarily mean  that  Article
    15(c) is engaged. We agree.  The political  backdrop  to  the  conflict
    remains however an important factor in this appeal.


84. There is no single authority in Libya today  which  could  be  properly
    identified as "the government".  The three entities who currently claim
    legitimacy do appear  to  be  providing  some  services,  or  at  least
    allowing some services to continue: the  material  before  us  contains
    references to hospitals, schools and even police forces  continuing  to
    operate, albeit in an  extremely  challenging  environment.   There  is
    however no evidence before us that the HOR, the GNA/PC or  the  NSG  is
    currently able to provide the  populations  under  their  control  with
    effective protection. Their ability to do so in the foreseeable  future
    is severely compromised by several factors.


85. First, the task of governance appears to be very far down  the  agendas
    of those ostensibly in  power.  We  place  significant  weight  on  the
    uncontradicted assessment of Ms Pargeter  that  this  conflict  is  not
    driven by ideology. It is primarily a turf war for valuable hydrocarbon
    resources.


86. Second, the three governments are themselves beholden to  external  and
    internal forces, all of whom have their own agenda. Externally  various
    regional actors seek to influence the post-Gaddafi settlement for their
    own gain.  Internally the "real  power"  lies  with  a  vast  array  of
    unregulated militias,  who  in  the  words  of  Prime  Minister  Sarraj
    "continue to act as they see fit".  The power vacuum  operates  to  the
    advantage of these armed groups, who can use it to seize territory  and
    resources, and profit  from  unchecked  criminality;  there  is  little
    incentive for them to provide peace, or seek stability.


87. Third, the state as it existed under  Gaddafi,  which  had  managed  to
    persist to some extent at the time that AT & Others was heard, has  all
    but disappeared in key areas.  The  current  CPIN  deems  the  domestic
    criminal justice system to be "dysfunctional, offering no prospects for
    accountability"; this view is supported by the UN, Human  Rights  Watch
    and Amnesty International who all describe it as being in  a  state  of
    collapse. This severely limits the prospects of a  return  to  law  and
    order in the immediate future.


88. Fourth, Libya continues to face an economic crisis. Oil production  has
    risen in recent months and this is certainly a development welcomed  by
    commentators and international observers, but all  agree  that  serious
    challenges remain.  The  International  Crisis  Group  warns  that  the
    country could be bankrupt by the end of the year.  Even if that  is  an
    unduly bleak assessment, it is clear that the lack of liquidity in  the
    banking system, coupled with the interruptions to the oil supply caused
    by fighting, is heightening tensions on the ground.  At present the  UN
    body OCHA estimates that there are 1.3 million people in need of urgent
    humanitarian assistance, including essential  medicines,  food,  water,
    hygiene, sanitation,  shelter  and  education.   We  note  that  it  is
    historically the case that such a scarcity of resources is more  likely
    to fuel war than foster peace.

    The Future


89. There are, it must be hoped, some grounds for future optimism.   Senior
    members of the rival governments continue to speak  of  the  LPA  as  a
    viable framework for peace.  The  UN  and  other  international  actors
    maintain their support for this enterprise, and in the absence  of  any
    alternative, it is the plan that must work if Libya is to  emerge  from
    its present state of political stalemate. The day  after  the  hearing,
    for instance, British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson flew  to  Tripoli
    to  meet  with  Sarraj  and  press  for  progress.    The  meeting  had
    apparently been planned for some time, but  fortuitously  fell  in  the
    days that followed the 'breakthrough' talks between Sarraj and  General
    Haftar which had taken place in the UAE in  the  preceding  week.   The
    meeting between these two  leading  figures  was  clearly  significant.
    Press reports assert that they had not spoken in over a year,  so  this
    tentative entente was widely welcomed.


90. It is not presently possible to say whether  this  flurry  of  activity
    will result in any tangible benefits for ordinary Libyans. Ms  Pargeter
    said that she would like to be optimistic, but  experience  had  taught
    her otherwise.   In her report she had described General Haftar as  the
    "main stumbling block" to peace,  insofar  as  he  remains  a  divisive
    figure. Powerful Misratan militias hate him and will refuse to serve in
    any army that he heads; elements of the NSG are implacably  opposed  to
    any deal with their eastern rivals.   Ms Pargeter  said  that  she  was
    "not holding her breath" as to any positive  outcome  from  the  recent
    talks. She pointed out that the LPA itself had been  signed  amid  much
    fanfare by individuals who had returned to their respective bodies only
    to find that they rejected much that had been  agreed  after  weeks  of
    painstaking negotiation. That the LPA cannot  survive  in  its  present
    form appears to be recognised by all  actors.  As  Martin  Kobler,  the
    Secretary-General's Special Representative in Libya puts it: "there  is
    a consensus that amendments are needed". Whether these  amendments  can
    be made, so that the LPA can be implemented, remains to be seen.


    The Risk


91. For the reasons we have set out,  the  statistics  are  unreliable  and
    incomplete.  UNSMIL know that in the 16 months between January 2016 and
    April 2017, at least 4.6 civilians  died  each  week  as  a  result  of
    shooting, shelling,  bombing,  and  other  explosions.  A  further  5.4
    received physical injuries in these attacks.   If  the  snapshot  crime
    figures are reliable, we can say that approximately 50 people per  week
    are being kidnapped in Tripoli alone, with a further 113 falling victim
    to robbery at gunpoint. Each of these  crimes  can  involve  unreported
    deaths. We know that approximately  300,000  Libyans  remain  displaced
    after they fled their homes in fear of violence. Those figures are  the
    starting point.  We must  then  consider  the  victims  of  "collateral
    damage" who have not been counted by  UNSMIL;  the  unknown  number  of
    civilians affected by  the  "widespread"  human  rights  violations  by
    militiamen; the uncounted victims of serious  violent  crime;  and  the
    unquantified number of people living  with  the  clinical  sequelae  of
    trauma.


92. All of this data must be assessed against the backdrop of  the  general
    country information. The situation is complex and fast-moving  but  two
    features stand out: there is at present a  manifest  failure  of  state
    protection for the ordinary  citizen  and  indiscriminate  violence  is
    liable to erupt anywhere, at any time. In the context of  this  extreme
    volatility we are satisfied that the cumulative effect of the  evidence
    is such that the Article 15(c) test is satisfied.


93. In light of our findings we have not considered it necessary to conduct
    a region by region review. We do not doubt  that  there  are  in  Libya
    today  towns  and   villages   which   are   relatively   calm   where,
    notwithstanding the absence of effective government, people  are  going
    about their 'normal' lives.  We cannot however be  satisfied  that  the
    peace in these oases  is  stable  or  durable,  or  that  the  notional
    returnee to Libya would be able to safely  access  such  locations.  In
    April 2017 the Secretary-General of the  UN  reported  the  freedom  of
    movement of ordinary Libyans to be "severely affected" by violence  and
    lawlessness. Ms Pargeter agreed. As her  addendum  report  illustrates,
    travel across the country is a dangerous enterprise. Those few airports
    that do remain open are under the control of various militias. Even  if
    the arriving passenger were able to talk his way  out  of  the  airport
    without being robbed,  assaulted,  detained  or  worse,  we  cannot  be
    satisfied that risks he would face on  his  onwards  journey  would  be
    acceptably low.   The evidence before us indicates that  the  situation
    throughout Libya is extremely unstable, that lawlessness  and  violence
    are widespread, and that there is not a sufficiency of  protection  for
    the ordinary civilian.  We are satisfied that the Article 15(c) risk is
    made out.


94. Giving effect to our findings, assessments and conclusions  above,  the
    country guidance we give is as follows:


         The violence in Libya has reached such a high level that there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that a returning civilian  would,
         solely on account of his presence on the territory of that  country
         or region, face a real risk of being subject to  a  threat  to  his
         life or person.


95. This decision has been confined to consideration of Article  15(c),  on
    the evidence as it was presented before us.   The overriding  theme  of
    that evidence has been the volatility of the situation on  the  ground.
    It is to be hoped that the parties to this conflict, and the people  of
    Libya, find some resolution to this sad and dangerous state of  affairs
    as soon as possible.


    Decisions


96. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  found  to  contain  a
    material error of law  and,  insofar  as  it  related  to  humanitarian
    protection, it has been set aside. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    on asylum  grounds  and  human  rights  grounds  was  unchallenged  and
    therefore that part of the decision is to stand.


97. We re-make the decision in respect of Article  15(c)  by  allowing  the
    appeal on that ground.


98. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:  Anonymity  Orders  we
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                    20th June 2017





                                 Appendix A


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01430/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th November 2016                     |On 28th November 2016             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     zmm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Moffatt of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Borsada
    made following a hearing at Birmingham on 13th May 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who  has  lived  all  his  life  in
    Tripoli.  He came to the UK as a student  on  9th  September  2014  and
    claimed asylum on 28th April 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State concluded  that  the  basis  of  his  claim  was
    entirely false and the judge agreed.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's credibility findings.

 4. His appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  and  permission  was
    initially refused by Judge Ogarro on 21st  June  2016.   Upon  renewal,
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge Rintoul on  18th  July  2016.
    Judge Rintoul noted that the grounds expressly stated that it  is  only
    the assessment under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  that
    is challenged.

 6. At the hearing Ms Moffatt produced the  case  of  FA  (Libya);  Article
    15(c) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 which held  that  the  former  country
    guidance in AT and Others Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 should no longer  be
    followed.

 7. Mr Avery did not seek to argue that this decision  should  not  be  set
    aside.

Conclusion on whether there is an error of law

 8. The judge erred in law in that he did not  engage  with  the  objective
    material before him seeking to establish that the country guidance case
    of AT and Others should no longer be followed.  The argument,  set  out
    in the grounds, that the situation in Libya generally has  deteriorated
    significantly since the guidance in AT was accepted by the Tribunal  in
    FA.

 9. Accordingly failed to  have  proper  regard  to  all  of  the  relevant
    evidence before him. He followed a country guidance case which has  now
    been found to be out of date.

10. His decision is set aside.

11. The appellant's representative requested leave to  adduce  an  expert's
    report from Ms Alison Pargetter, a senior  research  associate  at  the
    Royal United Services Institute for the next  hearing.   She  suggested
    that this is a suitable case for country guidance since  there  are  no
    credibility issues.

12. That is a matter which will be decided by the relevant judicial officer
    who will then make appropriate listing directions.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed
[pic]                                   Date 26 November 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


                                 APPENDIX B


               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                               Expert Reports

|Date            |Description                                              |
|25th March 2017 |Expert opinion of Alison Pargeter                        |


                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|                                                                          |
|Undated                                                                   |
|Undated                                   |Documents                      |
|                                          |Libya Herald: In light of the  |
|                                          |security chaos, kidnappings in |
|                                          |Tripoli are multiplying (inc   |
|                                          |English translation)           |
|                                          |Libya Focus: Can the new Arab  |
|                                          |initiative put Libya together  |
|                                          |again?                         |
|                                          |10 dead and 15 wounded in      |
|                                          |clashes in the capital Tripoli |
|                                          |(inc English translations)     |
|                                          |Tripoli in the grip of the     |
|                                          |militias: the conflict         |
|                                          |intensifies in the capital     |
|                                          |20 kidnappings and 12          |
|                                          |assassinations in Tripoli      |
|                                          |within two weeks (inc English  |
|                                          |translation)                   |
|                                          |The rise of crimes in an       |
|                                          |unprecedented manner... Has the|
|                                          |security situation collapsed in|
|                                          |Tripoli Libya (inc English     |
|                                          |translation)                   |
|                                          |Official statistics: 47 armed  |
|                                          |robbery and 19 bodies bumped in|
|                                          |the streets of Tripoli in the  |
|                                          |first half of November (inc    |
|                                          |English translation)           |
|                                          |Breaking news - the seventh day|
|                                          |(inc English translation)      |
|                                          |Libya: pollicising the conflict|
|                                          |in Sabha threatens to blow up  |
|                                          |efforts to calm down (inc      |
|                                          |English translation)           |
|                                          |My Sabha reveals the poor      |
|                                          |security, health and service   |
|                                          |situation in the city (inc     |
|                                          |English translation)           |
|                                          |Spokesperson for the Sabha     |
|                                          |medical centre (inc English    |
|                                          |translation)                   |
|                                                                          |
|2017                                                                      |
|Date             |Source                  |Description                    |
|                 |                        |                               |
|24 April         |Gov.UK                  |Libya Travel Advice            |
|13 April         |Amnesty International   |Amnesty International          |
|7 April          |Alison Pargeter's Report|Responses from Alison Pargeter |
|                 |                        |to the Respondent's Questions  |
|6 April          |Chatham House - Royal   |Libya's Power Vacuum Risks     |
|                 |Institute of            |Heightened Violence            |
|                 |International Affairs   |                               |
|4 April          |Libya Express           |AFP photographer in Libya freed|
|                 |                        |after two detention days in    |
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|4 April          |United Nations Security |Report of the Secretary-       |
|                 |Council                 |General on the United nations  |
|                 |                        |Support Mission in Libya       |
|3 April          |Libya Herald            |HoR sets conditions for        |
|                 |                        |dialogue on Libyan Political   |
|                 |                        |Agreement: separate Presidency |
|                 |                        |Council and government, no     |
|                 |                        |UNSMIL involvement, and no     |
|                 |                        |Additional Article 8.          |
|3 April          |Bloomberg               |Libya's Oil Production Set to  |
|                 |                        |Rebound as Biggest Field       |
|                 |                        |Reopens                        |
|3 April          |Alison Pargeter expert  |Respondent questions to Alison |
|                 |report                  |Pargeter in respect of her     |
|                 |                        |expert report                  |
|2 April          |Libya Herald            |Sniper kills woman and sailor  |
|                 |                        |on Benghazi's Guiliana Bridge  |
|1 April          |Human Rights            |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |                        |Casualties                     |
|1 April          |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties                     |
|1 April          |Libya Herald            |Two more civilians killed in   |
|                 |                        |mine explosion in Benghazi's   |
|                 |                        |Gwarsha district               |
|1 April          |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties - March 2017        |
|29  March        |Libya Herald            |Three including AFP            |
|                 |                        |photographer freed after       |
|                 |                        |"sinful" Benghazi Earth Hour   |
|                 |                        |celebrations                   |
|29 March         |Al Jazeera              |What is it like living in Libya|
|                 |                        |these days?                    |
|29 March         |Carnegie Endowment for  |The challenge of violent       |
|                 |International peace     |Extremism in North Africa: The |
|                 |                        |Case of Libya                  |
|28 March         |Reuters                 |UPDATE 3-Libya's oil output    |
|                 |                        |down 252,000 bpd due to armed  |
|                 |                        |protests                       |
|28 March         |The Maghreb Times       |Libya's Haftar refuses invite  |
|                 |                        |to Tunisia                     |
|26 March         |Libya Herald            |Presidency Council strips oil  |
|                 |                        |ministry of powers             |
|24 March         |International           |IOM Director General Visits    |
|                 |Organisation for        |Tripoli as Tragedy of Migrant  |
|                 |Migration               |Deaths at Sea Worsens          |
|23 March         |UN News Centre          |We can no longer turn our backs|
|                 |                        |on communities affected by     |
|                 |                        |migration crisis in Libya - UN |
|                 |                        |agency chief                   |
|23 March         |Amnesty International   |Evidence points to war crimes  |
|                 |                        |by Libyan National Army forces |
|22 March         |Qantara.de              |Quantara (Germany) Civil war in|
|                 |                        |Libya Forever at loggerheads   |
|22 March         |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: War Crimes as Benghazi  |
|                 |                        |Residents Flee                 |
|22 March         |International           |IOM Director General Visits    |
|                 |Organization for        |Tripoli as Crisis Worsens for  |
|                 |Migration               |Libyans and Vulnerable Migrants|
|22 March         |Alkarama (Switzerland)  |Disappearance of Two Men       |
|                 |Libya                   |Following Abduction from the   |
|                 |                        |Street by Pro-GNA Militia      |
|21 March         |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: UN Human Rights Council |
|                 |                        |should prioritize justice and  |
|                 |                        |accountability                 |
|21 March         |International           |IOM Libya Releases 2016        |
|                 |Organization for        |Displacement Trends Analysis   |
|                 |Migration               |Report                         |
|20 March         |United Nations Support  |Martin Kobler: Escalating      |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |violence and hateful rhetoric  |
|                 |                        |threaten widespread conflict in|
|                 |                        |Libya                          |
|17 March         |Global Initiative       |The Human Conveyor Belt: trends|
|                 |against Transnational   |in human trafficking and       |
|                 |Organized Crime         |smuggling in post-revolution   |
|                 |                        |Libya [Executive Summary; Human|
|                 |                        |Smuggling as Resource          |
|                 |                        |Predation]                     |
|15 March         |IRIN News               |Libyan Oil wars and the battle |
|                 |                        |for Tripoli                    |
|15 March         |Amnesty International   |The human cost of European     |
|                 |                        |hypocrisy on Libya             |
|14 March         |Reuters                 |UN Hears of human rights       |
|                 |                        |violations amid Libya Fighting |
|14 March         |Libya Herald            |Tripoli fighting spreads       |
|                 |                        |tonight                        |
|14 March         |Bloomberg               |Haftar's Army Says Key Libyan  |
|                 |                        |Oil Ports Back Under Its       |
|                 |                        |Control                        |
|14 March         |Office of the United    |Press briefing note on Libya   |
|                 |Nations High            |                               |
|                 |Commissioner for Human  |                               |
|                 |Rights                  |                               |
|14 March         |United Nations News     |UN rights wing urges calm,     |
|                 |Centre                  |protection of civilians amid   |
|                 |                        |hostilities in eastern Libya   |
|14 March         |Voice of America News   |East Libyan Force claims       |
|                 |                        |recapture 2 key oil ports      |
|14 March         |Al Jazeera              |Khalifa Haftar forces capture  |
|                 |                        |key Libya Oil Terminals        |
|10 March         |International Crisis    |New Libyan Militia's Oil Strike|
|                 |Group                   |Risks Wider Conflagration      |
|9 March          |Al Jazeera              |Will losing oil ports end      |
|                 |                        |Haftar's power?                |
|8 March          |Libya Herald            |Aman Bank head office set      |
|                 |                        |ablaze after guard kills       |
|                 |                        |customer                       |
|7 March          |Reuters                 |Libyan oil guard head says     |
|                 |                        |asked to protect oil ports     |
|                 |                        |after clashes                  |
|4 March          |Chairman National Oil   |National Oil Corporation's     |
|                 |Corporation  Statement  |statement                      |
|4 March          |Voice of America News   |Libyan Islamist Militia Clings |
|                 |                        |to Oil Port Region Amid Heavy  |
|                 |                        |Airstrikes                     |
|3 March          |US Department of State  |2016 Country Reports on Human  |
|                 |                        |Rights Practices: Libya        |
|2 March          |Libya Herald            |Benghazi's Jalaa Hospital      |
|                 |                        |treated 268 in February        |
|                 |                        |violence                       |
|1 March          |BBC News                |Libya Country Profile          |
|1 March          |Reporters Sans          |RSF Decries Closure of Two     |
|                 |Frontieres (Reporters   |Radio Stations in Libya        |
|                 |Without Borders)        |                               |
|1 March          |Libya Herald            |Obari football coach murdered  |
|                 |                        |in Tripoli                     |
|March            |Home Office Country     |Actual or perceived supporters |
|                 |Policy and Information  |of President Gaddafi - Version |
|                 |Note, Libya             |2                              |
|26 February      |Anadolu Agency News     |Car bombing kills 2 in Libya's |
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|25 February      |European Union External |Statement by HRVP Federica     |
|                 |Action                  |Mogherini on the recent clashes|
|                 |                        |in Tripoli                     |
|25 February      |Libyan Express          |Libyan national footballer     |
|                 |                        |abducted in Tripoli            |
|25 February      |Libyan Express          |Human Rights Watch report on   |
|                 |                        |Haftar's forces crimes in      |
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|25 February      |ReliefWeb               |Libya - joint statement by     |
|                 |                        |Ambassadors of France, Germany,|
|                 |                        |Italy, Spain, the UK , and the |
|                 |                        |US to Libya                    |
|24 February      |International Crisis    |Watch list 2017 [Libya Excerpt]|
|                 |Group                   |                               |
|24 February      |Libyan Express          |Fighting in Tripoli's Abu Salim|
|                 |                        |intensifies - ten killed       |
|22 February      |Amnesty International   |Report 2016/17                 |
|22 February      |Foreign Affairs.com     |Foreign Affairs - Libya after  |
|                 |                        |ISIS                           |
|21 February      |United Nations Human    |Libya Gaddafi regime trial fell|
|                 |Rights - Office of the  |short of international         |
|                 |High Commissioner       |standards - UN report          |
|21 February      |Voice of America News   |European Border Officials Paint|
|                 |                        |Grim Libyan Picture            |
|20 February      |BBC News                |Libya's eastern authority bans |
|                 |                        |women travelling solo          |
|15 February      |Middle East Observer    |Middle East Observer: Libya:   |
|                 |                        |Haftar Refuses to Meet         |
|                 |                        |Al-Serraj in Cairo             |
|13 February      |Human Rights Watch      |The Human Rights Council should|
|                 |                        |establish the mandate of an    |
|                 |                        |Independent Expert on Libya    |
|11 February      |eNCA                    |Libya on edge as militias enter|
|                 |                        |Tripoli                        |
|10 February      |Libya Tribune           |Libya's Political Stalemate:   |
|                 |                        |Time for action... EU and a new|
|                 |                        |political initiative in Libya  |
|10 February      |US Department of State  |On Recent Events in Tripoli    |
|9 February       |Libya Herald            |New Militia grouping supports  |
|                 |                        |ex-premier Khalifa Ghwell      |
|8 February       |Foreign & Commonwealth  |Libya-Human Rights Priority    |
|                 |Office                  |Country Update Report          |
|8 February       |United Nations News     |United Nations News Centre,    |
|                 |                        |Libyans must make 2017 the     |
|                 |                        |'Year of decisions', UN Envoy  |
|                 |                        |tells Security Council         |
|8 February       |United Nations Support  |Statement of SRSG Martin Kobler|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |to the Security Council        |
|7 February       |Libya Herald            |Residents move back to         |
|                 |                        |Benghazi's Garyounis and       |
|                 |                        |Gwarsha districts - to rebuild |
|                 |                        |homes and lives                |
|4 February       |Voice of America News   |EU-Tripoli Migrant Deal Ignores|
|                 |                        |Political Chaos in Libya,      |
|                 |                        |Analysts Warn                  |
|3 February       |Medecins Sans Frontieres|Migration: MSF Warns EU about  |
|                 |                        |inhumane approach to migration |
|                 |                        |management                     |
|1 February       |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties                     |
|1 February       |Relief Web              |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |                        |Casualties - January 2017      |
|26 January       |United Nations Support  |UNMSIL Team Visits Tobruk      |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Prison                         |
|25 January       |African Arguments Online|People smuggling in Libya: You |
|                 |(Royal African Society) |can't bomb away a problem a    |
|                 |                        |problem of economics           |
|22 January       |Libya Herald            |Triumph and tragedy in         |
|                 |                        |Benghazi's Ganfouda            |
|21 January       |Voice of America News   |Libya Neighbours Hold Talks in |
|                 |                        |Cairo to End Country's Crisis  |
|19 January       |Voice of America News   |US Strikes Kill More than 80   |
|                 |                        |Islamic State Fighters in Libya|
|19 January       |Libya Herald            |Situation in Sebha "terrible"  |
|                 |                        |says Mayor                     |
|18 January       |Libyan Express          |Another blackout sweeps through|
|                 |                        |Libya from West to East        |
|16 January       |Libya Herald            |Angry Fezzan HoR members       |
|                 |                        |suspend HoR membership over    |
|                 |                        |region's woes                  |
|13 January       |Human Rights Council    |Investigation by the Office of |
|                 |                        |the United Nations Commissioner|
|                 |                        |for Human Rights on Libya:     |
|                 |                        |detailed findings              |
|12 January       |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: Armed Groups Detain,    |
|                 |                        |Torture, Kill                  |
|12 January       |The National            |Rival government's forces seize|
|                 |                        |ministries from UN-backed      |
|                 |                        |Libyan PM                      |
|11 January       |United Nations High     |UNHCR / Mercy Corps, We Will   |
|                 |Commissioner for        |Stay Here: IDP Vulnerability   |
|                 |Refugees                |Assessment - Libya             |
|11 January       |Washington Institute for|After the Islamic State in     |
|                 |Near East Policy (USA)  |Libya: All-Out War?            |
|11 January       |Washington Institute for|Shifting International Support |
|                 |Near East Policy (USA)  |for Libya's Unity Government   |
|7 January        |Libya Herald            |Cold spell forces two-day      |
|                 |                        |closure of schools in eastern  |
|                 |                        |Libya                          |
|5 January        |United Nations News     |Amid threat of renewed         |
|                 |Centre, Libya           |conflict, UN envoy urges       |
|                 |                        |restraint                      |
|2 January        |Libya Herald            |The GNA's 2017 ''budget'' is   |
|                 |                        |illegal say HoR members: An    |
|                 |                        |analysis                       |
|2 January        |Home Office Country     |Libya: Security and            |
|                 |Policy and Information  |Humanitarian Situation -       |
|                 |                        |Version 2                      |
|1 January        |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties                     |
|January          |Libya Focus             |Showdown between Khalifa Haftar|
|                 |                        |and the forces of Misrata      |
|2016/17          |Amnesty International   |Report 2016/17 - Libya         |
|2017             |World Health            |Libya Emergency Response Plan  |
|                 |Organisation            |2017                           |
|                                                                          |
|2016                                                                      |
|24 December      |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: Provide Medical Care,   |
|                 |                        |Safety for Civilians Fleeing   |
|                 |                        |Sirte                          |
|21 December      |Libya Herald            |Two more bombs explode inside  |
|                 |                        |Benghazi Medical Centre        |
|18 December      |United Nations Support  |UN Congratulates Libya for     |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |defeating Islamic State in     |
|                 |                        |Sirte                          |
|14 December      |International Crisis    |Oil Zone Fighting Threatens    |
|                 |Group                   |Libya with Economic Collapse   |
|13 December      |Office of the United    |"Detained and dehumanised":    |
|                 |Nations High            |Report on human rights abuses  |
|                 |Commissioner for Human  |against migrants in Libya      |
|                 |Rights/ United Nations  |                               |
|                 |Support Mission in Libya|                               |
|1 December       |UK Parliament: House of |Libya November 2016 Update     |
|                 |Commons Library         |                               |
|1 December       |UN Security Council     |United Nations, Report of the  |
|                 |                        |Secretary-General on the United|
|                 |                        |Nations Support Mission in     |
|                 |                        |Libya (December 2016)          |
|1 December       |UN Security Council     |United Nations Support Mission |
|                 |                        |in Libya, Human Rights Report  |
|                 |                        |on Civilian Casualties         |
|December         |Libya Focus             |Tripoli, Sirte, and the Oil    |
|                 |                        |Crescent: Another violent month|
|                 |                        |in Libya                       |
|28 November      |Qantara.de              |Qantara (Germany), Libya's     |
|                 |                        |domestic crisis: On the road to|
|                 |                        |nowhere                        |
|22 November      |United Nations News     |Libya: UN voices extreme       |
|                 |Centre                  |concern at worsening           |
|                 |                        |humanitarian situation in      |
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|20 November      |Libya Herald            |Clashes continue in Sebha as   |
|                 |                        |Awlad Sulaiman claim Qaddadfa  |
|                 |                        |opponents have support from    |
|                 |                        |Sudan's JEM                    |
|19 November      |Libyan Express          |Armed clashes close Tripoli    |
|                 |                        |downtown street                |
|15 November      |United Nations Office   |OCHA: 2017 Humanitarian Needs  |
|                 |for the Coordination of |Overview: Libya [Part I:       |
|                 |Humanitarian Affairs    |Summary]                       |
|2 November       |Libya Herald            |Serraj blames Hafter, Saleh,   |
|                 |                        |Elkaber and Ghariani for       |
|                 |                        |Libya's problem                |
|2 November       |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: Civilians under Siege in|
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|1 November       |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties                     |
|November         |Libya Focus             |Good news, bad news: oil       |
|                 |                        |exports resume, while the      |
|                 |                        |council struggles              |
|November         |United Nations Office   |OCHA: Humanitarian Bulletin -  |
|                 |for the Coordination of |Libya                          |
|                 |Humanitarian Affairs    |                               |
|31 October       |United Nations Support  |Martin Kobler: Unacceptable to |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Fight, Particularly in         |
|                 |                        |Residential Area to Assert     |
|                 |                        |interest; Urge Parties in      |
|                 |                        |Zawiya to Stop Fighting        |
|26 October       |NATO Parliamentary      |The Expansion of Daesh to Libya|
|                 |Assembly                |and the Western Mediterranean  |
|25 October       |United Nations Office   |Humanitarian Bulletin Libya    |
|                 |for the Coordination of |                               |
|                 |Humanitarian Affairs    |                               |
|17 October       |VOA News                |Rival governments vie for      |
|                 |                        |control of Libya               |
|9 October        |Libya Herald            |Testimony of a mid-week,       |
|                 |                        |daytime Tripoli armed robbery  |
|                 |                        |and car-jack victim            |
|6 October        |Armed Conflict Location |Conflict Trends (No.52):       |
|                 |and Event Data Project  |Real-Time Analysis of African  |
|                 |                        |Political violence, October    |
|                 |                        |2016 [Libya Excerpt]           |
|1 October        |United Nations Support  |Human Rights Report on Civilian|
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Casualties                     |
|28 September     |AR3 Magazine            |After the Fall: Life Returns to|
|                 |                        |Benghazi                       |
|27 September     |United Nations Support  |33rd session of the Human      |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Rights Council: Oral update of |
|                 |                        |the United Nations High        |
|                 |                        |Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|                 |                        |on Libya pursuant to Human     |
|                 |                        |Rights Council resolution 31/27|
|27 September     |United Nations Support  |Special Representative of the  |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |Secretary-General and Head of  |
|                 |                        |the United Nations Support     |
|                 |                        |Mission in Libya pursuant to   |
|                 |                        |Human Rights Council resolution|
|                 |                        |31/27                          |
|26 September     |United Nations Office   |Humanitarian Bulletin Libya    |
|                 |for the Coordination of |                               |
|                 |Humanitarian Affairs    |                               |
|1 August         |Qantara.de              |Qantara (Germany), Libya:      |
|                 |                        |Facing hell in Sirte           |
|24 July          |United Nations Office   | Humanitarian Bulletin Libya   |
|                 |for the Coordination of |                               |
|                 |Humanitarian Affairs    |                               |
|23 July          |Libya Herald            |Tripoli as a kidnap capital    |
|18 July          |United Nations Security |Report of the Secretary-General|
|                 |Council                 |on the threat posed to Libya   |
|                 |                        |and neighbouring countries     |
|18 May           |Human Rights Watch      |We Feel We Are Cursed: Life    |
|                 |                        |Under ISIS in Sitre, Libya     |
|24 February      |Middle East Eye         |Cautious hope as residents     |
|                 |                        |return to 'liberated' Benghazi |
|15 February      |Human Rights Council    |Investigation by the Office of |
|                 |                        |the United Nations Commissioner|
|                 |                        |for Human Rights on Libya:     |
|                 |                        |detailed findings              |
|10 February      |Office of the United    |UN Chiefs call for             |
|                 |Nations High            |international solidarity to    |
|                 |Commissioner for Human  |address migrant and refugee    |
|                 |Rights                  |flows in Libya                 |
|2016             |US Department of State  |Libya 2016 Human Rights Report |
|2016             |Political Map           |Political Map of Libya - Ezilon|
|                 |                        |Map                            |
|2016             |Political Map           |Political Map of Libya         |
|2016             |ReliefWeb               |Internal Displacement in Libya |
|2016             |Freedom of Press        |Libya - Freedom of the press   |
|2016             |Human Rights Watch      |Libya: Events of 2016          |
|                                                                          |
|2015                                                                      |
|16 November      |United Nations Support  |Report on the Human Rights     |
|                 |Mission in Libya        |situation in Libya             |
|October          |Office of the United    |UNHCR Position on Returns to   |
|                 |Nations High            |Libya - Update 1               |
|                 |Commissioner for Human  |                               |
|                 |Rights                  |                               |
|September        |Reliefweb               |2015 Libya - Humanitarian Needs|
|                 |                        |Overview                       |
|28 August        |Aljazeera.com           |For Benghazi's displaced, no   |
|                 |                        |help and no dignity            |
|5 June           |Libyan Express          |800 displaced families from    |
|                 |                        |Sirte arrive in Tobruk         |
|5 June           |Libyan Express          |More than 800 displaced        |
|                 |                        |families arrive from the city  |
|                 |                        |of Sirte to Tobruk (inc English|
|                 |                        |translation)                   |
|2015             |Reuters                 |Armed clashes west of Tripoli  |
|                 |                        |forces families to flee (inc   |
|                 |                        |English translation)           |
|                                                                          |
|2014                                                                      |
|30 October       |Amnesty International   |Libya: Rule of the gun amid    |
|                 |                        |mounting war crimes by rival   |
|                 |                        |militias                       |
|29 October       |Amnesty International   |Libya: Rule of the gun -       |
|                 |USA                     |Abductions, torture and other  |
|                 |                        |militias abuses in Western     |
|                 |                        |Libya                          |
|9 June           |UPI .com                |Libyan oil output plummeting   |
|                                                                          |
|2013                                                                      |
|19 November      |Amnesty International   |Libya: Rule of the gun         |
|14 November      |UN News                 |Amid surging violence in Libya |
|                 |                        |UN warns of potential          |
|                 |                        |displacement crisis            |
|                                                                          |
|2012                                                                      |
|14 September     |International Crisis    |Divided we stand: Libya's      |
|                 |Group                   |enduring conflicts             |




