
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Mohamed Bilal Jan) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department
(section 10 removal) IJR [2014] UKUT 00265 (IAC)

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 April 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE BEAN
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 r (ON THE application OF mohamed bilal jan)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant :    Mr Z Nasim, instructed by Mayfair, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


1. In assessing whether there is a proper basis for a challenge to a
   decision to remove an applicant, as a matter of general principle a
   decision will not be unlawful simply on the basis that there has been a
   failure expressly to explain why other options were not followed.
   However, there may be cases when an issue is raised before the decision
   is made relating to the course to be followed or to a particular
   mitigating circumstances relating to the applicant where that should be
   expressly considered in the decision.

2. A statutory appeal exercisable out of country is regarded by Parliament
   as an adequate safeguard for those who are removed under s.10 of the
   Immigration and Asylum Act and in the absence of special or exceptional
   factors judicial review is not the appropriate remedy: R (on the
   application of  Lim v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]
   EWCA Civ 773 ; R Nepal v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2009] EWCA Civ 359.

3. The First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider issues of
   procedural fairness and the lawfulness of the exercise of discretion when
   deciding to make a removal decision under the ground of appeal permitting
   a challenge on the basis that the decision is "otherwise not in
   accordance with the law".

                                  JUDGMENT


1.   This is a  claim  for  judicial  review  challenging  the  respondent's
    decision of 26 July 2013 to remove the applicant from the UK under  the
    provisions of s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  ("the  1999
    Act"). Permission was refused on the papers  on  16  January  2014  but
    following an application for oral reconsideration  was  granted  on  24
    March 2014 on the basis that properly  arguable  issues  arose  in  the
    light of the judgment in Thapa  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWHC 659 (Admin).

The Background

2.   The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan who arrived  in  the  UK  on  12
    February 2011 with valid leave to enter as a Tier 4  (Migrant)  Student
    until 14 June 2012, when he made an  in-time  application  for  further
    leave to  remain  in  the  same  capacity  on  14  June  2012  but  his
    application was refused on 17 January 2013.  He appealed  against  that
    decision successfully and he was granted further leave to remain  until
    3 November 2013 with a condition that he take no  work  except  a  work
    placement.

3.   On 26 June 2013  he  was  encountered  at  a  hairdresser's  in  Ilford
    working, so the respondent alleges: that  would  be  a  breach  of  the
    conditions attached to his  leave  to  remain.   He  was  detained  and
    interviewed.  He was, on the respondent's account, served with a notice
    of liability to  removal  (IS151A)  and  a  notice  of  an  immigration
    decision (IS151A part 2).   The first  notice  notified  the  applicant
    that he was a person in respect of whom removal directions may be given
    in accordance with s.10 of the 1999 Act as a person who had  failed  to
    observe conditions of his leave to enter or remain.  The  statement  of
    reasons set out on the form is as follows:

         "You are specifically considered a person who has worked in  breach
         of your conditions as a Tier 4 Student because you were encountered
         working today and you were granted leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
         Student from 3  July  2013  to  3  November  2013  with  conditions
         restricting you to no work."

4.   The second notice informed the  applicant  that  a  decision  had  been
    taken to remove him from the UK and that he was entitled to appeal  the
    decision under s.82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) but only after he had left the UK.  He then  sought
    legal advice and his solicitors  made  representations  on  his  behalf
    asserting that he had not breached the conditions of his leave and that
    his current detention was unlawful (letters of 29 July 2013, 13  August
    and 22 August 2013).

5.   On 24 September 2013 the judicial review claim  form  was  filed.   The
    details of the decision to be judicially reviewed at section  3  assert
    that it is an ongoing matter and the decision has not  been  served  on
    the applicant or his representatives.  A mandatory order is sought that
    the refusal/decision is served.  However,  the  grounds  raise  further
    issues  and  challenge  the  respondent's  decision   to   cancel   the
    applicant's leave to remain as a student without giving him a right  of
    appeal whilst in the UK.

6.   The grounds argue firstly that the applicant was not  served  with  the
    notice of decision and also  assert  that  the  respondent  erroneously
    concluded that he was working in the UK in breach of his conditions. It
    is argued  that  the  applicant  was  merely  observing  the  trade  of
    hairstyling as he has an interest and a fondness for it.   It  is  then
    argued that the respondent failed to follow her own policy  as  set  in
    the IDIs at chapter 50.6, that  there  was  no  firm  evidence  of  the
    applicant working in breach of his conditions and that any  breach  was
    not of sufficient gravity to warrant removal. The second ground  argues
    that the respondent erred by failing  to  give  the  applicant  an  in-
    country right of appeal and that an out of country  appeal  is  not  an
    effective  remedy.   It  is  then  argued  that  the  respondent  acted
    disproportionately  in  exercising  her  discretion  to  take   removal
    proceedings rather than refusing the application with a right of appeal
    on curtailment.  It is further argued that the decision is  flawed  for
    want of service and that there was a  failure  to  consider  article  8
    properly.

7.   The grounds are supported by a witness statement from the applicant  in
    which he agrees that he was present at the  hairdresser's  on  26  June
    2013 but says that he went to see a friend who was  working  there  and
    that he had always had a desire to learn hairstyling  and  cutting;  he
    had asked the owner if he could observe at the shop; the owner  had  no
    issue with this and permitted him to do so once or twice  a  week.   He
    denies that he was working.

8.   At the hearing before us a  further  witness  statement  was  submitted
    dated 4 April 2014.  The applicant confirms that he was present at  the
    hairdressers on 26 July 2013 but says that  he  was  not  cautioned  or
    given any sort of warning that he was being  formally  interviewed.  On
    his account, after the immigration officers came into the shop, he  was
    asked his name and he gave his full name and date of birth. He was then
    asked to place his fingers in a biometric impression reader and did so.
     He was asked how many days he worked, how many hours and for how  long
    but he confirmed that he did not work  there  but  was  observing.   He
    mentioned that he attended the shop two days a week and had been  doing
    so for the past two weeks.  He asserts that he was not with a  customer
    or cutting anyone's hair as claimed by the respondent and that  he  had
    never breached the conditions of his leave to  remain.   He  says  that
    following his arrest, he did not receive the notices of  his  liability
    to removal or of the immigration decision.

9.   His evidence is in direct contradiction with the evidence now filed  on
    behalf of the  respondent.   There  is  a  witness  statement  from  an
    immigration officer saying that when she and other officers  went  into
    the hairdresser's, there was one male employee, the applicant, with two
    customers.  He was interviewed under caution and when asked  how  often
    he worked here he replied "two days a week, Friday and Saturday."  When
    asked how many hours he worked,  he  said  "between  9.30  to  14.30  /
    15.00".  When asked how much he was paid he said "I don't  get  paid  I
    get paid in food". He was asked how long he had  worked  there  and  he
    said he started two months  ago.   When  was  asked  how  the  training
    related to his studies, he replied that after  studies  he  worked,  he
    loved the work. According to the witness statement, the applicant  then
    finished off dealing with the customer, took off his robe  and  brushed
    the hair off him  before  the  customer  was  allowed  to  leave.   The
    applicant was then arrested.

10.  The witness statement is supported by a copy of the notes of  interview
    which, if correct, show that the applicant was cautioned and asked  the
    questions  already  set  out  in  the  witness  statement  and  further
    questions about any mitigating  circumstances.   The  time  of  arrest,
    caution, entry and search are also recorded.  The case record sheet has
    also been produced, repeating in substance  what  is  set  out  in  the
    witness statement and the notes of interview.

11.  The grounds of defence argue that the applicant was  personally  served
    with the relevant notices and that this had been acknowledged  by  him.
    In consequence his detention was and remained  lawful.   The  applicant
    was not entitled to an in-country right of appeal as  statute  provided
    for an appeal exercisable only once  he  had  left  the  UK.    On  the
    evidence available to the respondent it was reasonable to conclude that
    the applicant was working in breach of his conditions  and  to  make  a
    removal decision under s.10 of the 1999 Act. There was no  evidence  to
    support the contention  that  the  decision  engaged  article  8.   The
    applicant had been granted leave to remain as a student for the purpose
    of studying.  His arguments lacked substance  and  seemed  little  more
    than a last minute attempt to frustrate removal.

The Legislative Framework

12.   We  will  now  set  out  the  statutory  framework  relevant  to  this
    application.  It is provided by s.10 of the 1999 Act as follows:

          "10 Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom


              (1) A person who is not a British citizen may be removed from
                 the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions given  by
                 an immigration officer, if -


                 a) having only a limited leave to enter or remain, he  does
                    not observe a condition attached to the leave or remains
                    beyond the time limited by the leave; ...


              (8) When a person is notified that a decision has  been  made
                 to  remove  him  in  accordance  with  this  section,   the
                 notification invalidates any leave to enter  or  remain  in
                 the Untied Kingdom previously given to him."

13.  An immigration decision is defined in s.82 of the 2002 Act as follows:

         "(1) where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
             he may appeal to
                     an adjudicator.


         (2)  In this part 'immigration decision' means -
             "...
             (e)  variation of a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom if when  the  variation  takes  effect  the
                  person has no leave to enter or remain
             ...
             (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a),  (b),
                  (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (c.33)
                  (removal of a person unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom),
                  ..."


14.  The grounds of appeal against an immigration decision are  set  out  in
    s.84(1) of the 2002 Act and include the following:

             "(c)     that the decision is unlawful under section 6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not to act
                  contrary   to   Human   Rights   Convention)   as   being
                  incompatible with the appellant's convention rights; ...
             (e)       that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with
             the law; ...
             (g)      that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom
                  in consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach
                  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
                  Convention or would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the
                  appellant's Convention rights."

15.  The restrictions on the right to appeal within the United  Kingdom  are
    set out in s.92 of the 2002 Act as follows:


         "(1)     A person may not appeal under Section 82(1) while he is in
             the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of  a  kind  to  which
             this section applies.
         (2)  This Section applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
             decision of a kind  specified  in  Section  82(2)(c),  (d)(e),
             (f)(ha) and (j).
         ...
         (4)  This section also applies to an appeal against an  immigration
             decision if the appellant -
             (a) has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while
                  in the United Kingdom,
              ..."
16.  It is further provided by s.95 of the 2002 Act that:

        "A person who is outside the United Kingdom may  not  appeal  under
        section 82(1) (on the grounds specified in section 84(1)(g)  except
        in a case to which section 94(9) applies)."

17.  We have also been referred to the Enforcement Instruction and  Guidance
    (EIG) and in particular  chapter  50  relating  to  persons  liable  to
    removal under s.10. At 50.6 on working in breach it is said:-


         "A person is liable to administrative removal under Section  10  if
         found to be working in breach of a restriction  or  prohibition  on
         employment.  The breach must be of sufficient  gravity  to  warrant
         such action.


         There must be firm and  recent  evidence  (within  six  months)  of
         working in breach, including one of the following:

         .    An admission under caution  by  the  offender  of  working  in
             breach
         .    A statement by the employer implicating the suspect;
         .    Documentary evidence  such  as  payslips,  of  the  offender's
             details on the payroll, NI records, tax records, P45;
         .    Sight by the IO, or by a police officer who gives a  statement
             to that effect, of the offender working, preferably on two  or
             more separate occasions, on  one  occasion  over  an  extended
             period, or if wearing the  employee's  uniform,  in  practice.
             This should generally be backed by other evidence.   Statutory
             codes of practice  (under  the  Regulation  and  Investigatory
             Powers Act 2000, regulate the use of covert  surveillance  and
             covert human sources (informants), see 32.8."

18.  On the issue of curtailment,  the  grounds  refer  to  Section  2.2  of
    Chapter 9 Section 5 of IDI, entitled "Variation of Stay -  Curtailment"
    as follows:

         "Although the provision to curtail exists where a person  fails  to
         observe the conditions of leave to enter, it will be more usual  to
         proceed  directly  with  administrative  removal  for   breach   of
         conditions (see chapter 13, section 2, Administrative Removal under
         s.10 of the 1999 Act).


         Curtailment therefore should only be considered where the  person's
         actions are not so serious as  to  merit  enforcement  action,  but
         where it would be inappropriate to let him remain for the  duration
         of his leave."

The Submissions

19.  In  his  submissions  Mr  Nasim  challenged  the  decision  under  five
    separate heads. The first related to the respondent's duties before the
    decision to remove was made. He argued that the decision had to be made
    properly and fairly including whether to adopt the enforcement route by
    removal rather than taking no action or  curtailing   leave  so  giving
    rise to an in-country right of appeal.  He  submitted  that  there  had
    been a complete failure on the part of the respondent  to  exercise  or
    even consider the discretion of what course to take, or  to  show  that
    the respondent had applied or considered the policy set out in  chapter
    50 of the EIG.  He further argued that the respondent  had  a  duty  to
    consider other factors set out in para 395C, or as that  paragraph  had
    been repealed, the factors in chapter 53 of  the  EIG.   He  relied  in
    particular on the judgments in Thapa and on the issue  of  fairness  on
    Kabaghe (Appeal from outside UK - fairness) Malawi [2011] UKUT 00473.

20.  He submitted secondly, so far as the duty  at  the  time  of  making  a
    decision was concerned, that the respondent was under a duty to  ensure
    that the relevant notices were properly served, whereas in the  present
    case they had not been served, and further, that the appeal  forms  had
    failed to inform the applicant that it was open to him to make a  human
    rights claim.  He submitted, thirdly,  that  the  respondent  had  also
    failed in her duties after the decision to remove was made because  she
    had failed to serve a s.120 notice under the 2002  Act.   Fourthly,  he
    argued that  there  was  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  because  in
    substance  the  fact  that  the  removal   decision   invalidated   the
    applicant's leave meant that his leave had been varied such as to bring
    his leave to an end.  He argued, finally, that if  the  applicant  only
    had an out of country appeal, this was not an adequate remedy  for  the
    reasons given in Thapa  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  not  have
    jurisdiction  to  consider  the  exercise  of  discretion  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and he would not be able to argue that  the  decision
    was in breach of his human rights.

21.  Mr Malik submitted on behalf of the respondent that  the  proper  focus
    when challenging the lawfulness of  the  decision  to  remove  was  the
    rationality and legality of that decision and there was no  requirement
    without more to explain why a different decision such as curtailment or
    taking no action was not made.  He argued that in any event  the  terms
    of the notice of the removal  decision  and  the  record  of  interview
    showed  that  the  decision  maker  had  appreciated  that  there   was
    discretion and had been entitled to find that this was  a  proper  case
    for removal under s.10.  The exercise of that power was  plainly  fair,
    rational and lawful.  There had been no obligation on the respondent to
    serve a notice under s.120.  There was clear evidence that  the  proper
    notices had been served on the applicant.

22.  He submitted that it was not open to the applicant  to  argue  that  he
    had an in-country right of appeal in the light of the judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in RK  (Nepal)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 359.  Judicial review was not appropriate or
    necessary as there was an out of country appeal in which  all  relevant
    matters could be considered: R (Lim) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 773.  There were no special  or  exceptional
    factors which justified the exercise  of  discretion  to  entertain  an
    application for judicial review.   He submitted that  the  decision  of
    Coulson J in R (Zahid) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 4290  (Admin)  was  correctly  decided  whereas  Thapa  was
    wrongly decided on the issue of the availability of judicial review and
    should not be followed.

The Issues

(i)  The Respondent's Duties Before Making the Decision to Remove

23.  We will deal with the issues in the order followed by Mr Nasim  in  his
    submissions. We consider firstly the respondent's duties before  making
    a decision to remove.  We accept that the respondent has  a  discretion
    about the course to be taken when she has evidence that an applicant is
    working in breach of his conditions of entry.  It would be open to  her
    to take no action, to give a warning, to curtail leave or to decide  to
    give  a  removal  direction  under  s.10.   The  heart  of  Mr  Nasim's
    submission on this issue in the present case is that there has  been  a
    failure, either to consider the exercise of that discretion or to  give
    reasons why the  discretion  has  been  exercised  to  make  a  removal
    decision.   He places reliance on Thapa where, on the facts before her,
    the Deputy Judge noted at [48] that

         "there [was] nothing which [indicated] that the defendant's officer
         was even aware that she was exercising a discretion"

     and at [56] that

         "Once it was conceded that there was a discretion as to whether  to
         take enforcement action and if so which type of enforcement  action
         against those lawfully present  but  judged  to  be  in  breach  of
         condition of leave, the decision maker must record such facts as to
         enable this court to satisfy itself that the  decision  as  to  the
         existence of precedent fact and consequent exercise of a discretion
         has been exercised fairly."

24.  However, we are not satisfied as a matter of general principle  that  a
    decision will be unlawful simply on the basis that  there  has  been  a
    failure expressly to explain why other options were not followed.   The
    issue before us in this case is whether there is a proper basis  for  a
    challenge to the respondent's decision to remove the applicant.  We are
    satisfied firstly, that there was a proper basis in the evidence before
    the decision maker to conclude that the applicant was working.  He  was
    seen  by  immigration  officers  cutting  a  customer's   hair   in   a
    hairdresser's.  He was interviewed and was recorded as  admitting  that
    he worked two days a week between 9.30 and 14.30 / 15.00 having started
    two months previously and that, although he did not get  paid,  he  was
    paid in food.  We are also satisfied that the decision was based on the
    guidance in the EIG chapter 50.6.   The applicant's conditions of leave
    prevented him from working, save on a placement.  Working for two  days
    a week for two months was unarguably a breach of sufficient gravity  to
    warrant removal.  There was both an admission under caution of  working
    in breach and sight by immigration officers of the  applicant  working,
    albeit on one occasion. In those circumstances we approach the case  on
    the basis of the facts as put forward in the respondent's evidence. The
    applicant cannot realistically complain of this, since judicial  review
    (as opposed to a statutory appeal) is generally an inappropriate  forum
    for resolving disputed issues of fact.

25.  In any event, we are satisfied that  the  decision  maker  was  clearly
    aware that he had a discretion. The interview  records  that  questions
    were asked about any mitigating circumstances,  and  there  would  have
    been no purpose in these questions if the Immigration Officer  had  not
    have been aware of the fact that he had a discretion as to  the  course
    to be taken when there was a breach of the conditions of working.

26.  It was argued that the respondent also erred  by  failing  to  consider
    all relevant factors before making her decision.  The grounds refer  to
    the duties under para 395C but  that  cannot  bind  the  respondent  in
    circumstances when it has been revoked.  In the alternative,  Mr  Nasim
    argued that exceptional circumstances should be taken into  account  in
    accordance with chapter 53 of the EIG and in any  event  in  a  removal
    case there is an obligation arising on grounds of fairness to  consider
    all relevant matters. We are satisfied that  the  primary  focus  in  a
    removal case involving working in breach of conditions should be on the
    facts of the breach and whether it is of sufficient gravity to  warrant
    removal.  The provisions of chapter  53  are  not  applicable  to  this
    process.

27.  In his submissions Mr Nasim also challenged whether the decision  maker
    had followed the proper procedures when arresting and interviewing  the
    applicant.  However it is clear from the notebook  that  the  applicant
    was cautioned and that the  "caution plus 2" procedure, as set  out  in
    EIG Chapter 37.2, was followed.

28.  In summary, we are satisfied that there was power to  make  a  decision
    under s.10 to remove  the  applicant.   There  was  ample  evidence  to
    support a finding that he was working and that the breach  was  serious
    and would be regarded as such.  We are not satisfied that the  decision
    maker was unaware that there was a discretion to be exercised  or  that
    there is any error in failing to  deal  expressly  with  the  issue  of
    discretion in deciding what decision should be made.  It is clear  from
    the IDI referred to in the grounds that curtailment would normally only
    be appropriate in circumstances where the breach was not regarded as of
    sufficient severity to justify removal.  This is a case where a removal
    decision was rationally and lawfully made and  it  necessarily  follows
    that the respondent was entitled to take the view that this was not  an
    appropriate case for a curtailment decision or  for  no  action  to  be
    taken.

29.  We are also satisfied that the  notice  of  decision  and  the  reasons
    given were adequate to indicate why the decision was  taken.   This  is
    not a case where there needed to be any express reference  to  why  the
    discretion was exercised to make a  removal  decision.   There  may  be
    cases when an issue is raised before the decision is made  relating  to
    the course to be followed or  to  particular  mitigating  circumstances
    relating to the applicant where that should be expressly considered  in
    the decision.  This is not such a case (unlike  perhaps  the  facts  in
    Thapa where there may have been such factors). It has not  been  argued
    that any specific factors were not  taken  into  account,  simply  that
    factors in  general  were  not  considered.   We  also  note  that  the
    applicant's own witness statements do not  raise  any  such  issue  but
    focus on his denial that he was working.

30.    It was argued that the respondent failed in her duty of fairness  but
    in substance this is an aspect of the argument that the reasons for not
    pursuing the curtailment option had not  been  specifically  addressed.
    In the light of  the  respondent's  published  policy  on  how  removal
    decisions would be made when there is evidence  that  an  applicant  is
    working, no issue arises of procedural unfairness in the present  case.




(ii) The Respondent's Duties at the Time of Making the Decision

31.  Under this head it was argued that the respondent was under a  duty  to
    ensure that the relevant notices were  properly  served  and  that  the
    correct rights of appeal were identified.   There is  no  substance  in
    the argument that the notices  were  not  properly  served.   There  is
    evidence on the face of  the  notices  that  they  were  given  to  the
    applicant.  It was argued that the notice does  not  properly  identify
    the right of appeal but it does indicate that he has a right of  appeal
    on the basis that the decision is unlawful because it  is  incompatible
    with his rights under the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
    appeal in this case would be under the provisions of s.84(1)(c) whereas
    there is  no  right  of  appeal  under  s.84(1)(g)  by  reason  of  the
    provisions  of  s.95.   Mr  Nasim  sought  to  rely  on  the   Tribunal
    determination in Kabaghe but that decision was primarily concerned with
    issues of fairness in the decision making process.  It is not authority
    for the proposition that there is no right of appeal from  outside  the
    United Kingdom under s.84(1)(c).  The summary of the  statutory  scheme
    at [29] must be read in the light of the fact that whilst s.95 prevents
    an appeal from outside the UK under  s.84(1)(g)  there  is  no  similar
    restriction in respect of an appeal under s.84(1)(c).

(iii)    Duties After Making the Decision

32.  Under this head it was argued that there was a duty on  the  respondent
    to serve a s.120 notice under the 2002 Act but there is no substance in
    this argument.   In Lamichhane  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 260 the Court of Appeal made it  clear  that
    this section conferred a discretionary power, a  decision  approved  by
    the Supreme Court in Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2013] UKSC 72 by Lord Carnwath at [27].  There was therefore  no  duty
    on the respondent to serve a s.120 notice.

(iv) Whether there is an in-Country Right of Appeal

33.  We are satisfied that there is not an in-country right of appeal.   The
    applicant's leave is invalidated by virtue of s.10(8) of the  1999  Act
    when a decision to remove is made.  In so far as reliance was placed on
    the Tribunal determination in CD (s.10 curtailment:  right  of  appeal)
    India [2008] UKAIT 00055, this  was  specifically  disapproved  by  the
    Court of Appeal in RK (Nepal), Aikens LJ saying at [37]:

          "37. Accordingly, I would conclude that CD was wrongly decided and
          that Saleh was correct.   Since  the  hearing  before  us  I  have
          discovered the decision of Wilkie J in R (Qinuyu) v  Secretary  of
          State for the Home Department.  It was handed down on  16  October
          2008, that is, before the decision in Saleh, which was handed down
          on 1 December 2008.  In his judgment, Wilkie  J  had  to  consider
          whether CD was wrongly decided, as submitted on behalf of the SSHD
          in that case.   He  held,  at  paragraph  29,  that  it  was,  for
          essentially the same reasons I have attempted to give."


34.  The judgment in RK (Nepal) makes it clear that there  is  no  right  of
    appeal under s.82(2)(e).  It is not arguable that the  invalidation  of
    leave by virtue of s.10(8) of the 1999 Act is a variation of  leave  to
    enter or remain.

(v)  Alternative Remedy:  is  it  appropriate  for  Judicial  Review  to  be
    granted?

35.  This issue was considered by the Court of Appeal in  Lim.   The  appeal
    turned on the propriety of  using  judicial  review  to  challenge  the
    factual basis of a removal decision against which  an  out  of  country
    appeal lay to the AIT.  The applicant had been found working in  breach
    of his  conditions.   It  was  a  less  serious  breach  than  in  this
    application as the applicant did not observe  a  condition  of  working
    only at one particular restaurant: he was found working at a  different
    restaurant also  owned  by  his  employer.   Sedley  LJ  described  the
    decision as "a colossal over-reaction to what, even if  proved,  was  a
    venial breach of condition" [27].  Nonetheless,  the  Court  held  that
    judicial review was a remedy of a last resort so that where a  suitable
    statutory appeal was available the Court would exercise its  discretion
    in all save exceptional cases by declining to entertain an  application
    for judicial review.  It was held that where  a  statutory  channel  of
    appeal existed, in the absence of special exceptional factors the  High
    Court would refuse any exercise  of  its  discretion  to  entertain  an
    application for judicial review.

36.  That decision was endorsed and approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  RK
    (Nepal) where Aikens LJ said:

         "33. The importance of that decision lies in its  emphasis  on  the
             appeal structure that Parliament has laid down in the 2002 Act
             with respect to various types of 'immigration decision'.   The
             courts must respect that  framework,  which  is  not  open  to
             challenge in the courts by way of judicial review unless there
             are 'special  or  exceptional  factors'  at  play.  Therefore,
             except  where   such   'special   exceptional   factors'   can
             successfully be invoked so as to  give  rise  to  a  right  to
             judicial review, the court must accept that an out of  country
             right of appeal is  regarded  by  Parliament  as  an  adequate
             safeguard for those who are removed under section  10  of  the
             1999 Act.


         34.  It is plain in this case that the  immigration  decision  made
             against the applicants was one under section 10(1)(a)  of  the
             1999 Act. That is what was stated in the form IS151A that  was
             served on each of the applicants. There is no issue concerning
             their non-British citizenship.  It is also clear, as a  matter
             of fact, that the reason  for  the  removal  from  the  UK  in
             accordance with directions given by an Immigration Officer  is
             that they both obtained limited leave to enter and  remain  in
             the UK and that this leave was  subject  to  conditions.  They
             have broken those conditions in  the  manner  I  have  already
             described. Those facts fall squarely within  section  10(1)(a)
             of the 1999 Act.
         ...


         36.  Parliament has decided that the SSHD can make  a  decision  to
             remove a non-UK citizen under Section 10(1) of the  1999  Act,
             or by using the  curtailment  provisions  of  the  Immigration
             Rules. The two routes are distinct and must not be blurred. If
             the SSHD decides to use the section 10(1) procedure, then that
             can only be  challenged  in  the  very  limited  circumstances
             described by Sedley LJ in Lim. If that is not possible (and it
             has not been attempted at all in this case) then the applicant
             is confined to an out of country right of appeal."
37.  In Thapa, the Deputy Judge took the view that an out of country  appeal
    was not an adequate remedy in that case firstly because  the  challenge
    was not to a question of law or fact which would be  for  consideration
    by the First-tier Tribunal but to the question of whether the  decision
    to remove rather than some other or no enforcement  action  was  lawful
    and appropriate.  She held that it was not a challenge to the  decision
    under s.10(1) of the 1999 Act but to  the  prior  decision  to  proceed
    under that section at all.  However, that overlooks the fact  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal does  have  the  jurisdiction  to  consider  issues
    relating both to fairness  and  to  whether  the  respondent  erred  by
    failing to appreciate that there was a discretion  whether  or  not  to
    make a removal decision.  These issues can be considered by the  First-
    tier Tribunal and there is nothing to suggest that such arguments could
    properly  be  treated  as  special  or  exceptional.   Further,  it  is
    artificial to say that there is a separate prior decision which can  be
    challenged separately from a challenge to the removal decision.
38.  These issues fall within the  ground  challenging  a  decision  on  the
    basis that it was  "otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  as
    provided in s.84(1)(c) of the  2002  Act.   In  Kabaghe  at  [36],  the
    President, Blake J said:
        "Third, we remind immigration judges and the  respondent  that  the
        statutory jurisdiction to consider whether an immigration  decision
        is in accordance with the law includes consideration of whether the
        decision has been made fairly because there is a public law duty on
        the Secretary of State to act fairly:  see discussion in  Macdonald
        Eighth Edition at 19.09 citing Singh v Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
        [1986] Imm AR 352;  D.S. Abdi  v  SSHD  [1996]  Imm  AR  148;    BO
        (Nigeria) [2004] UKIAT 00026; AG (Kosovo) [2007] UKAIT  00082;   AA
        (Pakistan)  [2008] UKAIT  00003 and HH (Iraq) [2008]  UKAIT  00051.
        These principles have been  applied  in  the  Upper  Tribunal:  see
        Thakur (PBS decision - common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011]  UKUT
        151 (IAC) and Patel (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -  fairness)
        India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC)."
39.  It is of course important that these comments are read in  the  context
    of what the President, Blake J, said in Fiaz (cancellation of leave  to
    remain - fairness [2012] [UKUT 00057] IAC at [34]:
         "We would add that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to  determine
        that a decision is not in accordance with the law because of a lack
        of fairness, is not to be degraded to a general judicial  power  to
        depart from  the  Rules  where  the  judge  thinks  such  a  course
        appropriate or to turn a mandatory factor into a discretionary one.
         Fairness in this context is essentially procedural:  a  course  of
        action that prevents the claimant from drawing a relevant  document
        or other information to the attention of  the  decision  maker,  or
        preventing the claimant from switching  colleges  to  one  that  is
        currently  approved  by  the  Secretary  of   State   rather   than
        substantive: an  untrammelled  exercise  of  discretion  to  permit
        people to remain  who have failed to use the   previous  permission
        for the purpose for which it was granted  and  who  have  no  other
        claim to remain under the rules."

40.  It must inevitably follow that the Deputy Judge was wrong to  take  the
    view that  the  facts  in  Thapa  raised  issues  falling  outside  the
    jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal.  Further, there is nothing  to
    suggest that such issues could  properly  be  regarded  as  special  or
    exceptional, and it is artificial to say that there is a distinct prior
    decision which can  be  challenged  separately  from  the  decision  to
    remove.
41.  The second reason given was that the statutory procedure could  not  in
    fact provide a suitable alternative remedy  given  the  nature  of  the
    challenge as by the time the matter was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    in an out of country appeal it would be too late for  the  Tribunal  to
    apply an adequate remedy if it decided  that  inadequate  reasons  were
    given for rejecting the in-country appeal route.  However,  this  logic
    must apply equally to an appeal on the basis that the applicant was not
    in fact working.  No  rational  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  a
    challenge  to  whether  a  discretion  was  exercised  or  whether  the
    respondent wrongly concluded that the applicant was working.  The  view
    taken by the Deputy Judge in Thapa was, with respect, not open  to  her
    given the Court of Appeal decisions to which we have referred;  and  it
    is not open to us.
42.  The third reason given was that the amended grounds  raised  points  of
    considerable  wider  importance  as  to  the   fair   and   appropriate
    application of discretion and that there was a wider public interest in
    clarifying this point in the High Court.  However, as we  have  already
    indicated, the issue identified by the Deputy Judge was one which could
    be considered by the First-tier Tribunal and if that Tribunal erred  in
    law, there is a right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal which is now  the
    forum which in any event hears judicial review applications in relation
    to challenges to remove under s.10.
43.  We are therefore not satisfied that these are adequate  reasons  making
    it appropriate to apply for judicial review.  We have been referred  to
    the decision of Coulson J in R (Zahid) where he declined  to  entertain
    judicial review proceedings following  Lim  and  RK  (Nepal).   We  are
    satisfied that his was the correct approach  and  that  on  this  issue
    Thapa was wrongly decided and should not be followed.  In  the  present
    case there are no special or exceptional factors to justify a challenge
    by way of judicial review as opposed to the statutory  appeal  provided
    in primary legislation.
Conclusion
44.  For these reasons, there is, in our judgment, no  proper  basis  for  a
    challenge by judicial review to the respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    removal decision in the circumstances of this case.   This  application
    is accordingly dismissed.  Subject to  any  further  submissions  there
    appears  to  be  no  reason  why  the  applicant  should  not  pay  the
    respondent's costs on the standard basis to be assessed if not  agreed.





Signed                                  Dated:  30 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




