

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                        FH (Post-flight spouses) Iran [2010]
                                                              UKUT 275 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 13 July 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                             Lord Justice Sedley
                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins


                                   Between

                                     Fh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, TEHRAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood and Miss N Ismail, instructed by IAS
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer




   1. The Immigration Rules make no provision for  the  admission  of  post-
      flight spouses of refugees with limited leave.  The  Rules  should  be
      changed. In the mean  time  it  is  most  unlikely  that  it  will  be
      proportionate to refuse the admission of the spouse of a refugee where
      all the requirements of paragraph 281 are met save  that  relating  to
      settlement.


   2.  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  the  subject  of  a  declaration   of
      incompatibility under s.4 of the Human Rights Act  1998,  and  in  any
      event, a Tribunal has no power to make such a declaration.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the judgement of the Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iran. She appealed to  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on 4 March
      2009 refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  spouse
      of the sponsor, who is also a national of Iran, and is in  the  United
      Kingdom with leave as a refugee. Immigration Judge Rose dismissed  her
      appeal.   The   appellant   sought   and   obtained   an   order   for
      reconsideration, which under the provisions of paragraph 4 of Schedule
      4 to the Transfer of Functions of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal
      Order 2010 takes effect as a grant of permission  to  appeal  to  this
      Tribunal.

   The facts

   3. The sponsor was born in 1980. He came to the United  Kingdom  in  2002
      and claimed  asylum.  Following  an  appeal,  he  was  in  due  course
      recognised  as  a  refugee  on  the  basis  of   his   conversion   to
      Christianity, and granted  limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom. That grant was made on 15 May 2006 and was for (nearly)  five
      years: it expires, for some reason, on 11 May 2011. Under the terms of
      the Refugee Convention he  was  also  issued  with  a  Refugee  Travel
      Document.

   4. The appellant was born in 1976. She and the  sponsor  had  known  each
      other since 1999, and had been in contact since the sponsor left Iran.
      In 2008 they both travelled to Turkey, and were married  there  on  16
      November 2008. They then each returned to  their  countries  of  usual
      residence. The appellant applied on 4 February 2009 for a visit  visa,
      which was refused; she then applied on 17 February  for  a  settlement
      visa as the sponsor's wife. It is convenient to indicate at this point
      that the Immigration Judge found that the marriage was valid,  genuine
      and subsisting; and Mr Ouseley indicated to us, on the  basis  of  the
      evidence that has been made available at  various  stages  during  the
      course of this appeal, that there was no doubt that, at  the  date  of
      the decision and now, the sponsor's financial circumstances were  such
      that the appellant would be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately
      without recourse to public funds in the manner required  by  paragraph
      281 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395  insofar
      as that paragraph applies to the appellant.

   The Immigration Rules

   5. We turn, then, to the Immigration Rules. The  Rules  which  appear  to
      touch the appellant's situation most closely are  paragraphs  281  and
      352A. We set them out below omitting parts  which  are  certainly  not
      relevant to the present appeal.

         "281.    The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the spouse of
         a person present and settled in the United Kingdom or who is on the
         same occasion being admitted for settlement are that:

             (i) (a)     the applicant is married to a person  present  and
                  settled in the United Kingdom  or  who  is  on  the  same
                  occasion being admitted for settlement ....

             (ii)      the parties to the marriage have met; and

              iii) each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the
                   other  as  his  or  her  spouse  and  the   marriage   is
                   subsisting; and

               iv) there will be adequate accommodation for the parties  and
                   any  dependents  without  recourse  to  public  funds  in
                   accommodation which they own or occupy exclusively; and

                v) the parties will be available to maintain themselves  and
                   any dependants  adequately  without  recourse  to  public
                   funds ....

         352A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  a  refugee  are
         that:

                i) the applicant is married to a person  granted  asylum  in
                   the United Kingdom; and

               ii) the marriage did not take place after the person  granted
                   asylum left the country of his former habitual  residence
                   in order to seek asylum; and

              iii) the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection  by
                   virtue of article 1F of the United Nations Convention and
                   Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees if he were to
                   seek asylum in his own right; and

               iv) each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the
                   other  as  his  or  her  spouse  and  the   marriage   is
                   subsisting; ...."

   6. Those familiar with the Immigration Rules will be aware that paragraph
      281 is the normal  route  for  the  admission  of  a  foreign  spouse.
      Paragraph 352A arises from the United Kingdom government's  acceptance
      of a principle of family reunion for refugees. As will  be  seen  from
      its terms, paragraph 352A is limited to the spouses of those who  have
      been recognised as refugees; it differs also  from  paragraph  281  in
      that there is, for spouses of refugees, no financial  requirement:  it
      is not necessary to show that adequate maintenance  and  accommodation
      will be available without recourse to  public  funds.  The  phrase  "a
      person granted  asylum"  in  paragraph  352A(i)  was  the  subject  of
      authoritative interpretation by the Supreme Court in ZN  (Afghanistan)
      and others v Entry Clearance Officer [2010] UKSC  21.  The  Court  was
      there concerned with the family members of an  individual  who,  after
      being granted asylum, had subsequently attained  British  citizenship.
      The Secretary of State's argument was that the provisions of paragraph
      352A were no longer applicable and that the sponsor's  family  members
      should seek admission under the normal provisions  relating  to  those
      present and settled in the United  Kingdom  (in  other  words,  for  a
      spouse, paragraph 281, with its requirements  as  to  maintenance  and
      accommodation). The Supreme Court rejected that argument, holding that
      the grant of asylum was a historical fact and that a  person  who  had
      been granted asylum did not cease to be "a person granted  asylum"  if
      his status was no longer that of a  refugee  but  that  of  a  British
      citizen.

   7. That decision means that a person who was the sponsor's spouse  before
      he left his own country continues to benefit from  the  more  generous
      provisions of paragraph 352A  despite  any  change  in  the  sponsor's
      status in the United Kingdom. It does not assist the appellant in  the
      present case, however, because she was not the sponsor's spouse before
      he left Iran.

   8. Paragraph 281 does not assist the appellant either.  Although,  as  we
      have said, there is no dispute about the nature of the  marriage,  and
      the  appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  financial  requirements   of
      paragraph 281, the difficulty here relates to the requirement  in  the
      opening words of paragraph 281 that she be intending to join a  person
      "present and settled in the United  Kingdom".  That  phrase,  for  the
      purposes of the Immigration Rules, is defined in paragraph  6,  which,
      so far as relevant for present purposes, reads as follows:

         "'settled in the United Kingdom' means that the person concerned:

            (a)   is free from any restriction on the period  for  which  he
         may remain...

            (b)   is either:

                  (i)  ordinarily resident in the  United  Kingdom  without
                       having  entered  or  remained  in   breach   of   the
                       immigration laws; or

                  (ii) despite having entered or remained in breach of  the
                       immigration laws, has subsequently  entered  lawfully
                       or has been granted leave to remain and is ordinarily
                       resident."

   9. Subparagraphs (a) and (b) are  cumulative  requirements.  As  we  have
      said, the sponsor has limited leave to remain, until May next year. He
      is thus not "settled" for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  281,  and  it
      follows that the appellant is not entitled  to  admission  under  that
      paragraph.

  10. Neither paragraph 281 nor paragraph  352A  appears  to  admit  of  any
      argument as to ambiguity. It is not  for  the  Tribunal  to  write  or
      rewrite Immigration  Rules.  It  follows  that  the  appellant  cannot
      succeed under the Immigration Rules.

   Comparable situations

  11. The Secretary of State recognises that "post-flight spouses", such  as
      the appellant, cannot qualify under the  Immigration  Rules.  In  that
      respect, they are treated differently not only from pre-flight spouses
      (paragraph 352A) and the spouses of those settled in the UK (paragraph
      281), but also from the spouses of others granted temporary  leave  in
      the United Kingdom. The spouses of  students,  those  working  in  the
      United Kingdom, businessmen, artists, ministers of religion and so  on
      may obtain  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraphs  76  or
      (principally) 194, even though the sponsor has only limited leave, and
      even though the marriage took place after  the  sponsor  came  to  the
      United Kingdom. From that point of view, therefore, refugees are in  a
      particularly disadvantageous position. If, after leaving their country
      of nationality, they contract a marriage to a  person  who  is  not  a
      British (or EEA) national, the Immigration Rules do  not  provide  for
      the couple to live together in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  is,  as  we
      remarked at the hearing, odd that the refugee should be  disadvantaged
      in that way, because, unlike other persons with limited leave  in  the
      United Kingdom under the Rules, the refugee is  a  person  who  cannot
      return home to enjoy married life there.

  12. The disadvantage which we have identified is if anything rendered even
      more  surprising  by  ZN  (Afghanistan),  to  which  we  have  already
      referred. The Immigration Rules themselves provide for the  pre-flight
      spouse and family of a refugee to continue to be so treated even after
      the refugee himself is "settled". It begins to look as though the post-
      flight spouse of a refugee is indeed being treated in  a  particularly
      adverse way.

  13. The Secretary of State's position, put formally on behalf of the Entry
      Clearance Officer before us by Mr Ouseley, and similarly to the  Court
      of Appeal in A (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 825, is  that  the
      Secretary of State is entitled to make Immigration Rules in the  terms
      we have identified. In particular, the Secretary of State is  entitled
      to  distinguish  between  pre-flight  and  post-flight   families   of
      refugees, between those who are "settled" in the UK and those who  are
      not, and between the types of  temporary  presence  in  the  UK  which
      should attract the right to have a spouse here  too.  When  the  point
      arose in A (Afghanistan), the Court of Appeal described that  case  as
      involving "important policy issues". The Secretary of State asked  for
      time to deal with them in full. Time was granted, but  no  substantive
      answer was raised in time for the appellant to deal with  it.  Indeed,
      it was very shortly before the hearing in the Court of  Appeal  on  23
      July 2009 that the Secretary of State sought, in the words  of  Hooper
      LJ at [49]:

         "without the benefit  of  a  respondent's  notice  and  after  very
         considerable delay, to present  a  substantial  argument,  not  put
         before the AIT, that there  is  a  public  interest  in  drawing  a
         distinction between refugees and other  persons  granted  leave  to
         remain for a limited period".

      In the circumstances, the court refused  to  allow  the  Secretary  of
      State to develop that argument. It noted that the AIT had been  unable
      to identify the public interest on the basis of  the  material  before
      it. It allowed the appellant's appeal, but Hooper LJ noted at [52]:

         "I accept that the public interest arguments now submitted may lead
         to a Tribunal or Court in the future agreeing that in a  case  like
         the present it would not be a violation of Article 8 to prevent the
         spouse from joining the refugee. However, it would be desirable for
         that issue to be considered first by the AIT, given the  specialist
         knowledge of its members. It would not be desirable for the  issues
         to be considered in this court for the first time."

  14. The present appeal, so far as we are aware, is the  first  opportunity
      that the Tribunal has had to consider the matter. It is clear that  Mr
      Ouseley has endeavoured to obtain all the  information  he  could,  in
      order to put the Secretary of State's case before us in full.  Without
      any disrespect to Mr Ouseley, we think it is  fair  to  say  that  his
      success has been only moderate. In his written skeleton he points  out
      that the appellant does not qualify under paragraph 352A or  paragraph
      281, and continues as follows:

         "The issue of settled status

         Granting refugees limited leave rather than settlement in the first
         instance allows the refugee a period of integration  and  time  for
         reflection in case the situation in the country of origin  improves
         sufficiently for a return to be possible. It also  allows  for  any
         cases where asylum status has been gained fraudulently to be  acted
         upon more effectively and, at the end of the five-year period,  for
         UKBA officials to review whether the  situation  in  the  refugee's
         country of origin has improved sufficiently  for  there  to  be  no
         further need for protection. During their period of leave  refugees
         are permitted to be joined by the members of their existing  family
         and  are  encouraged  to  find  work  and  participate   in   local
         communities.  This  seeks  to  ensure  that  they   make   a   full
         contribution to the UK while here, and that the have the skills  to
         benefit their country of  origin  if  they  return  home.  Refugees
         without a pre-flight family who  subsequently  marry  and  wish  to
         commence a family life in the UK will clearly not be able to return
         to their country of origin to do so. That, by and large, means that
         anyone seeking leave to enter or remain to join a refugee  a  post-
         flight spouse will not be a refugee, and the UK will not  have  the
         same obligations  towards  them.  There  are  other  categories  of
         immigrant (e.g. work permit holders and students) whom UK wishes to
         attract to the UK for the contribution they make to the economy and
         the education sector. Not to allow them  to  bring  family  members
         here could detract from that goal. In  relation  to  refugees,  the
         Rules give effect to the UK's international  obligations  to  offer
         protection, but do not actively seek to encourage asylum seekers to
         come to the UK."

  15. In the course of his submissions, Mr Ouseley was challenged as to  the
      final sentiment. He accepted that it was not the task of the Secretary
      of State to encourage or discourage refugees,  but  to  process  their
      applications, in conformity with the  United  Kingdom's  international
      obligations.

  16. With that modification, however, Mr Ouseley's  written  skeleton,  and
      his brief oral expansion of it, is evidently the best the Secretary of
      State can offer, despite the passage  of  some  15  months  since  the
      application for an adjournment in A (Afghanistan)  in  order  to  deal
      with this very issue.

  17. In A (Afghanistan), the Court of Appeal noted that  the  Tribunal  had
      said this:

         "Until August 2005, those recognised  as  refugees  got  indefinite
         leave to remain, and they could by joined by their  spouses  either
         by way of Rule 352A, which was inserted from 18 September 2002, or,
         if they were not married  before  leaving  their  country  to  seek
         asylum,  by  way  of  Rule  281.  When  the  practice  of  granting
         indefinite leave to refugees ended in August 2005, it either was or
         was not appreciated that the second of these routes was now  closed
         off."

  18. The Tribunal (as cited by Hooper LJ at [47]), continued as follows:

         "17. It may be that the reason  why  refugees  with  limited  leave
         cannot generally be joined by their spouses whom they married after
         coming here to seek asylum is that this situation falls outwith the
         principle of refugee family reunion, namely that a family which has
         been sundered because one of its members had  to  flee  persecution
         ought to he reunited in the country of refuge.  But  why  should  a
         refugee who did not found a family before fleeing persecution be in
         a worse position than a businessman who may have got married abroad
         during the currency of his limited leave, and is not  prevented  by
         the Rules from being joined thereafter by his dependent spouse?  It
         can hardly be  said  that  the  former  enjoys  a  more  precarious
         immigration status than the latter. Both may apply  for  indefinite
         leave on the basis of five  years'  residence,  and  while  refugee
         status is said to be subject to 'active review' at this  point,  in
         practice indefinite leave is nearly always granted.  It  is  nearly
         always granted  to  businessmen  too,  but  likewise  that  is  not
         guaranteed.

         18. What then is the public interest  being  served  by  preventing
         refugees like the sponsor from being joined by  their  spouses?  No
         doubt it would be unduly cynical to suggest that asylum seekers may
         thereby be deterred from coming here in the first place. Or can  it
         be that the present position results from sheer inadvertence on the
         part of the Home Office? We have no way of knowing. ... We  at  any
         rate cannot identify a public interest in preventing refugees  like
         the sponsor from being joined by spouses whom they can maintain and
         accommodate adequately, when other categories of immigrant who  are
         here with limited leave, and who  may  not  be  intending  to  stay
         permanently, can be joined by theirs. Indeed, there seems to be  an
         inconsistency between delaying family  reunion  for  one  class  of
         refugee and encouraging all refugees to integrate  fully  into  the
         community once they have been granted asylum, a process  for  which
         the Home Office provides financial and other assistance."

  19. Mr Ouseley told us that  he  was  still  unable  to  say  whether  the
      consequence for spouses of the change of  policy  was  intentional  or
      unintentional. The position as it is before us is  that,  as  we  have
      indicated, the appellant and other post-flight spouses seem to be  the
      subject of particularly disadvantageous treatment; no public  interest
      in that treatment has been identified; the Secretary of State  is  not
      even able to say whether the difference is intentional; but the effect
      of the Rules is that the difference undoubtedly exists.

   Resolution

  20. Before us, both parties agreed that it was open  to  the  Tribunal  to
      allow the appellant's appeal on the  basis  that,  in  the  particular
      circumstances of her case, to refuse entry clearance would be a breach
      of her protected rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.
      Mr Ouseley made no remotely  spirited  attempt  to  suggest  that  the
      appeal should not be allowed simply  on  the  basis  that,  given  the
      Immigration Judge's findings of fact, it would be disproportionate  to
      refuse entry clearance in her case. He argued that, given  that  post-
      flight spouses cannot qualify under the Immigration Rules, they should
      be subject to an individual assessment on an Article 8 basis.  It  was
      always open to the Secretary of State or, if necessary, the  Tribunal,
      to produce a decision in an individual applicant's favour if the facts
      warranted it.

  21. Mr Mahmood drew his arguments from a rather wider spectrum. As well as
      an argument based on Article 8 alone, he submitted that the  treatment
      of post-flight spouses infringed  Article  14  (discrimination)  taken
      with Article 8, and Article 12 (the freedom to  marry).  He  suggested
      both originally and in  a  supplementary  skeleton  argument  produced
      during the hearing, that the Tribunal should make  a  "declaration  of
      incompatibility" of the existing Immigration Rules with  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights, because of the discrimination against post-
      flight spouses to be found in the Immigration Rules read as a whole.

  22. It  is  difficult  to  understand  quite  what  Mr  Mahmood  meant  by
      "declaration of incompatibility" in this context.  The  phrase  has  a
      precise meaning under Section 4 of the Human Rights Act 1998, but that
      relates to a declaration made by a court no lower than the High Court,
      that a  provision  of  primary  legislation  is  incompatible  with  a
      Convention Right. Although  this  Tribunal  is  a  superior  court  of
      record, it is not the High Court; and, as we understand it,  there  is
      no suggestion in Mr Mahmood's skeleton argument that any provision  of
      primary legislation is  incompatible  with  a  Convention  Right.  His
      arguments  relate  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  are  not  even
      "subordinate legislation" within the meaning of the Human  Rights  Act
      (see the definition in Section 21).

  23. So far as the present case is concerned,  it  is  not  suggested  that
      there is any country in the world other than the United Kingdom, where
      the appellant and the sponsor can live together as husband  and  wife.
      The appellant meets all the requirements of paragraph 281,  save  that
      relating to the sponsor's status in the United  Kingdom.  No  argument
      justifying her exclusion, on grounds that her exclusion would  in  the
      circumstances be proportionate, has been adduced by the respondent  or
      on his behalf. We have no hesitation in saying that in this case,  the
      Article 8 rights of the appellant and the sponsor demand that  she  be
      granted entry clearance. We shall therefore allow this appeal.

  24. Can we go further? It does no harm to remind ourselves that we  should
      be very cautious about using the European Convention on  Human  Rights
      to cover  perceived  defects  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  Rules  are
      essentially general, whereas rights  are  essentially  individual.  To
      that extent, we have considerable sympathy with Mr Ouseley's  argument
      that, while the Rules are as they are at present, an individual  post-
      flight spouse's remedy is in an individual assessment of the  relevant
      factors under Article 8.

  25. But, on the other hand, the appellant's situation is by  no  means  an
      unusual one, and it arises from provisions  of  the  Rules  for  which
      there  appears  to  be  no  justification.  Unless   there   is   some
      justification, of which we have not been made  aware,  of  the  Rules'
      treatment of post-flight spouses, we think that the Secretary of State
      ought to give urgent attention to amending  the  Rules,  by  extending
      either paragraph 281 or, (perhaps preferably) paragraph 194, so as  to
      extend to the spouses  of  those  with  limited  leave  to  remain  as
      refugees. In the mean time, it seems to us that  although  a  decision
      based on Article 8 does have to be an individual one in each case,  it
      is most unlikely that the Secretary of State  or  an  Entry  Clearance
      Officer will be able to establish that it is proportionate to  exclude
      from the United Kingdom the post-flight spouse of a refugee where  the
      applicant meets all  the  requirements  of  paragraph  281  save  that
      relating to settlement.

  26. For the reasons we have given, we  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      materially erred in law. We substitute a  determination  allowing  the
      appellant's appeal, and direct that entry clearance in the usual  form
      issue to her.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                       Vice President of the Upper Tribunal,
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber



