

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


     BN (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |                        |
|On 13 May 2010                          |                        |
|                                        |                        |


                                   Before

                             Mr Justice Ouseley
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter



                                   Between

                                     BN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr A Griggs
For the Respondent:           Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting
Officer

(1)   The Tribunal is entitled  to  reject  a  clinical  diagnosis  that  an
      appellant suffers from a depressive illness but  it  must  give  clear
      reasons for doing so which engage adequately with  a  medical  opinion
      representing the judgment of a professional psychiatrist  on  what  he
      has seen of the appellant.

(2)   In the present case where the psychiatric evidence  was  being  relied
      on to  provide  an  explanation  for  admitted  discrepancies  in  the
      appellant's evidence,  the  psychiatrists'  comment  on  the  role  of
      depression in explaining inconsistencies could not and  did  not  even
      purport  to  deal  with  all  the  aspects  of  the  claim  which  the
      Immigration Judge had found incredible.

(3)   On the facts  of  the  present  case  even  taking  the  diagnosis  as
      correct, it provided no reasonable explanation for the many aspects of
      the appellant's evidence and behaviour which led to the  rejection  of
      his claim as credible. Accordingly, if there were any error of law  in
      what the Immigration Judge had concluded in relation to the diagnosis,
      the error had no effect on the result.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.    The Appellant is a male citizen of Albania born in  1987  who  entered
      the United Kingdom clandestinely on 6 December 2008 and claimed asylum
      on 12 December 2008.  His application was refused in a detailed letter
      of 17 February 2009.  The basis of the asylum claim was  that  he  had
      deserted the army, into which he had been conscripted,  following  his
      discovery in the communal bathroom in the barracks having sex  with  a
      soldier.  He feared that he would go  to  prison,  that  he  would  be
      beaten up and tortured and that the brother  of  the  soldier  he  was
      discovered having sex with would kill him.

2.    In her determination of  7  August  2009,  Immigration  Judge  Ransley
      rejected his claim because she did not find these  incidents  credible
      or that he was a homosexual.  The appellant sought reconsideration  of
      that decision on the grounds that the Immigration Judge had  erred  in
      law in her consideration of two psychiatric reports,  which  diagnosed
      the appellant as suffering from depression.  One of these referred  to
      depression as  the  cause  of  the  discrepant  accounts  between  the
      screening interview and the asylum interview about  when  the  act  of
      homosexual intercourse happened.  The Immigration Judge, it was  said,
      had treated the date on which the  incident  was  said  to  have  been
      discovered as crucial in her rejection of the appellant's  credibility
      and to have erred in her rejection of the psychiatric  evidence  about
      depression and its significance.

3.    Reconsideration was ordered by Mr Justice  Langstaff  on  18  February
      2010.  He gave five reasons for  his  conclusion  that,  although  the
      Judge  was  not  bound   to   accept   expert   evidence   even   when
      uncontradicted, she had to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      diagnosis of depression which, it was said, went to what was  arguably
      the critical  point  in  the  Judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's
      credibility namely, the discrepancies over when this  sexual  incident
      occurred.  Arguably she had failed to give adequate reasons.

4.    The matter comes before us as if permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal has been given.  It is for us to decide whether there was  an
      error of law, and if so, whether it was material to the decision.   We
      accepted the submission that, were it to be material, the appeal would
      have to be considered with further evidence, which for various reasons
      was not available at the date of our hearing.

The processing of the claim

5.    In order to understand the significance  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
      approach, it is necessary to consider how matters developed before the
      appeal.

6.    At the screening interview, by which time the  appellant  had  already
      instructed his current solicitors, he gave a fairly  detailed  account
      of how he had left Albania in mid October 2008,  had  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom and about what he had done on arrival  here.   He  said
      that the reason for his coming to the United Kingdom was that  he  had
      been called up for military service in August 2008 until October 2008;
      he was mistreated by other soldiers because he was the only one from a
      particular area and had no friends.  He had been picked on because  he
      was found having sex with another man and would be tortured and beaten
      up if returned, and the brother of the other  soldier  involved  would
      kill him.

7.    Following that interview, his solicitors wrote to the Home  Office  on
      5 January 2009, saying there had been a misunderstanding  between  the
      appellant and the interpreter as to what he had said.  The  solicitors
      then enclosed, with a letter of 28 January 2009, a statement from  the
      appellant about what he said had happened at the  screening  interview
      and about what he had actually said.  The account in  this  statement,
      the letter said, was "somewhat different to the account  contained  in
      the screening interview", and the solicitors  expressed  concern  that
      the  interpreter  was  allowed  to  continue  to  interpret  for   the
      appellant.  The appellant's statement did indeed make complaints about
      the female interpreter, who he  felt  had  "maliciously  damaged"  his
      case.  He had been unable to understand her  accent  fully.   She  had
      accused him of lying about whether he had a phone number, had  accused
      him of lying throughout the interview and had taken his  mobile  phone
      out of his pocket without his consent.   She  had  talked  to  a  Home
      Office representative for at least 10-15 minutes, none  of  which  was
      interpreted  to  him.   The   questions   were   asked   in   a   very
      confrontational manner, leaving him extremely  nervous  and  confused.
      The interpreter accused him of lying about his cousin, whom  she  said
      was really his  fianc�e.   When  he  managed  to  have  the  screening
      interview translated, he said that he was shocked to  learn  what  had
      been written in it.  He then  set  out  what  he  said  was  the  true
      position in relation to his cousin, the details of his journey to  the
      UK and what happened on arrival. He did not suggest  that  the  August
      2008 date he had given for when he was conscripted into the  army  was
      wrong.

8.    The asylum interview in fact had  taken  place  on  27  January  2009.
      After that interview the solicitors wrote on 3 February  2009  to  the
      Home Office complaining that the same interpreter had been used.  They
      asked for a typed version of the interview but  using  such  interview
      notes as they had been able to decipher,  the  appellant  corrected  a
      number of his answers on points of detail.  None  of  the  corrections
      are of themselves germane to the issues in this appeal, save that they
      added to his answer to Question 151, which asked whether  he  had  any
      medical conditions and to which he had answered no, "the client is not
      well and this is what his answer should have  been,  he  misunderstood
      the question and believed he was  being  asked  about  [how  he  felt]
      during the interview.   The  client  suffers  from  depression".   The
      appellant had not been represented during that interview.  The absence
      of corrections to the substance of his other answers, coupled with the
      fact that he did correct some very detailed points, is however of some
      importance.

9.    The Secretary of State's refusal letter  of  17  February  2009  is  a
      detailed analysis of the claim that the appellant  was  a  homosexual.
      It went in considerable detail  through  inconsistencies  between  the
      asylum interview and the screening interview, and  improbabilities  in
      the account given in the asylum interview.  These  included  the  fact
      that in the asylum interview he said  that  he  had  started  military
      service on 15 June 2008, but had said that that was in August 2008  in
      his screening interview.  He suggested in his  asylum  interview  that
      his problems started on 20 July 2008 and dated the  incident  when  he
      was seen  having  sexual  intercourse  with  another  soldier  in  the
      communal baths to about two weeks after 20 July 2008.  The letter said
      that he could offer no explanation  as  to  why  this  difference  had
      arisen.  It also noted that he had been able to give several  specific
      dates in his asylum interview, but could not recall the specific  date
      of such a significant incident.

10.   Improbabilities were considered such as the  choice  of  the  communal
      bathroom for sexual intercourse with  another  soldier,  when  he  was
      trying to keep this sexual relationship secret.  He said that  he  had
      been ill treated by the other soldiers the next day, but they had  not
      pursued their threats because "the gong sounded and they  had  to  go"
      and the senior officer who found him tied up naked on the  ground  did
      not ask him why he was lying on the floor naked.  He also said that he
      had been stabbed whilst shaving by a fellow soldier a few weeks before
      because this solider had wanted to use the mirror  and  the  appellant
      had told him it was not his turn to do so.  He could only  state  that
      this stabbing had  happened  in  the  second  month  of  his  military
      service.  It was thought odd that he could give specific dates when he
      started the military, deserted the military,  left  Albania  and  left
      Kosovo, but could give no indication of the date of the incident  when
      he was stabbed.  He had said that he was  bleeding  severely  and  was
      left for dead, but had managed to get himself to hospital by  himself,
      walking to the pharmacy and then taking a taxi to  the  hospital.   He
      showed a scar on the right hand side of his back, which  is  where  he
      said it had happened.    It was thought unlikely that  he  would  have
      embarked on an  illicit  homosexual  relationship  with  another  male
      soldier in a communal area soon after his return to  barracks,  if  he
      had felt that he was already being targeted by other soldiers  because
      of where he came from.  He was never charged with any offence  against
      military discipline or any civilian offence.

11.   The letter also drew attention  to  differences  between  the  initial
      letter sent by the solicitors on 10 December 2008 outlining the basics
      of the claim, which included that he had escaped from military service
      because he did not agree with what he was seeing, said so,  and  as  a
      result was tortured, and what was said  at  the  screening  or  asylum
      interview.

12.   He also said in interview that he had told  his  legal  representative
      the details of his alleged homosexual  encounter  at  his  very  first
      meeting with his solicitors, but  they  had  only  referred  in  their
      letter of 10 December 2008 to a private matter which he wished to add,
      "but he is not  able  to  express  this  at  this  stage  and  further
      instructions will need to be obtained in this regard".   He  then  had
      said in interview that he had not told his solicitor about this at the
      first meeting, to explain the inconsistency, because  the  interpreter
      was a male interpreter who might torture him  like  the  soldiers  had
      done.  The solicitor's letter of 3 February  2009  explained  this  by
      saying that he had told them  of  his  homosexuality  at  their  first
      meeting but not in detail,  because  he  was  nervous  at  this  first
      meeting.  The SSHD pointed out that the letter made no reference to  a
      male interpreter and fear of torture as an  explanation,  although  it
      was what had been proffered at interview.

13.   The SSHD then turned to the letter from the solicitors of  3  February
      2009, dealing with Question 151, and pointed out that he had been told
      at    the    beginning    of    the    interview    to    raise    any
      understanding/interpretation issues and was asked at the  end  whether
      he was feeling fit and well and had understood all the questions.   It
      was noted that there had been no medical evidence yet  to  suggest  he
      was suffering from depression.  There were then specific rebuttals  of
      the claims about the interpreter's actions before the letter turned to
      inconsistencies between the two interviews over his account of how  he
      left Albania and then Kosovo.

The psychiatric evidence

14.   A hearing of the appeal was set for 5 June 2009.   The  appellant  was
      interviewed  for  a  medico-legal  report  by  Professor  Prasher,   a
      professor in Neuro-Developmental Psychiatry.   He  produced  a  report
      dated 5 May 2009.  The appellant gave  a  history  on  examination  of
      feeling "spaced out" and not  his  normal  self,  complaining  of  not
      eating or sleeping and of having nightmares especially of  the  police
      trying to catch him, and at times feeling that people were  trying  to
      harm him.   This made him  scared  of  being  found  and  returned  to
      Albania.  He was said to be on anti-depressants and sleeping  tablets,
      but his compliance with medication had been poor.   Professor  Prasher
      said of his mental state examination that the appellant presented with
      "quite marked psychomotor retardation during the interview  with  very
      little body and facial movement.  His speech was slow  and  monotonous
      and very few responses at times to questions. His speech  was  slurred
      and quite flat in tone, his mood was  low  but  there  were  no  overt
      hallucinations  or  delusions.   Rapport  was  not  established,   and
      cognitively he said that he did not know the day, month, or  year,  at
      times saying "nothing to do with me" to questions.  He  said  his  age
      was 21 but could not give his date of birth.  He was able to name  his
      Mom and Dad. He was able to answer the questions which were  asked  of
      him by the interpreter.  I was unable to formally test his memory."

15.   Professor Prasher's impression was that the appellant  presented  with
      being mentally unwell and his presentation was atypical.   There  were
      several possibilities, one of which was over-sedation with medication,
      the second was an underlying depressive illness  with  paranoid  ideas
      and the third was malingering.  The Professor could not say  which  of
      the three was the primary presentation and it could be  a  combination
      of two or three as well.  His level of intelligence  fell  within  the
      normal IQ range for an Albanian and he recommended  that  he  see  the
      appellant again when he had not been given medication for three  days,
      so as to exclude medication sedation as a cause of his presentation.

16.   On 4 June 2009, following a  further  examination,  Professor  Prasher
      provided another report.  The appellant had not taken  any  medication
      for the preceding few days.  He said  he  felt  a  little  better  but
      described much the same symptoms and, from the  report's  description,
      the mental state examination was very similar.  He was again unable to
      give the correct day, month or year, saying that was not in his  mind.
      He could not give his date of birth.  He was unable  to  remember  his
      parents' names  this  time,  saying  he  did  not  want  to  remember.
      Professor Prasher concluded that his mental state was not due  to  the
      effects of medication.  In his opinion  the  appellant  was  suffering
      from a "moderately severe depressive illness" with an  increased  risk
      of suicide; he required further and more appropriate treatment for his
      mental illness.

17.   Professor Prasher in response to a further letter of 4 June 2009  from
      the solicitors then offered two further opinions: "in my  medico-legal
      opinion [the appellant] is not fit to give  evidence  at  the  hearing
      arranged for 5 June 2009,  as my report states [the appellant] suffers
      from a mental illness-depressive state - as defined  by  World  Health
      Organisation criteria.  2. In my opinion  [the  appellant]  has  given
      different accounts to the Home Office due to his  mental  stage  being
      moderately depressed".  This is the first  time  those  opinions  were
      expressed and they were expressed in extremely short terms.

18.   The hearing shortly after this, at which the  appellant  was  present,
      was adjourned because the Home Office interpreter  was  the  very  one
      about whom the appellant  had  made  complaints  in  relation  to  the
      screening and asylum interviews.  It was agreed, at the next  hearing,
      that the opinion of Professor Prasher that the appellant was  not  fit
      to give evidence, had not been the first Immigration  Judge's  primary
      reason for adjourning the hearing.  The hearing was then fixed for  22
      July 2009 before Immigration Judge Ransley this time.

19.   Two further psychiatric reports were provided, including a  third  one
      from Professor Prasher.  This dealt in a little more detail  with  the
      issues of fitness to give evidence and inconsistencies  in  interview.
      Professor Prasher affirmed his  opinion  that  in  May  and  June  the
      appellant had been suffering from a moderately depressive illness.  He
      referred to his observations in his report of 5 May  2009  and  simply
      commented: "In my opinion [the appellant] is not fit to give  evidence
      due to the presence of a moderately  severe  depressive  illness.   He
      would have significant impairment in court in his mental faculties due
      to his poor concentration, low mood,  poor  recall,  memory,  paranoid
      ideas and lack of rapport.  He will not at times be able to listen  to
      questions, fully understand questions, recall  information  accurately
      and reliably.  He will in my opinion at times not answer questions  at
      all or will give  answers  without  thought.   He  might  also  become
      distressed, but methods could be adopted to minimise the problem".

20.   Professor Prasher  turned  to  the  inconsistencies:  because  of  the
      depressive illness, the appellant  had  impairment  in  concentration,
      memory recall and sense of time.  His inability to  establish  rapport
      with his interviewer and his pessimistic thoughts "means that he  will
      at times not give answers, give answers without thought i.e.  say  the
      first thing that comes into  his  head  or  confabulate  answers.   In
      addition chronic poor sleep and chronic poor self care would aggravate
      his mental illness."

21.   Professor Prasher commented further on suicide risk  and  then  turned
      to an issue upon which he had been asked  to  comment  for  the  first
      time, namely mental capacity.  He said that mental  state  could  vary
      depending upon time and issues, and although it was possible that  the
      appellant lacked mental capacity with regards  to  legal  matters,  he
      "recommended an assessment of capacity closer to the time of the  next
      hearing."

22.   There was no further report from Professor Prasher,  but  on  15  July
      2009 Dr Van Woerkom, a consultant psychiatrist, produced a  report  on
      the appellant's behalf.  He interviewed the appellant on 10  July  and
      said that he had seen the two earliest reports from Professor Prasher.
       He did not mention the most recent one.  He said the interview was  a
      little difficult because the appellant appeared  quite  depressed  and
      retarded at present.  He was not taking any medication at present.  At
      the interview he appeared very subdued, flat, retarded, lifeless, slow
      in his responses and without eye contact, describing low mood, loss of
      interest and  pleasure,  lethargy,  anxiety,  panic  attacks,  reduced
      appetite,  weight  loss,  poor  concentration   and   regular   severe
      nightmares.  Dr Van  Woerkom  said  that  "his  mood  objectively  and
      subjectively appears very low".  Clinically he presents  as  having  a
      good going, moderately severe, retarded  depressive  illness".   There
      were also some features of post-traumatic stress.  There was  "obvious
      marked psychomotor retardation, almost at times seeming  to  lack  the
      energy to respond to even basic questions such as his age etc,  but  I
      do not think he could  be  malingering  these  symptoms  as  he  seems
      genuinely lethargic, slowed up  with  psychomotor  retardation."   The
      appellant was "severely depressed" and needed therapy  and  monitoring
      to support him and to  try  to  reduce  the  quite  visible  risks  of
      suicide.  He dealt with the appellant's ability to  give  evidence  at
      the Tribunal, saying "given that I was able to extract quite a lot  of
      information from him, although with some difficulty, I think it  would
      be possible for [the appellant], notwithstanding his difficulties,  to
      attend and attempt to give evidence at the tribunal hearing."  He then
      referred to the suicide risk and anxieties  on  return.   However,  he
      thought that with appropriate skilled treatment in the UK in the  form
      of effective anti-depressant therapy he  should  be  able  to  make  a
      reasonable recovery within  3-4  months.   He  added  simply  this  on
      inconsistencies "he  says  that  at  his  very  first  interview  with
      immigration he was given a very poor quality interpreter and that this
      may have given rise to some  apparent  inconsistencies,  although  his
      poor mental state may have been a factor."  It is not clear  how  much
      of the last phrase is the appellant speaking or the psychiatrist.

The appeal

23.   The appellant did not attend the hearing of his appeal.  This  appears
      to have come as something of a  surprise  because  his  advocate  said
      that, on  the  morning,  his  solicitors  had  tried  to  contact  the
      appellant by  his  mobile  phone  without  success  and  they  had  no
      explanations for his non appearance; he had appeared on  the  previous
      occasion.  His advocate then said that in those circumstances he still
      felt "under a professional duty" to apply for an adjournment which was
      opposed.   It  was  refused  by  the  Immigration  Judge  because  the
      substantive hearing of the appeal had been adjourned on  two  previous
      occasions.  There is no evidence  that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to
      attend the hearing  and  in  all  the  circumstances  she  thought  it
      appropriate to refuse the adjournment. It is not suggested  that  that
      was an error of law and forms no ground of appeal.

24.   This however meant that the only evidence from the  appellant   before
      the Immigration  Judge  were  the  contents  of  the  two  interviews,
      together with the statement he had  made  in  response  to  the  first
      interview and the solicitor's letters before the first  interview  and
      after the second.  Neither  of  the  psychiatrists  attended  to  give
      evidence.  The appellant's advocate was then very clear as to the role
      he saw the psychiatric evidence as playing.   He was  not  relying  on
      the reports "to increase the credibility" of the appellant's  account,
      that is to say to provide support for the credibility or  plausibility
      of what the appellant said had happened.  Rather, he  only  relied  on
      the clinical diagnosis to explain the discrepancies in the account and
      to establish an Article 3 claim based on the suicide risk  on  return.
      He said that the appellant no longer relied upon the problems with the
      interpreter as being the cause of the discrepancies  between  the  two
      interviews.  We interject at this stage to  say  that  Mr  Grigg,  who
      appeared for the appellant before us, accepted that the alleged  error
      of law in relation to the treatment of the psychiatric evidence really
      only went to the credibility issue through the explanation it was said
      to offer for inconsistencies.  He accepted that  if  this  credibility
      point failed, the psychiatric evidence of a depressive  illness,  even
      if accepted at face value, would not  provide  a  sufficiently  strong
      case for return to breach Article 3 ECHR.

The Immigration Judge's determination

25.    The  Immigration  Judge,  in  her   analysis   of   the   appellant's
      credibility, thought  that  the  credibility  issues  arose  not  just
      directly in relation to the core  elements  of  the  claim,  but  also
      because of the appellant's conduct  and  tactics  in  pursuit  of  his
      claim.  She was entitled to conclude and this is not  at  issue,  that
      the appellant had not mentioned  any  mental  health  problem  at  the
      screening interview, that his first instructions before the  screening
      interview said that he had deserted because he did not agree with what
      he saw and was required to do, which had led to torture.  She  rightly
      pointed out that this was not  what  he  had  said  at  his  screening
      interview, which was that he had been ill treated because of where  he
      came from and his being in love with another soldier.  She agreed with
      the Secretary of State who had found the appellant not credible in his
      account of a senior officer finding him lying naked on the floor  with
      his hands tied up, untying him without asking any  questions;  and  in
      not believing that the Albanian police would have twice failed to find
      him when he was in a hut or barn some 50 metres only from  the  family
      home.  She concluded that the appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any
      satisfactory explanation to resolve those or any  other  of  the  many
      credibility issues raised by the respondent.

26.   She then  turned  to  discrepancies  in  the  critical  dates  and  in
      particular how, if he had only joined the military in August 2008, the
      core incidents could have happened in July 2008.  He had said  in  his
      substantive interview that he had joined the military service in June,
      volunteering the precise date of 15 June 2008, but  had  said  in  his
      screening interview that he had joined the army in August  2008.   The
      Immigration Judge commented, and having read the record we agree, that
      the appellant had been unable to give any reasonable  or  satisfactory
      explanation for  this  at  his  asylum  interview.   It  was  evident,
      concluded the Judge, that he had been  internally  inconsistent  about
      the sequence of events and timeframe of his asylum claim, even  within
      the interview.  He put the time  when  he  was  caught  having  sexual
      intercourse in the communal bathroom at about two weeks after 20  July
      2008, the date he gave for when his problems had begun.  He  had  been
      caught in the showers about three weeks after  he  had  returned  from
      hospital, where he had gone after the soldier had stabbed him while he
      was shaving.

27.   Towards the end of the asylum interview, in  reply  to  Question  151,
      the appellant had clearly said that he had no medical conditions.  The
      Immigration Judge concluded that the real purpose of  the  solicitor's
      letter of 3 February  2009  was  to  deal  with  his  answer  to  this
      question.  She also found it highly significant  that  notwithstanding
      the  serious  allegation  that  the  Home   Office   interpreter   had
      maliciously damaged his case at the screening interview,  nothing  had
      been said about that in the six  week  period  between  the  screening
      interview and the substantive  asylum  interview,  that  is  until  23
      January 2009 and the letter of 28 January 2009, which arrived  at  the
      Home Office the day after the substantive interview.  The  Immigration
      Judge  pointed  out  that  misunderstandings  between  appellant   and
      interpreter were merely asserted.   The  appellant  did  not  seek  to
      assert any inaccuracies in the record or specific misinterpretation by
      the Home Office interpreter in his 23 January 2009  statement.   (This
      does  not  appear  quite  correct,  but  none  of   the   points   are
      significant.)  The Immigration Judge was certainly  entitled  to  draw
      this  conclusion  in  relation  to  the  screening  interview  record:
      "however looking at the screening interview record as a whole I  could
      find no real evidence of any language barrier  between  the  appellant
      and the interpreter.  The appellant gave appropriate  answers  to  the
      questions asked and in some cases he gave fairly detailed answers.   I
      have no reason to believe that the Home Office interpreter would  have
      invented those answers or that the  interpreter  acted  in  a  way  to
      "maliciously damage" the appellant's case as he alleged".

28.   The Immigration Judge also  rightly  noted  that,  although  a  letter
      dated 3 February 2009 from the  solicitors  alleged  problems  at  the
      asylum interview, the only specific interpretation or correction point
      made was a quibble  about  the  translation  of  'hut'  or  'barn'  at
      Question 99.  The Immigration Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that
      there was no justification for the allegation in the letter  that  the
      appellant had been "railroaded" in to giving  his  asylum  account  at
      either interview, although it appears the allegation was  directed  to
      what he said at the  substantive  interview.   The  Immigration  Judge
      rejected the further allegation, as she  was  entitled  to,  that  the
      account had been misinterpreted at the screening interview because  of
      malicious intent or linguistic  misunderstanding.   We  add  that  the
      solicitor's comment on Question 151 that the appellant  suffered  from
      depression, but had said that he had no medical condition  because  he
      believed that "he was being asked  about  [how  he  felt]  during  the
      interview", plainly means that he had felt well during  the  interview
      and by necessary implication his capacity and  answers  had  not  been
      affected by the depression now being asserted.

29.   The Immigration Judge said this at paragraph 90:

           "I agree with Mr Walker that the many material discrepancies  in
           the Appellant's account have destroyed the core elements of  his
           asylum claim.  The Appellant  at  his  screening  interview  had
           clearly stated that he joined the  military  service  in  August
           2008.  At his asylum interview he gave a clear and precise  date
           that he commenced his military service on 15th June 2008 and  he
           described two core incidents  -  that  he  was  stabbed  with  a
           bayonet by another soldier and that  he  was  discovered  having
           homosexual intercourse in the  communal  bathroom  with  another
           soldier - both occurred in the  second  month  of  his  military
           service in July 2008.   He  submitted  a  statement  dated  23rd
           January 2009 alleging language problems  with  the  Home  Office
           interpreter but he did not seek to correct any alleged  mistakes
           in the screening interview record.  I agree with Mr Walker  that
           if the Appellant had joined the military service in August 2008,
           the  core  incidents  of  July  2008  described  in  his  asylum
           interview account could not have happened."

30.   The Immigration Judge  turned  to  the  explanations  which  had  been
      offered for the discrepancies:  the appellant no longer relied on  the
      allegations of language problems and relied instead on the psychiatric
      evidence as the explanation for the discrepancies,  and  not,  as  his
      advocate put it, "to increase" the credibility  of  his  account.   Mr
      Walker, the HOPO, had made a number of  critical  comments  about  the
      diagnosis of depression:   Professor Prasher gave no indication as  to
      how long his medical examinations had lasted and there was a degree of
      difference  as  to  the  appellant's  intelligence  between  Professor
      Prasher and Dr Van Woerkom.  She noted other differences  between  the
      doctors' opinions which she regarded as material.

31.   The Immigration Judge referred to the possibility noted  by  Professor
      Prasher in his 5 May 2009 report that one of the causes for the way in
      which the appellant presented, was that he was "malingering", by which
      it is clear that everyone understood the doctor  to  mean  faking  his
      symptoms.  There was no evidence before her that Professor Prasher had
      engaged in any process of testing the appellant, either in May  or  on
      the second examination in June, in order to rule out  the  possibility
      of malingering.  Dr Van Woerkom in the 15 July 2009 report stated that
      he did  not  think  that  the  appellant  "could  be  malingering  his
      symptoms".  The Immigration Judge agreed with the  HOPO  that  Dr  Van
      Woerkom "had failed to give clear reasons for coming  to  this  view",
      and, reading the description of the appellant as "genuinely lethargic"
      with the next sentence which referred to him having had "a little  bit
      of anti-depressant therapy from his GP",  concluded  that  the  doctor
      "could  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that   the   appellant   was
      malingering, or that the "lethargic" presentation could be due to anti-
      depressants prescribed by his GP".

32.    In  his  second  report,  Professor  Prasher  made  no   mention   of
      malingering, whether it remained a possibility or had been  eliminated
      and if so on what basis.  He had only concluded that the symptoms were
      not due to the effects of  medication.   His  clinical  diagnosis  was
      significantly  based  on  the  appellant's  own  description  of   his
      symptoms.

33.   The Immigration Judge criticised Professor  Prasher's  opinion,  given
      on 14 July 2009, that the appellant  was  not  fit  to  give  evidence
      because of his moderately severe depressive illness. It was  based  on
      the assessment in the report of 5 May 2009 and Professor  Prasher  had
      not seen the appellant since 4 June 2009.   She  took  the  view  that
      Professor Prasher's preparedness to give an opinion on  14  July  2009
      that the appellant was not fit to give evidence, when he had not  seen
      the appellant for  over  a  month,  undermined  both  the  Professor's
      credibility and his opinion on unfitness to give evidence  in  the  14
      July 2009 report.  Indeed, the appellant said in June that he had been
      feeling a bit better in himself than when he first saw  the  Professor
      in May 2009.

34.   The Immigration Judge then turned to  this  report's  explanation  for
      the inconsistencies in interviews as being due to depressive  illness.
      She thought it important, in assessing the weight to be given to  this
      opinion of Professor Prasher, that the appellant had  in  fact  blamed
      the Home Office interpreter for the inconsistencies, alleging that the
      interpreter had behaved wholly improperly and had maliciously  damaged
      his case.  She thought it material that the appellant said he  had  no
      medical conditions and only in the 3 February 2009 letter claimed that
      he suffered from depression.  (The letter of 3 February 2009  did  not
      attribute any answers at interview to that depression or  assert  that
      it provided the explanation for the inconsistencies, merely correcting
      the answer to Question 151 about medical condition).  She thought that
      Dr Van Woerkom's opinion about fitness  to  give  evidence  contrasted
      starkly with the opinion of Professor Prasher.

35.   She thought that there was a material difference in Dr  Van  Woerkom's
      diagnosis of "severe depression" and Professor Prasher's diagnosis  of
      "moderately severe depressive illness."  She  was  dismissive  of  the
      evidence of suicide risk, which  we  have  said  does  not  arise  for
      consideration in this appeal before us, and plainly concern about  the
      importance of genuine but  unfounded  fear  is  not  relevant  if  the
      appellant is falsely claiming to be a homosexual.   She  rejected  the
      claim that the appellant was a  homosexual  and  rejected  his  asylum
      account in its entirety.


The appellant's submissions

36.   In his submissions for the appellant,  Mr  Grigg  relied  strongly  on
      what Mr Justice Langstaff had said in  ordering  reconsideration.   He
      accepted that the Judge was entitled  to  reject  even  uncontradicted
      expert evidence, but  the  Immigration  Judge  had  to  give  adequate
      reasons for doing so and he submitted that she had  not  done  so  for
      five reasons:

           i.    She had assumed that Professor Prasher could perform tests
                 to  detect  or  eliminate  malingering,  when  she  had  no
                 evidence that such tests existed.

           ii.   The Immigration Judge was not entitled to reject the  same
                 overall clinical diagnosis of depression, whether severe or
                 moderately severe, because of differences of detail in  the
                 diagnoses.

           iii.  There  were  no  real  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
                 appellant was malingering, particularly in the  absence  of
                 evidence from him.

           iv.   It was wrong to treat Professor Prasher's  credibility  as
                 undermined because he gave a view on  14  July  2009  about
                 fitness  to  give  evidence,  having  last   examined   the
                 appellant on 4 June 2009.  She did not explain  what  basis
                 she had for saying in effect that he was unprofessional.

37.   Both psychiatrists' reports  were  based  on  both  the  apparent  and
      objective presentation of the appellant.

38.   The psychiatric evidence was critical,  submitted  Mr  Grigg,  because
      those who were depressed  might  not  care  very  much  about  precise
      accuracy with dates.  It was the discrepancy  between  the  dates  the
      appellant said he joined the army in his screening  interview  and  in
      his substantive interview, when related to the dates of the key events
      relied on, that had  been  a  significant  plank  in  the  Immigration
      Judge's rejection of the credibility of  the  claim.   Mr  Grigg  drew
      particular attention to paragraph 90 for that submission.

Conclusion

39.   We accept that some of the criticisms made of the Immigration  Judge's
      reasoning in relation to the psychiatric reports are sound.

40.   She was wrong to treat the difference between  the  two  diagnoses  as
      material when both psychiatrists agreed that  the  appellant  suffered
      from a depressive illness, and the only difference was whether it  was
      moderately severe or severe. They each examined him and each described
      similar symptoms and history. That did not mean that she had to accept
      the diagnosis, but it did mean that she had to provide  clear  reasons
      for rejecting it, and that difference between  the  two  psychiatrists
      could not be a sound reason.

41.   Her comment that Dr Van Woerkom could not  rule  out  the  possibility
      that the appellant was malingering does not  grapple  adequately  with
      the total evidence on malingering, doing justice to  the  significance
      of what he does say.  He specifically concluded that he was clear that
      the symptoms were genuine, and said that he did  not  think  that  the
      appellant could  be  malingering.  Although  the  doctor  provides  no
      further reasoning for that view, it is clear that  it  represents  the
      judgment of a professional psychiatrist on what he can see.   This was
      the key professional evidence on malingering she  had  to  deal  with.
      Saying that he could not rule out the possibility  of  malingering  is
      not enough and she had to explain what evidence led  her  to  conclude
      that the appellant clearly was malingering, that is  lying  about  his
      symptoms  and  feigning  those  which  the  psychiatrists  could  see.
      However, the  view  that  Dr  Van  Woerkom  could  not  rule  out  the
      possibility is of itself a statement of the obvious  in  view  of  the
      nature of the issue, and the more so given the absence of any analysis
      or testing of the appellant's truthfulness, whether by the doctors  or
      by others for them to see. That is not a criticism of the doctors  but
      a recognition that their role  inevitably  limits  the  usefulness  of
      their  views  on  whether  symptoms  are  carefully  and  deliberately
      feigned.

42.   The Immigration Judge may have been too strong  in  her  criticism  of
      Professor Prasher saying that his credibility was  undermined  because
      he gave an opinion on fitness to give evidence on 14 July 2009 when he
      had not seen the appellant since 4 June 2009, and had  recognised,  at
      least in relation to capacity that mental  state  could  change.  What
      Professor Prasher had to say on this was very much based  on  what  he
      found back in May.  But  she  was  clearly  entitled  to  reduce  very
      substantially  the  weight  given  to  his  report  on   that   point,
      unqualified as it was by  any  reference  to  the  absence  of  recent
      examination, and whether or not that could  have  any  impact  on  the
      current usefulness of the report. She had the advantage of  an  up  to
      date report from Dr Van Woerkom which differed in  this  respect  from
      Professor Prasher, and did so on the basis of current examination,  so
      she knew that the passage of time could make a difference. And she was
      entitled therefore to regard what else  Professor  Prasher  might  say
      with some scepticism.

43.   Her other criticisms of Professor Prasher on this aspect are also  not
      well made:  the doctor did not say  that  there  were  any  tests  for
      malingering that he could have carried out. If  there  are  none,  and
      there is no evidence that there were any he could have used, it is not
      a proper criticism to say that he had not used  them.  Of  course,  if
      there are no tests,  that  rather  supports  her  point  that  Dr  Van
      Woerkom's conclusion on malingering could not rule out the possibility
      of it.

44.   That is not to say however that there were  not  proper  and  powerful
      criticisms which could be made of Professor Prasher's reports: it  was
      Professor Prasher who pointed  out  that  there  were  three  possible
      explanations, alone or in combination for the symptoms  described  and
      seen: medication, malingering, and genuine illness. He took  steps  to
      eliminate the first. But he never returned to  the  second  in  either
      report, whether to say that no view could be formed  or  that  he  had
      concluded, and if so why, that the symptoms were or might  be  genuine
      or not. That is not satisfactory.

45.   But for all that, she had to deal with the report which did express  a
      view,  and  the  fact,  which  we  accept,  that  the  possibility  of
      malingering could not be ruled out, did not prove that it was present.
      She did reach the view that the appellant was  feigning  his  symptoms
      but in reaching that view, she had to grapple with what Dr Van Woerkom
      actually did say, giving proper reasons for rejecting it, even  though
      he did not elaborate the basis for his conclusion  on  what  Professor
      Prasher had left open.

 46.  In reality, in  our  judgment,  however  the  Immigration  Judge  does
      explain why she reached that view,  although  she  does  not  tie  her
      conclusions in with  this  particular  aspect  of  the  evidence.  Her
      reasons are all those which she gives for rejecting the credibility of
      the appellants' claim: the  core  events  underlying  the  claim,  his
      departure from Albania and what happened here, in the  way  his  claim
      evolved, with its effectively abandoned allegations of  misconduct  by
      the interpreter, and how the evidence of depression emerged. She  drew
      attention to the interviews; she would have read the  detailed  nature
      of  the  answers,  with  specific  dates  being  volunteered  by   the
      appellant, the scope and extent of what he remembered, and the way  in
      which the reason he gave for the  inconsistencies  he  was  questioned
      about,  was  not  illness  but   instead   allegations   against   the
      interpreter, which the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  find  were
      false. It was  not  suggested  that  his  depression  was  capable  of
      explaining the implausibilities in the claim, or his  making  serious,
      false allegations about the interpreter.  That of itself, and  in  our
      view the Judge had this in mind, properly gave rise  to  grave  doubts
      about the claimed depression: why had he made those serious and  false
      allegations, and why had he then changed his mind? And  a  person  who
      made such false allegations would not be above feigning symptoms. They
      do not appear to be very difficult symptoms to feign, and there is  no
      ready method for judging whether that is what is happening.

47.   It was for the Immigration judge to decide whether the  appellant  was
      credible, and she would have been in a position to  judge  this,  with
      the psychiatric reports in  mind  and  with  the  previous  interviews
      before her.  What is  more,  she  had  to  reach  conclusions  on  the
      appellant's credibility, knowing that he had failed to turn up for the
      hearing, at which he had been expected.  He had given  no  explanation
      for his absence then or before promulgation (and still has  not),  and
      had been passed fit to attend, and  on  15  July  2009,  fit  to  give
      evidence albeit with difficulty. (This was a significant  change  from
      what he might have thought the position would be at the first  hearing
      and after the further report from  Professor  Prasher).   She  was  or
      would have been  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  from  his
      absence. Mr Grigg accepted that were there to be  a  further  hearing,
      and were the appellant not to  attend,  the  adverse  inference  could
      readily be drawn that  he  was  absent  because  he  feared  that  his
      evidence would be shown to be false more easily were he to attend.  We
      think that the Judge was or would have  been  entitled  to  draw  that
      inference on this occasion.

48.   What she is saying  in  substance,  reading  the  determination  as  a
      whole, is that this all provided a  proper  basis  for  rejecting  the
      evidence of Dr Van Woerkom on malingering. She does not need to reject
      Professor Prasher's conclusion on that point  because  he  reached  no
      conclusion on it. If he did so inferentially, he gave no  reasons  for
      his view,  and  if  it  was  simply  his  professional  judgment,  the
      Immigration Judge was entitled to reject it for the reasons  which  in
      substance she gave.  Her criticisms of the  psychiatric  evidence  are
      not always well directed but they have to be read in  the  context  of
      the case as it evolved over time, and some of her points have a kernel
      of substance.

49.   There is a more significant point, which does seriously undermine  the
      confidence to be reposed in their reports which she does not make, but
      which it is very likely she had in mind.  We come  to  it  later.   It
      concerns the absence  of  analysis  by  the  psychiatrists  of  either
      screening or substantive interview.  It goes to the very basis of  the
      value of the observations the psychiatrists used for  their  diagnosis
      of depression, and supports the rejection of their diagnoses  and  the
      fabricating of symptoms by the appellant.  We discuss  it  however  in
      the context of the relevance of depression to the inconsistencies.

50.   Even if she or we had accepted the diagnosis of moderately  severe  or
      severe  depression,  the  conclusion  on  the  central  issue  of  the
      credibility of his claim would not be changed. There  is  no  material
      prospect of a different result  on  this  material.  First,  the  only
      aspect of his credibility to  which  the  diagnosis  was  said  to  be
      relevant  was  to   provide   the   explanation   for   the   admitted
      inconsistencies in his claim. That fails to focus on  the  real  basis
      for the rejection  of  his  credibility  which  went  far  beyond  the
      June/August date for entry into  the  army.  The  Immigration  Judge's
      wholesale rejection of credibility draws on the SSHD  refusal  letter.
      The structure of the reasoning includes implausibilities  as  well  as
      inconsistencies, and includes not just what happened in  Albania,  but
      how he says he travelled to the UK and what he did here.  His  tactics
      in  relation  to  the  interpreter   undermined   both   his   general
      credibility, and his later explanation for the  role  that  depression
      might have played in the  inconsistencies.   Although  dates  were  an
      important part of the Judge's reasons, they were not the critical part
      and  certainly  not  any  pin-point  inconsistencies  in   them.   The
      inconsistency related to which month he joined the army, and how  long
      he had been in it  when  the  events  occurred,  and  it  was  he  who
      volunteered the pin-point accuracy of the 15 June date after all.

51.   The psychiatrists' comment on the role  of  depression  in  explaining
      inconsistencies could not and did not even purport to  deal  with  all
      the aspects of the claim which the Immigration Judge found incredible.



52.   Second, the view that  depression,  even  to  the  lower  standard  of
      proof, could provide a  reasonable  alternative  explanation  for  the
      inconsistencies is in the end also untenable, as in reality the  Judge
      found. It is not obvious why  depression  should  mean  that  positive
      answers should  be  inconsistent,  unless  they  were  accompanied  by
      reservations about their  accuracy,  which  they  were  not,  or  were
      answered in some sequence which suggested difficulties in  remembering
      dates, which they were not.

53.   The manner of answer in examination was crucial to the  psychiatrists'
      view that depression played a part in inconsistencies.  We acknowledge
      that  Dr  Van  Woerkom  is  much  the  more  circumspect.    Yet   the
      psychiatrists had either not read the interview records, statement and
      letters or had not evaluated them in reaching their conclusions.  This
      obviously means their views are not informed  by  crucial  information
      available to the Immigration Judge  and  to  this  Tribunal.   Neither
      records are consistent with what the psychiatrists describe  in  their
      examinations, even though the manner of speaking is not recorded.  The
      sequence of questions and answers, the detail of events and people  is
      clear, and in obvious contrast to how the  psychiatrists  portray  the
      appellant on examination.  He volunteered specific dates: there is  no
      obvious difficulty with  remembering  events  and  details,  including
      personal and family details.  There was no suggestion by  either  that
      what they saw on examination was a condition  which  had  only  arisen
      after the interviews, upon which, with  the  aid  of  solicitors,  the
      appellant had commented in statement and letter.  They read as  normal
      interviews, although pauses are  not  recorded,  and  there  are  some
      passages where there  might  be  some  crossed  wires.   There  is  no
      evidence from him or anyone about his demeanour at  those  interviews.
      Nothing is noted by either interviewer or the interpreter.

54.   The solicitors provided no material to suggest that they had  had  any
      difficulty in taking instructions or preparing the statement after the
      screening interview, or in writing the letter  after  the  substantive
      interview. Neither statement nor letter suggests any difficulty on the
      appellant's part at all in remembering either the events described  at
      interview or the interviews themselves. The  purpose  was  to  correct
      answers, which suggest that he remembered events  quite  clearly,  the
      answers given, and what he thought was wrong  with  them.   The  first
      explanation for inconsistency was the malice of the interpreter  which
      was withdrawn after some time. When depression was first raised it was
      not to explain inconsistency, but just to correct the omission by  the
      appellant to say that he was depressed. None of this is  mentioned  or
      evaluated by Professor Prasher or Dr Van Woerkom. We  would  not  have
      thought it possible to give any weight to their views on inconsistency
      being caused by depression.

55.   Accordingly, if there were any error of law in  what  the  Immigration
      Judge concluded in relation  to  the  diagnosis,  and  we  would  have
      reached the same  view  as  she  did,  using  substantially  the  same
      reasoning, the  error  had  no  effect  on  the  result.   Taking  the
      diagnosis as correct, it provides no reasonable  explanation  for  the
      many aspects of the appellant's evidence and behaviour  which  led  to
      the rejection of his claim as credible.

    56. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed





Mr Justice Ouseley
sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal


