
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           MT (Ahmadi - HJ (Iran)) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00277(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 June 2011                                |                             |
|                                              |20 June 2011                 |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     MT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan (Thompson & Company Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where it is found that an Ahmadi will be "discreet" on  return  the  reasons
for such discretion will need to be considered in the  light  of  HJ  (Iran)
[2010] UKSC 31.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  6  July  1959.   The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 June 2010 stating  he  was
    on a family visit.  He  applied  for  asylum  on  25  June  2010.   The
    appellant was treated as an illegal entrant.  He based his claim on his
    problems as an Ahmadi.  His claim was rejected for reasons set  out  in
    the refusal letter dated 12 July 2010.

2.    The appellant appealed and his appeal came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Archer on 20 August 2010.

3.    The Immigration Judge helpfully  summarised  the  respective  parties'
    cases as follows:

         "The Basis of the Appellant's Claim


         12.      The appellant claims that he  used  to  work  in  1982  in
             Kahota District in a  research  laboratory  as  an  electrical
             engineer but his job was terminated because he is  an  Ahmadi.
             He then worked in private companies as an engineer.   He  then
             started his own business  in  2001  as  the  owner  of  Remy's
             International manufacturing garments and sportswear.


         13.      In September 2004 an FIR was issued  against  him  and  14
             others for being Ahmadis.  The appellant was at a wedding when
             3 bridegrooms were arrested; he went underground and fled back
             to Sialkot.


         14.      He was not arrested  at  the  scene  because  he  is  from
             Punjabi and  he  fled.   The  case  was  registered  in  Sindh
             province in Kunri Court.  The appellant avoided being arrested
             after the police found him by  paying  bribes  of  5000-20,000
             rupees.


         15.      AW, who brought the case, died 2 years ago but the  police
             are still blackmailing the appellant to  pay  bribes.   On  14
             March 2005 an arrest warrant was issued against the  appellant
             but he went underground and paid bribes to police.


         16.      The appellant went on a business trip to Malta in 2007 and
             2008 and also visited Azerbaijan  for  business  in  2009  and
             January 2010.  He also visited Ukraine.


         17.      The appellant applied for a visa on 17  August  2009  (his
             wife applied on  26  January  2009).   The  applications  were
             refused but the refusals were successfully  appealed  and  the
             appellant received the visas on 10 May 2010.


         18.      On  23  May  2010  the  Khatwe  Nabuwwat  Federation  (KN)
             distributed a pamphlet listing  35  businesses  including  the
             appellant's  business,  telling  Muslims  to  boycott   Ahmadi
             businesses.  3 businessmen were murdered in April 2010.


         19.      The appellant last bribed police on 23-24 April 2010.   In
             May 2010, 3 mullahs came to his office and threatened him that
             Ahmadis should leave.  Then on 23 May and 25 May the appellant
             received letters threatening that he would be killed.  He made
             a complaint with the district  police  office  in  Faisalabad.
             The report was forwarded to Kotwali  police  station  and  the
             station house officer advised the appellant that police  could
             not protect him against the mullahs and advised him  to  leave
             town.


         20.      The appellant left Pakistan on 6 June 2010.  His wife left
             on 22 June 2010 to join  him.   The  appellant  has  lived  in
             Sialkot, Islamabad and Faisalabad.  At the time of the  asylum
             interview his nephew was looking after the business; there are
             various other relatives still in Pakistan.


         The Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusing the Application


         21.      The appellant claims that he preached in Pakistan but  has
             not provided any evidence.


         22.      The business trips abroad  are  not  consistent  with  the
             claim that the appellant was in hiding.  The appellant  failed
             to claim asylum in Malta which damages his credibility.


         23.      The  appellant  changed  his  account  during  the  asylum
             interview, first stating that he was not physically harmed  by
             the mullahs and then after a break stating that he was  beaten
             up in a park (Q67-69).  The account  of  the  assault  is  not
             credible.


         24.      The nephew was running the business under  the  same  name
             whilst the appellant was in the  UK  and  has  experienced  no
             problems even though he is also an Ahmadi.


         25.      The appellant has produced no  evidence  that  police  are
             interested in him anywhere other than his home town, where his
             wife resides.  Nothing happened  to  the  wife  when  she  was
             living alone.  No arrests have been made in  relation  to  the
             outstanding FIR from September 2004.


         26.      The threatening letters from KN are also localised and the
             business  has  not  closed  down.   The  authenticity  of  the
             documents is not disputed  but  they  do  not  show  that  the
             appellant is in fear of his life.


         27.      The recent attacks on Ahmadis were random attacks and  the
             appellant has never been personally targeted.   The  appellant
             used deception to enter the UK because he always  intended  to
             claim asylum.


         28.      Even if the appellant could prove that he had been charged
             with blasphemy or for being an Ahmadi all similar charges have
             ultimately been dismissed.  The appellant has a  large  family
             in Pakistan and can relocate easily."


4.    The Immigration Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  his
    wife.

5.    The Immigration Judge set out his findings  on  the  evidence  between
    paragraphs 46 and 62 of his determination.  He rejected the claim  that
    the appellant had been assaulted or that he had gone into  hiding.   He
    was not satisfied that the appellant's business had been closed as  the
    appellant had claimed.  He had not used relatively brief business trips
    abroad to avoid threats - there was no reason why  potential  attackers
    could not simply wait  until  he  returned  to  his  office.   "If  the
    appellant  was  really  travelling  to  avoid  threats  then  he  would
    logically have kept a low profile abroad rather than  preach  in  Malta
    for fifteen days."  (See paragraph 52 of the determination).

6.    The Immigration Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  paid
    bribes to police as he had claimed and that he had been able to run his
    business and travel at home and abroad without difficulty.

7.    The Immigration Judge pointed out  that  the  appellant  had  run  his
    business openly for a number of years  and  that  he  had  returned  to
    Pakistan on six occasions from foreign trips.   The  Immigration  Judge
    was not satisfied the appellant was at risk  from  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan  and  he  had  not  given  the  authorities   any   reasonable
    opportunity to provide state protection.

8.    The Immigration Judge did not, however, reject the  appellant's  claim
    in all respects.  The determination concludes as follows:

         "59.     I accept that the appellant is a devout Ahmadi and  it  is
             reasonably likely that he used his caste name when writing the
             books  that  were  produced  to  me  ('Jihad  and  Extremism',
             'Guidelines for Charity from the Ahmadi Faith' and 'Founder of
             Ahmadi Faith Travelling  to  Lahore  and  Sialkot  in  1904').
             However, there is little evidence that the appellant has  used
             the books to preach to Muslims.  The appellant confirmed  that
             the books were not on sale in  bookshops,  the  preaching  was
             only done privately and the books would only be handed over to
             a person 'who is not dangerous'.  The  relationship  is  built
             before any preaching begins.


         60.      I  find  that  the  research  books  do  not  support  the
             appellant's claim to have  preached  in  Pakistan;  not  least
             because he did not mention them during his  asylum  interview.
             In his witness statement of 20  August  the  appellant  stated
             that he could not see a better way and more efficient  way  to
             preach than to publish research and materials on his faith.  I
             find this evidence to be unreliable in that  the  'publishing'
             is no more  than  providing  copies  of  the  books  to  those
             individuals who are already established as  non-dangerous,  on
             the appellant's account.  I find that  it  is  not  reasonably
             likely that the books have been distributed beyond the  Ahmadi
             community; they are lengthy and somewhat academic documents.


         61.      I find that it is not reasonably likely that the appellant
             has  been  engaged  in  public  preaching  in  Pakistan.   The
             appellant's account at Q86-Q87  that  he  became  angry  at  a
             businessman's  dinner  and   began   to   preach   is   wholly
             inconsistent with his claim that he had to live in hiding much
             of the  time  because  of  fear  of  persecution  due  to  his
             religion.  The books do not assist the appellant's claim.  The
             appellant himself stated at Q83 that he only preached  to  his
             friends and in secret.  The  appellant's  family  continue  to
             live openly in Pakistan.


         62.      I have carefully considered MJ.  I find that the appellant
             falls within the circumstances described at  paragraphs  83-84
             of the judgment.  The risk on  return  falls  well  below  the
             level necessary to engage international protection.  The  fact
             that the appellant's business appears on a threat list is  not
             sufficient to distinguish MJ, in all of the  circumstances  of
             this case."

9.    The reference to MJ is a reference to the  country  guidance  case  MJ
    and ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033.

10.    The  Immigration  Judge  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

11.   There was an application for permission to appeal  which  was  refused
    by Senior Immigration Judge Keki? on 1 October 2010.

12.   Renewed grounds of appeal were filed on 13 October 2010.  In ground  3
    of the renewed grounds reference was made for the  first  time  to  the
    case of HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]
    UKSC 31; [2010] INLR 425.

13.   It was submitted as follows:

         "The Immigration Judge  and  Senior  Immigration  Judge  have  also
         failed to consider the recent judgment of HJ (Iran) in which it was
         clearly held that if a person is required to carry  out  activities
         discreetly, then this amounts to persecution.  It is impossible for
         the appellant to openly preach the Ahmadi faith because of the anti-
         Ahmadi laws which exist in Pakistan; therefore, he  has  no  option
         but to preach discreetly.  This in itself amounts  to  persecution.
         TM, KM and LZ (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 916 dealt with this  issue
         further and agreed that an individual cannot be expected to lie  in
         order to avoid persecution.  It was further stated that  the  ratio
         in HJ (Iran) is not limited just to  sexual  orientation  but  will
         apply to all grounds covered by the Convention.  This decision  is,
         therefore, very relevant in the appellant's case and the failure to
         mention it and consider it results in a material error  of  law  by
         both the Immigration Judge and Senior Immigration Judge."


14.   As no one had brought the attention of the Immigration  Judge  to  the
    decision of HJ (Iran) the criticism is somewhat unfair.  No mention had
    been made of it either, as I have said,  in  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal.  The decision was given on 7 July 2010 in the  month  preceding
    the hearing before the Immigration Judge.  In defence of  all  parties,
    however, it may be said that the full  significance  of  that  case  in
    asylum appeals generally was not perhaps immediately appreciated.

15.   Senior Immigration Judge Allen granted permission to appeal on the  HJ
    (Iran) point, seeing little weight in the other grounds.  He directed a
    hearing on submissions only.  Ms Holmes acknowledged that there was  no
    Home Office reply in this case.

16.   Mr Khan concentrated on the ground on which permission to  appeal  had
    been specifically granted.  He pointed out that the appellant had  been
    found to be a devout Ahmadi and that the publications had been directed
    to those deemed not to be dangerous.  He submitted that  the  appellant
    had taken care because of fear of reprisals or  persecution.   Mr  Khan
    referred  to  paragraph  82  of  HJ  (Iran)  and  submitted  that   the
    appellant's case required positive answers to the  questions  posed  by
    Lord Rodger.  Preaching of the Ahmadi faith was a criminal offence  and
    the appellant would distribute material only to  people  who  were  not
    dangerous in order to avoid persecution.  At  interview  the  appellant
    said he had had problems because of preaching and  those  who  had  not
    preached did not have problems.   The  appellant  had  published  three
    papers.  Reference was made  to  the  Home  Office  Country  of  Origin
    Information Reports relating to Ahmadis,  Ms  Holmes  helpfully  making
    available from her file the version that would have been apposite  when
    the Immigration Judge considered the matter.

17.   Mr Khan submitted that the question arose  about  what  the  appellant
    would do on return.  Would he continue to preach?   He  submitted  that
    past behaviour was indicative  of  future  behaviour  by  analogy  with
    paragraph 339K (past persecution being indicative of future risk).   He
    said there were sufficient findings of fact  made  by  the  Immigration
    Judge to enable the Tribunal to allow the appeal on the  basis  of  the
    decision of HJ (Iran).

18.   Ms Holmes submitted that the case of HJ (Iran) did  not  bite  because
    the appellant's preaching had not been circumscribed because of a  fear
    of persecution.  She referred to paragraph  60  of  the  determination.
    The appellant in his witness statement had said that "he could not  see
    a better way and more efficient way to preach than to publish  research
    and materials on his faith."  The appellant was not deterred and  would
    not be deterred in the future from preaching in the same way - he would
    still find it better and more efficient to preach in the  way  that  he
    had in the past.  While it appeared that the appellant had preached  in
    Malta over a period of fifteen days it was odd that he  should  publish
    this fact in a paper in Rabwah - he was not being particularly discreet
    in the circumstances.  Why would he draw attention to himself?

19.   At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our decision.

20.   Dealing firstly with the grounds of appeal, Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Allen granted permission to appeal on the HJ  (Iran)  point  describing
    the other points as of little weight.  When the time came  for  him  to
    issue directions for the  hearing  of  this  matter,  he  directed  the
    hearing to take place on submissions only.  In the event, both  parties
    were content  to  deal  with  the  case  on  the  basis  of  the  point
    highlighted by Senior Immigration Judge Allen.  We  respectfully  agree
    with his  observations  about  the  remaining  grounds.   Had  it  been
    necessary for us to deal with them, we would not have found  that  they
    raised a material error of law.  We can of course only  interfere  with
    the Immigration Judge's decision if it was flawed by a  material  error
    of law.

21.   Ms Holmes, rightly in our view, did not take a point on the fact  that
    the issue before us had not been raised before the  Immigration  Judge.
    Her submission was a  simple  one.   The  case  did  not  bite  in  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant's case.  This was because  he
    had no need, and would not, modify his behaviour because the  preaching
    activity he engaged in was the most efficient and best for him - he had
    not circumscribed his activity because of any fear.

22.   Because the Immigration Judge had not had his attention drawn  to  the
    implications of the case of HJ (Iran) his findings  were  not  directly
    related to the issues raised therein.  However, in our view  a  careful
    reading of the determination does enable us to reach  a  conclusion  on
    this matter based on the submissions we  have  heard  as  envisaged  by
    Senior Immigration Judge Allen when he gave directions for the  hearing
    of this  case.   Paragraph  59  of  the  determination  is  of  pivotal
    importance.  In that paragraph the Immigration Judge accepted both that
    the appellant was a devout Ahmadi and that  he  had  written  books  on
    aspects of his faith.  The preaching was done privately and  the  books
    would only be handed over to a person  "who  is  not  dangerous".   The
    judge states that the relationship was built up  before  any  preaching
    began.  The Immigration Judge referred to paragraphs 83 and 84  of  the
    case of MJ (Pakistan).  In paragraph 84 the Tribunal noted  "the  great
    care exercised by the preaching teams who operate out of private homes,
    by invitation only and after careful vetting  of  those  to  whom  they
    propagate the Ahmadi faith."

23.   Reading the determination as a whole we are able to  infer  from  what
    the  Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  appellant   restricted   the
    publication of his books to certain  people.   Those  people  were  not
    dangerous.   It  appears  to  us  on  any  sensible  reading   of   the
    determination  that  the  reason  that  the  appellant  restricted  the
    publication to such persons was that to do otherwise would be dangerous
    to him.   His  activities  in  Pakistan  may  be  contrasted  with  his
    activities  in  Malta.   In  paragraph  52  of  the  determination  the
    Immigration Judge does not appear to disbelieve the  appellant's  claim
    that he had preached in Malta for fifteen days.  It was the appellant's
    case that he had preached with approval of the head  of  the  Ahmadiyya
    community.  We were referred to a document attached to the respondent's
    bundle at E1 which is a  translation  of  a  publication  "The  Alfazal
    Rabwah".  Ms Holmes submitted that the appellant was drawing  attention
    to himself by publishing his activities in this document.  On the other
    hand it appears to us that it does show that the appellant's activities
    abroad were less inhibited than his  activities  in  Pakistan.  On  the
    evidence before us we are prepared to accept  that  the  appellant  was
    preaching openly in Malta to an extent that he could not  in  Pakistan.



24.   If we adapt the guidance given by Lord Rodger in paragraph  82  of  HJ
    (Iran) it is first necessary to see whether the appellant is  a  devout
    Ahmadi and that has been found in his favour.  The next question  would
    be to ask whether if the appellant were  to  preach  openly  on  return
    would he be liable to persecution in Pakistan?

25.   To answer this question it is necessary simply to consider the  result
    if the appellant were to publish to those  who  were  "dangerous".   We
    have already referred to paragraph 84 of MJ.

26.   The next question is to  consider  what  the  appellant  would  do  on
    return.  In our view the evidence is consistent that the appellant is a
    devout Ahmadi who has published and preached in the past, both at  home
    and abroad.  There are two possibilities:

         "If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         'discreetly'.


         If on the other hand the  Tribunal  concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so."


27.   On this aspect we would be inclined to the  view  that  the  appellant
    would do in the future as he has in the past - preach  and  publish  to
    those deemed not to be dangerous.  The next question is why he would do
    this.  Ms Holmes submitted that it was  simply  because  the  appellant
    found it better and more efficient to do it  this  way.   Returning  to
    paragraph 82:

         "If, on the other hand, the  Tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted.  Such a person has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution."


28.   It is true that the appellant in his witness statement refers,  as  Ms
    Holmes points out, to the best and  most  efficient  way  of  preaching
    being to publish research and materials on his faith but we do not find
    that this establishes that "a  material  reason"  for  the  appellant's
    discretion would not be a fear of  what  would  happen  if  he  was  to
    publish to non dangerous people.  We think that would  be  reading  too
    much into the appellant's  witness  statement  not  least  because  the
    Immigration Judge found that particular evidence to be unreliable.   It
    does however appear to us to be implicit that the Immigration Judge did
    accept that publication was restricted to non dangerous people.

29.   Ms Holmes did not argue that HJ (Iran) was not potentially  applicable
    in cases other than those involving sexual orientation and she  was  in
    our view right not to do so - see RT (Zimbabwe) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1285
    [2011] Imm A.R. 259.  In that case it had been submitted that the ratio
    of HJ (Iran) applied equally to cases concerning political opinion.  An
    individual found  to  hold  genuine  political  beliefs  could  not  be
    required to modify their behaviour or deny their beliefs  in  order  to
    avoid persecution.  This submission was not apparently an issue in  the
    case - see paragraph 25 of the judgment.  As a general  proposition  "a
    person found to  have  genuine  political  beliefs  cannot  be  refused
    refugee status merely because they have declined to hide those beliefs,
    or to act "discreetly", in order to avoid  persecution."   Counsel  for
    the Secretary of State did not seek to distinguish between  persecution
    on the grounds of membership of a social group and on  the  grounds  of
    political opinion.

30.   It does appear to us that the Immigration Judge  did  err  in  law  in
    failing to apply the case of HJ (Iran)  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's case although no one drew this authority to  his  attention
    and its full implications for cases not  based  on  sexual  orientation
    were not immediately appreciated.

31.   Ms Holmes sought  to  distinguish  the  case  but  we  find  that  the
    appellant falls squarely within the principles of HJ (Iran).  He  would
    behave discreetly on return, preaching if not to the converted to those
    deemed not to be dangerous. His behaviour would at  least  in  part  be
    conditioned by the fear of persecution.

32.   Because we have found an error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    approach it is open to us to consider current background  material  and
    country information.  As we have said, Ms Holmes helpfully provided the
    Country of Origin Report that would have been current at the  time  the
    Immigration Judge considered the matter and Mr  Khan  also  lodged  the
    January 2011 Country of  Origin  Report.   Neither  side  drew  to  our
    attention to any material distinction between the two reports.  Counsel
    did refer to the Parliamentary Human Rights Group Report  published  on
    24 September 2010 which did not  appear  in  the  previous  Country  of
    Origin Information Report.  In this report there  is  reference  to  an
    attack in May 2010 on two large Ahmadi mosques.  Assailants entered the
    two mosques when the people were worshipping and in the end  85  people
    were killed and 150 injured.  The attack was carried out by a  hitherto
    unknown group "assumed to be a front  for  a  sectarian  organisation".
    The report also referred to a suggestion by the Ahmadi  community  that
    the state and  political  parties  contributed  to  the  discrimination
    against and persecution  of  Ahmadis  -  the  situation  could  not  be
    attributed solely to extremist mullahs.  (See paragraph  19.75  of  the
    Country of Origin Information Report published on 17 January 2011).

33.   It was not argued by Ms Holmes that the  situation  had  improved  for
    Ahmadis in the last few  years.  We  did  not  hear  full  evidence  or
    submissions  on  whether  the  position   for   Ahmadis   had   altered
    significantly since the time when the Tribunal gave guidance in MJ  and
    in the event it is not necessary for us to resolve the matter given the
    way the case was argued before us and  our  conclusions  on  the  point
    raised by HJ (Iran).

34.   Ms Holmes did not raise the issue of  internal  relocation.   She  did
    however in the course of her  submissions  raise  the  point  that  the
    appellant had behaved indiscreetly  by  publishing  his  activities  in
    Malta in a Rabwah newspaper.

35.   It appears to us that the  appellant  would,  as  Mr  Khan  submitted,
    behave on return as he has behaved in the past.   He  would  so  behave
    whether he was  in  Rabwah  or  elsewhere.   In  IA  (Ahmadis:  Rabwah)
    Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088 the Tribunal noted at paragraph 26  that
    the evidence did not suggest that Rabwah was safer than  anywhere  else
    and whilst Ahmadis sought some protection in Rabwah  among  the  Ahmadi
    communities there, that "does not demonstrate that Rabwah is  safe  for
    long-term residence."  In paragraph  85  of  MJ  the  Tribunal,  having
    referred to IA the Tribunal stated:

         "It may be, as the Tribunal said in IA and  Others,  that  in  some
         individual cases the level of risk can be shown to be  sufficiently
         enhanced on the particular facts to indicate that  that  individual
         cannot be returned safely to their home area.  Whether or not there
         is an internal relocation option, either to Rabwah or elsewhere  in
         Pakistan, will then be a question  of  fact  in  relation  to  that
         individual.  Rabwah is no safer  than  elsewhere  in  Pakistan  for
         Ahmadis, but the question whether it  is  an  appropriate  internal
         relocation option for an individual Ahmadi will  always  depend  on
         the  particular  circumstances  and  facts  of  that   individual's
         situation."


36.   There was no response by the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  grant  of
    permission in this case.  Ms Holmes concentrated fairly and squarely on
    the HJ (Iran) point and did not  argue  that  the  internal  relocation
    option was reasonably available to the appellant  in  the  alternative.
    We can understand why she approached the case  in  this  way.   If  the
    appellant were to publish material to "dangerous" people it is unlikely
    that  Rabwah  would  provide  a  safe  haven  for  him.   In  the  2007
    Parliamentary Human Rights Group Report referred to in paragraph  19.73
    of the 2010 Country of Origin Information Report and paragraph 19.91 of
    the 2011 report it is made clear that Khatme Nabuwwat have an office in
    Rabwah and fear of Khatme Nabuwwat "is ever present" there.  The  Human
    Rights Commission of Pakistan explained  "that  the  best  way  for  an
    Ahmadi to protect her or himself is to hide their religion:  living  in
    Rabwah has the opposite effect as it is the focus  of  Khatme  Nabuwwat
    and living in the town marks the person as an Ahmadi."

37.    We deal with this case on its own particular facts in  the  light  of
    the way in which it was argued and given the point on which  permission
    to appeal was granted.  The appellant has been accepted to be a  devout
    Ahmadi and to  have  produced  three  quite  lengthy  publications  and
    further it appears to be accepted that he has preached  openly  abroad.
    It may well be that  if  the  Immigration  Judge  had  had  benefit  of
    argument on the subject of HJ  (Iran)  his  decision  would  have  been
    different.  In any event, we find  that  his  decision  was  materially
    flawed in law for the reasons we have given and accordingly  we  remake
    the decision.

    The appellant's asylum appeal is allowed.



    Signed                                         Date


      Senior Immigration Judge Warr
      (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

