
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


        AZ (Asylum-'legacy' cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms G. Brown, Counsel instructed by Luqmani Thompson &
Partners
For the Respondent: Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


(i) Where an appellant in an asylum  appeal  had  previously  been  informed
that his case is being considered as a 'legacy case' but no  decision  under
the process had been made, a subsequent  immigration  decision  following  a
rejection by the Secretary of State of his  asylum  claim  is  not  rendered
unlawful by reason of the failure  to  make  a  decision  under  the  legacy
process.

(ii) There is no obligation on a Tribunal to adjourn an asylum appeal so  as
to allow for a decision to be made under the legacy process.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1  January  1994.
       He is said to have  arrived  in  the  UK  in  December  2006  as  an
       unaccompanied minor aged 12. He claimed asylum on 22  January  2007.
       The application for asylum was refused on 29 April 2009 but  he  was
       granted discretionary leave until 1 July 2011.

    2. On 27 June 2011  he  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain.  That
       application was also refused and at the same  time  a  decision  was
       made to remove him under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act"),  about  which  more  is  said
       below. His appeal, on asylum and human rights grounds, was dismissed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot after  a  hearing  on  6  August
       2012. Permission to appeal having  been  granted,  the  appeal  came
       before me.

    3. In summary, the appellant's claim was that there was a raid  on  the
       family home by the Taliban who wanted to recruit the  appellant  and
       his brothers. During the raid his father was killed and  his  mother
       was shot. Judge Talbot rejected the  appellant's  account  of  those
       events and did not accept that the appellant had to escape from  his
       home or from Afghanistan.

    4. He was similarly not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  given  a
       credible account of having lost contact with his family, or that his
       mother and siblings have been killed or are  missing.  He  concluded
       that it was highly likely that the appellant was  still  in  contact
       with his family. He found that he has family members  who  would  be
       able to provide him with support on his return and that he would not
       be at risk for any reason in Afghanistan.

    5. In relation to the Secretary of State's  failure  to  undertake  the
       'tracing' duty, he concluded that the appellant had not suffered any
       prejudice. He rejected the argument based on what was said to be the
       Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  give   consideration   to   the
       appellant's claim under the 'legacy' exercise of 2010.

    6. Before me Ms Brown relied on the grounds  of  appeal,  amplified  in
       submissions. She relied on the decisions in KA (Afghanistan)  [2012]
       EWCA Civ 1014 and EU  (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32.  On  the
       'legacy' point I was referred to the decision in Hakemi [2012]  EWHC
       1967 (Admin) whereas in response Mr Tarlow relied on Mohammed [2012]
       EWHC 3091  (Admin).  I  have  considered  the  appellant's  skeleton
       argument.




My assessment

    7. Neither the initial  grounds  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  nor  the
       renewed grounds as they are before me make any specific challenge to
       the judge's assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  claim
       as to the events that took place in Afghanistan. What  is  suggested
       in the grounds (and in the skeleton argument) is that the judge  was
       in error in terms of his findings as to contact with his family  and
       their circumstances now. In  submissions  Ms  Brown  repeated  those
       points but did not seek to widen the argument to include the judge's
       credibility findings generally.

    8. So far as contact with his family is concerned, the  appellant  said
       in his asylum interview in March 2009  at  question  21  that  since
       arriving in the UK he has had no contact with the uncle  who  helped
       him to leave Afghanistan.  In evidence he said that he spoke to  his
       mother in 2008, she having called from a public telephone  and  that
       in September 2011 he spoke to his maternal uncle who told  him  that
       his mother had died and that his two brothers were missing.

    9. At [25] Judge Talbot considered the question  of  contact  with  his
       family and concluded that he had only given a vague  explanation  of
       how his uncle was able to access his mobile phone  in  the  UK,  and
       that it was not plausible that he would not be  aware  of  how  that
       contact was arranged. Because the appellant had  not  explained  how
       his uncle was able to contact him, he did not accept the account  of
       his uncle having told him that his  mother  had  died  and  his  two
       brothers were missing. He also rejected the claim  that  his  mobile
       phone was stolen  in  January  2012,  he  not  having  provided  any
       evidence to support that claim. He also noted the lack of detail  in
       the appellant's claim as to what information  he  is  said  to  have
       given to the Red Cross.

   10. Ms Brown submitted that at the time of the telephone  call  in  2008
       the appellant would have been only 14 years of  age.  She  contended
       that no reasons, or no adequate reasons,  had  been  given  for  the
       adverse credibility finding in relation to contact with  his  family
       and the family circumstances now. I am satisfied however,  that  the
       judge's reasons for  his  findings  in  this  respect  are  entirely
       sustainable. The fact that the appellant was aged 14 in 2008 when he
       is said to have received the call from his uncle does not mean  that
       he would not have been aware of how the uncle was able  to  get  his
       mobile phone number. In addition, his account of contact as  between
       his asylum interview in 2009 and his oral evidence was  inconsistent
       and aspects of the account were vague. The  judge's  conclusions  on
       this aspect of his account were open to him on the evidence.

   11. The 'tracing' duty arises from Article 19(3) of Directive 2004/83/EC
       as  implemented  by  the  Asylum  Seekers   (Reception   Conditions)
       Regulations 2005 ("the Regulations"). Regulation 6 provides that  in
       order to  protect  an  unaccompanied  minor's  best  interests,  the
       Secretary of State shall "endeavour to trace"  the  members  of  the
       minor's family as soon as possible after the minor makes  his  claim
       for asylum. The duty is most aptly described as a duty to  endeavour
       to trace, although nothing turns on that for present purposes.   The
       Regulations came into force on 5 February  2005  and  are  expressly
       stated  to  apply  to  asylum  applications  after  that  date.  The
       appellant made his claim for asylum on 22 January 2007.

   12. There is no indication from the Secretary of State's decision letter
       dated 29 April 2009 refusing asylum that the duty was complied with.
       It does not appear that during the proceedings before the First-tier
       Tribunal there was any suggestion by the Secretary of State that the
       duty had been complied with, and such a suggestion was not  advanced
       before me. I proceed on the assumption  therefore,  that  there  has
       been a failure by the Secretary of State to fulfil the tracing duty.



   13. A similar issue to that arising in the present case  was  considered
       by the Court of Appeal in EU. At [5] a passage from the judgment  of
       Maurice Kay LJ in KA (Afghanistan) was cited, as follows:
             "There is a hypothetical spectrum. At one end is  an  applicant
             who gives a credible  and  cooperative  account  of  having  no
             surviving family in Afghanistan or of having  lost  touch  with
             surviving family members and having failed, notwithstanding his
             best endeavours, to re-establish contact. It seems to me  that,
             even if he has reached the age of 18 by the time his appeal  is
             considered by the tribunal, he may, depending on  the  totality
             of the established facts, have the basis of a successful appeal
             by availing himself of the Rashid/S principle and/or section 55
             by reference to the  failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
             discharge the duty to  endeavour  to  trace.  In  such  a  case
             Ravichandran would not be an insurmountable  obstacle.  At  the
             other end of the spectrum is an applicant whose claim  to  have
             no surviving  family  in  Afghanistan  is  disbelieved  and  in
             respect of whom it is found that he has been  uncooperative  so
             as to frustrate any attempt to trace  his  family.  In  such  a
             case, again depending on the totality of established facts,  he
             may have put himself beyond the  bite  of  the  protective  and
             corrective principle. This would not be because the  law  seeks
             to punish him for his mendacity but because he  has  failed  to
             prove the  risk  on  return  and  because  there  would  be  no
             causative link between the Secretary of State's breach of  duty
             and his claim to protection. Whereas, in the  first  case,  the
             applicant may have lost the opportunity  of  corroborating  his
             evidence  about  the  absence  of  support  in  Afghanistan  by
             reference to a negative result  from  the  properly  discharged
             duty to endeavour to trace, in the second case he can establish
             no such disadvantage."

   14. That  passage,  at  least  in  terms  of  what  is  said  about  the
       "protective and corrective principle",  needs  to  be  read  in  the
       context of what is said in  [6]  of  EU  about  the  limits  of  the
       principle.

   15. Notwithstanding the failure of the Secretary of State to fulfil  the
       obligation to endeavour  to  trace,  Judge  Talbot  found  that  the
       appellant does have family in  Afghanistan  who  would  be  able  to
       provide him with support on his return.

   16. Ms Brown submitted that had the tracing duty been  carried  out  the
       appellant's account might have been established and the difficulties
       in relocating within Afghanistan may  also  have  been  established.
       However, it is important to bear in  mind  what  was  said  in  this
       respect at [10] of EU as follows:

             "Lastly, I should mention a point  made  by  the  Secretary  of
             State  which  I  consider  to  have  substance.   Unaccompanied
             children who arrive in this country from Afghanistan have  done
             so as a result of someone, presumably  their  families,  paying
             for their fare and/or for a so-called agent  to  arrange  their
             journey to this country. The costs incurred by the family  will
             have been considerable, relative to the wealth of  the  average
             Afghan family. The motivation for their incurring that cost may
             be that their child faces risk if he or she remains  with  them
             in Afghanistan, or it may simply  be  that  they  believe  that
             their child will have a better life  in  this  country.  Either
             way, they are unlikely to be happy to cooperate with  an  agent
             of the Secretary of State for the  return  of  their  child  to
             Afghanistan, which would mean the waste of their investment  in
             his or her journey here."

   17. Although every case is fact specific, in none of the appeals  before
       the Court in EU was it concluded that the  failure  of  the  tracing
       duty resulted in any error by the Tribunal  which  determined  their
       appeals, in terms of the credibility assessments made.

   18. Whilst there is no  'bright  line'  rule  to  be  applied  where  an
       appellant reaches the age of 18 as explained in EU, the fact is that
       the appellant was 18 years of age at the time of his appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal and is now 19 years of age. He has been found to
       be someone who could and would receive family support on return.

   19. Judge Talbot considered the Secretary of State's failure in terms of
       'tracing' in the context of his  Article  8  assessment.  I  am  not
       satisfied that there is any error of law in his decision in relation
       to the Secretary of State's failure of her tracing duty, whether  in
       the context of Article 8 or otherwise.

   20.  In  the  light  of  the  judge's  credibility  assessment  and  his
       conclusions in relation to the family  support  that  the  appellant
       could expect to receive on return to Afghanistan, there is no  error
       of law in his assessment at [30] that the appellant would not be  at
       risk on return generally or as a Pashtun, as contended in [4] of the
       grounds with reference to the decision in AA  (unattended  children)
       Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).

   21. The 'legacy' argument arises in the following way. The appellant was
       informed on 29 July 2010 that his case was being considered as  part
       of the legacy exercise. A copy of the letter is at page A58  of  the
       appellant's bundle. It states that:

             "Your case is in the backlog of older asylum applications  that
             the UK Border Agency is in the process of concluding. The  Case
             Resolution Directorate (CRD) are responsible for your case.

             The Case Resolution Teams have  been  established  specifically
             with the older asylum applications, such as  yours,  and  their
             aim is to resolve these cases by  either  removing  individuals
             from the United Kingdom or granting them  leave  to  remain  in
             accordance with the existing law and policy."

   22. The letter gives the web address for details of how the  claims  are
       to be processed and as to what further information is required.

   23. At A56 is a letter to the UKBA from the appellant's solicitors dated
       4 July 2011 stating that on 19 August 2010 the appellant's  original
       Immigration Status Document and passport photographs  were  provided
       in response to the letter from the CRD. The letter noted that  there
       have been no further developments, and asked for confirmation as  to
       whether or not the appellant is still being  considered  within  the
       CRD team. As a matter of interest, the letters at A56  and  A58  are
       also in the respondent's bundle.

   24. Prior to the solicitors' chase-up letter of 4  July  2011  they  had
       made the application for further leave to remain dated 27 June 2011.
       It appears that the next thing that happened was that the  Secretary
       of State issued the refusal letter dated 2 April 2012.  That  letter
       does not refer to the legacy issue and there appears to have been no
       further communication on the matter  from  the  Secretary  of  State
       after the letter dated 29 July 2010 informing the appellant that his
       was being considered as a legacy  case.  I  note  that  the  refusal
       letter dated 29 April 2009 in respect  of  the  appellant's  initial
       application for asylum was written by a  person  from  "Legacy  CRT-
       South 6, Case Resolution Directorate". The refusal letter  of  April
       2012 is described as coming from "Barnet/Enfield LIT".  'LIT'  would
       seem to mean Local Immigration Team.

   25. It is suggested in the appellant's grounds before the Upper Tribunal
       that the First-tier judge erred in failing to adjourn the hearing in
       order that the Secretary of State "might  consider  the  appellant's
       case under the provisions of the legacy". At [3] of the  grounds  it
       is said that the Secretary of State's failure to grant the appellant
       leave to remain under the legacy process meant that her decision was
       not in accordance with the law and the First-tier judge should  have
       so found. It is also said that the judge failed to give any  or  any
       adequate reasons for the conclusion in [44] that there was no  error
       in the Secretary of State's decision by reason  of  the  failure  to
       consider the appellant's case under the legacy  provisions.  In  the
       skeleton argument before me the matter is put in terms of legitimate
       expectation.

   26. That the appellant's case was, at least at one stage, a legacy  case
       is clear from the letter dated 29 July 2010,  as  set  out  at  [22]
       above. His application for asylum was made in January 2007  and  the
       legacy cases are those where applications were made prior to 5 March
       2007 (see [1] of Hakemi) and  the  House  of  Commons  statement  by
       Melanie Gower dated 10 August 2010, referred to at [40] of Mohammed.



   27. The appellant relies on [7], [10] and [13] of Hakemi  to  illustrate
       the period of residence that might qualify him for a grant of  leave
       to remain as a legacy case, he having been resident in the UK for  a
       period of five years and four months at the date of the decision  to
       refuse to vary leave to remain, or four and a half years at the date
       of his application for further leave.

   28. However, I do not see that the decision of Burton  J  in  Hakemi  is
       authority for the proposition that where a case has been  identified
       as a legacy case but where no decision has in fact been  made  under
       the terms of legacy cases, a subsequent immigration decision is  not
       in accordance with the law by reason of the  failure  to  decide  it
       under the legacy process. Hakemi involved cases where decisions  had
       been made under the legacy provisions.  The  challenge  was  to  the
       legacy process on judicial review grounds and in terms of how it was
       applied to those individual applicants.

   29. Furthermore, if it is suggested that the fact that a case  is  being
       considered as a legacy case means that substantive consideration  of
       the asylum claim is barred, that is a suggestion with which I cannot
       agree. The point of the legacy process is, in part, as  set  out  in
       the House of Commons statement,  to  deal  with  unresolved  claims.
       Where a claim can be resolved, as it was in this case by the refusal
       to vary leave to remain, surely that is a  process  that  is  to  be
       encouraged not  discouraged.  After  all,  this  appellant  made  an
       application for further leave to remain on 27 June 2011.  True  that
       his discretionary  leave  was  due  to  expire  shortly  after  that
       application and if there was to be an application it would  need  to
       be made before expiry of his existing  leave.  Nevertheless,  having
       made the application, it needed to be decided.

   30. This view, it seems to me, is reinforced by  what  is  said  in  the
       House of Commons statement where at section 4 it states  as  follows
       (with footnotes removed):

"What are the criteria for granting leave to remain?

             When the CRD considers a legacy case,  it  does  so  using  the
             ordinary criteria for deciding  whether  or  not  to  recognise
             Refugee status or to  grant  another  form  of  leave  such  as
             Humanitarian Protection or Discretionary Leave.  The  UKBA  has
             been at pains to point out that this means the legacy programme
             is not an amnesty:

                 This is not an amnesty  for  individuals  whose  cases  are
                 unresolved. We will consider the cases in same way  as  new
                 applications,  using  the  same  rules  to  decide  whether
                 applicants qualify for permission to  stay  in  the  United
                 Kingdom or should be refused asylum and  removed  from  the
                 country.  Human  rights  factors  will  be  part  of   this
                 assessment.


             This distinguishes it from  the  "one-off  exercise"  to  allow
             families who applied for asylum before 2 October 2000  to  stay
             in the UK, regardless of the merits of their claim."

   31. At [4] in Hakemi Burton J noted that the argument that the reference
       of a legacy case to the relevant legacy department  amounted  to  an
       'amnesty' the benefit of which the claimants had been deprived,  was
       no longer pursued.

   32. I do not accept that the appellant had any legitimate expectation of
       being granted leave to remain under the legacy process. For so  long
       as his claim remained unresolved it may be, and probably  would  be,
       arguable that he had a legitimate expectation of  being  dealt  with
       under the terms of the  legacy  process.  Whether  that  would  have
       resulted in  a  grant  of  leave  is  not  a  matter  that  requires
       consideration here. His asylum claim was however, considered by  the
       Secretary of State and rejected.

   33. The appellant relies in the skeleton argument and in submissions  on
       the report  entitled  "An  inspection  of  the  UK  Border  Agency's
       handling of legacy asylum and migration cases" dated March-July 2012
       by the Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration,  John
       Vine CBE QPM. In actual fact, the only passage relied on is  in  the
       Foreword where there is criticism of the policy change in July  2011
       of granting "legacy asylum applicants" discretionary leave for three
       years where removal from the  UK  was  not  considered  appropriate,
       rather than indefinite leave to  remain  as  previously.  This,  the
       report states, adversely affected a number of  applicants  including
       former unaccompanied asylum seeking children whose cases should have
       been dealt with in a timely fashion and where  the  applicants  were
       not at fault for the delays.  The  Chief  Inspector  concludes  that
       those applicants had a reasonable expectation that their cases would
       have been resolved by July 2011 and that they thus would  have  been
       granted indefinite leave to remain.

   34. The report is highly critical of the handling of the legacy process.
       It does not however, help at all in informing  my  decision  on  the
       issues to be decided in the appeal before me.

   35. Mohammed was also a judicial review decision, by Mr  Stephen  Morris
       QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge. The  grounds  for  judicial
       review are set out in summary at [59]. They  were,  first  that  the
       claimant was still awaiting a decision on consideration of her  case
       under the legacy programme. The second related ground was  that  the
       case should be stayed pending consideration of her case by the  Case
       Assurance and  Audit  Unit  ("CAAU"),  the  successor  to  the  Case
       Resolution Directorate ("CRD"). Third, it was said that the decision
       to  refuse  the  claimant   discretionary   leave   was   Wednesbury
       unreasonable, or was otherwise unfair and  should  be  quashed.  The
       Court rejected the first two grounds but found for the  claimant  on
       the third, as to the approach that  was  taken  in  considering  her
       case.

   36. Mr Tarlow relied on Mohammed, in particular at [69] and [70].  Those
       paragraphs relate to the judge's conclusions on the  argument  about
       what length of residence would or could result in a grant  of  leave
       under the legacy  process.  That  issue  is  not  relevant  to  this
       appellant's case in the light of my conclusions on the relevance  of
       the legacy process to the determination of his asylum claim.

   37. In the circumstances, the complaint in the grounds that  the  First-
       tier judge  ought  to  have  adjourned  the  hearing  to  allow  for
       consideration by the Secretary of  State  of  the  appellant's  case
       under the legacy process is without merit. Judge Talbot was informed
       that the CRD (legacy team) had been disbanded,  not  being  informed
       that it was succeeded by the CAAU. Nevertheless, in the light of  my
       conclusions, even had he been informed that there was still a legacy
       team in existence, there was no error in his failing to adjourn.

   38. There was no discrete challenge to the judge's Article 8  assessment
       beyond the limits of the challenges to the decision already referred
       to.

   39. In terms of the grounds advanced therefore, I am not satisfied  that
       there is any  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

   40. It was however conceded on behalf of the respondent that the removal
       decision under section 47 of the 2006 Act was not in accordance with
       the law, it being made at the same time as, and in the same decision
       as, the refusal to vary leave to remain. It was  decided  in  Ahmadi
       (s. 47 decision: validity; Sapkota) [2012]  UKUT  00147  (IAC),  now
       confirmed by the Court of Appeal ([2013] EWCA Civ 512)
       that a removal decision under s. 47 of the 2006 Act cannot  be  made
       at the same time as the  variation  of  leave  decision.  (See  also
       Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal   decisions:   Tribunal
       Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC)). The First-tier judge  did  not
       deal with the question of the validity of the removal decision.

   41. There is thus an error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal
       in relation to the decision to remove the appellant under s.  47  of
       the 2006 Act and to that extent only the decision is set aside.  The
       appeal in relation to s.47 is allowed to  the  limited  extent  that
       that decision (as distinct from the decision to refuse to vary leave
       to remain) is not in accordance with the law.

Decision

   42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law in terms of the Secretary  of  State's
       decision to refuse to vary leave to  remain.  The  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
       protection and human rights grounds therefore stands.

   43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error on a point of law in relation to the decision  to  remove  the
       appellant  under  section  47  of  the   Immigration,   Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006. The decision in that respect is set aside  and
       the appeal is allowed to the limited extent that  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision is not in accordance with the law.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 /13
