
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Kovacevic (British citizen - Art 21 TFEU) Croatia [2018] UKUT 00273 (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|on 12 June 2018                    |                                        |
|                                   |....................................... |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ANITA KOVACEVIC
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Blundell, instructed by the GLD
For the Respondent:    Mr R De Mello and Mr N Garrod, instructed by David
Tang & Co

   1) A Union citizen who resides in a Member State of which he or she is  a
      national is not a beneficiary under  Article  3(1)  of  the  Citizen's
      Directive.



   2) A dual Croatian/British citizen who was residing in the United Kingdom
      when Croatia joined the EU and  who  has  never  exercised  EU  Treaty
      rights does not acquire a right of residence under Article 21 TFEU.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. Anita Kovacevic (hereafter claimant) is a national of Croatia.  She
        lawfully entered the UK in September 1995 and worked and resided in
        accordance with the Immigration Rules until she  naturalised  as  a
        British citizen in May 2007. On naturalisation, and  in  line  with
        Croatian law, she retained her Croatian nationality. She has been a
        dual national since May 2007. She has continuously  worked  in  the
        UK.


     2. The claimant's husband, Redha Zekri, is an  Algerian  national.  He
        entered the UK on or around August 1996. They married in June 2014.
        Croatia became an EU Member State on 1 July 2013.

     3. In July 2014 the claimant's husband submitted an application for  a
        residence card as the spouse of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty
        rights in the UK and, on the same date, the claimant applied for  a
        registration certificate under regulation  16  of  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006  Regulations")
        as proof of her right of residence in the UK as a qualified  person
        (defined in regulation 6 as an EEA national present in the  UK  as,
        inter alia, a worker or self-employed  person).  Both  applications
        were rejected on 6 August 2014 on the basis that the claimant, as a
        naturalised British citizen, did "... not  qualify  as  a  Croatian
        exercising a treaty right in the United Kingdom."

     4. On 20 November 2014 the claimant made a further application  for  a
        registration certificate and her husband made a further application
        for a  residence  card.  The  covering  letter  accompanying  their
        applications asserted that, although a naturalised British citizen,
        she was also a Croatian national and was able to choose to exercise
        her European Treaty rights as a  European  citizen.  The  husband's
        application was refused on 9 January 2015 because the claimant  was
        a British citizen and not  subject  to  worker  authorisation.  The
        Secretary  of  State  relied  on  regulation  2(1)  of   the   2006
        Regulations which, following an amendment in 2012 stated,


         "EEA national" means a national of an EEA State who is not also a
         British citizen.

     5. Before the amendment to regulation 2(1) the definition  of  an  EEA
        national did not exclude someone who was also  a  British  citizen.
        British citizens who were also nationals of another EEA State  were
        consequently able to rely on the 2006 Regulations. They  could  not
        do so following the amendment.


     6. Despite the refusal  to  issue  her  husband's  residence  card,  a
        registration certificate was nevertheless issued to the claimant on
        9 January 2015 on the basis that she was "... a  Croatian  national
        exempt from worker authorisation." The refusal to issue a residence
        card to the claimant's husband was a decision that did not  attract
        a  right  of  appeal.  He  obtained  permission  to  challenge  the
        lawfulness of the Secretary of State's  decision  through  judicial
        review proceedings.

     7. On 20 July 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  revoked  the  claimant's
        registration certificate because she was a British citizen  and  so
        not an EEA national as defined  in  regulation  2(1)  of  the  2006
        Regulations. On 23 December 2015,  following  the  commencement  of
        separate judicial review proceedings, the Secretary of State made a
        new decision revoking the claimant's registration certificate. This
        decision attracted a right of appeal under  regulation  26  of  the
        2006 Regulations which the claimant exercised. Her judicial  review
        challenge  was  withdrawn  by  consent  on  19  January  2016.  Her
        husband's judicial review challenge was stayed following a  hearing
        in the Administrative Court on 9 February 2016  pending  the  final
        outcome of the claimant's appeal. On the same day Mrs Justice  Lang
        made a reference to the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union
        (CJEU) in a similar judicial review challenge concerning Mr Lounes,
        the Algerian national spouse of Mrs Ormazabal, a  Spanish  national
        (Lounes, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2016] EWHC 436 (Admin)). Mrs Justice Lang  stated,
        at [63],


         In my judgment, a reference to the CJEU is required  since  it  is
         unclear whether the 2012  amendment  to  the  definition  of  "EEA
         citizen" in the EEA Regulations 2006, and the  decision  that  Mrs
         Ormazabal, who is a Spanish national, can no longer  rely  on  her
         rights as a Union citizen under  the  Directive  within  the  U.K.
         following naturalisation as a British citizen, unlawfully restrict
         the right to free movement under TFEU  Article  21  and  Directive
         2004/38/EC.


     8. Mrs Justice Lang referred the following questions to the CJEU.

           Where a Spanish national and Union citizen:


          i) moves to the United Kingdom, in the exercise of  her  right  to
          free movement under Directive 2004/38/EC; and


          ii) resides in the United Kingdom in the  exercise  of  her  right
          under Article 7 or Article 16 of Directive 2004/38/EC; and


          iii) subsequently acquires British citizenship, which she holds in
          addition to her Spanish nationality, as a dual national; and


          iv) several years after acquiring British citizenship,  marries  a
          third country  national  with  whom  she  resides  in  the  United
          Kingdom;


          are she and her spouse both beneficiaries of Directive 2004/38/EC,
          within the meaning of Article 3(1), whilst she is residing in  the
          United Kingdom, and holding both Spanish nationality  and  British
          citizenship?


     9. On 11 July 2016 the claimant's appeal was allowed by Judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal Herbert. Having set out the parties'  competing
        arguments, Judge Herbert stated (at [73] to [76])


         I find that following the case of Rottman v Fristaat C-135/08 2010
         that the Respondent is not entitled to  revoke  a  Residence  Card
         even though she has dual nationality. The Respondent I find is not
         entitled to dictate which nationality  the  Appellant  deploys  in
         respect to her private and family life and that of her dependants.
         It [sic] also find that the revocation of  the  registration  card
         was disproportionate in all the circumstances.


         I am however aware that the Upper Tribunal (Administrative Appeals
         Chamber) has recently stated two cases to await  the  decision  in
         the case of Lounes with similar questions arise.


         Having carefully considered the submissions made by the Respondent
         and by the claimant, I formed the view that the correct course  of
         action is  to  make  this  decision  notwithstanding  the  pending
         outcome of the case of Lounes.


         I am aware that Mrs Justice Lang referred four  questions  to  the
         CJEU for  consideration  concerning  Directive  2004/38/EC.  Those
         considerations are similar to the ones before me in this case  and
         therefore it is likely that decision may become irrelevant in  due
         course. I  am  unable  to  stay  these  proceedings  pending  that
         Determination however.


    10. An application by the Secretary of State for permission  to  appeal
        to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Grant-Hutchison on 17 November  2016  on  the  basis  that
        Judge Herbert arguably misdirected  himself  in  failing  to  apply
        McCarthy v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  C-434/09,
        [2011] ECR I-3375  ("McCarthy  No  1"),  and  by  failing  to  give
        adequate reasons for his conclusions. It was additionally  arguable
        that the First-tier Tribunal judge should have stayed  the  hearing
        to await the outcome of  the  reference  to  the  CJEU.  The  Upper
        Tribunal hearing was stayed pending the CJEU's decision in Lounes.


    11. On 14 November 2017, the Grand Chamber of the CJEU handed down  its
        answer to the reference from the  Administrative  Court  (Lounes  v
        Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Article  21  TFEU  -
        Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-165/16, ("Lounes")). In brief summary,
        the CJEU concluded that neither Mr Lounes  nor  his  dual  national
        spouse were able to derive a right  of  residence  under  Directive
        2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive")  as  they  fell  outside  the
        definition of beneficiaries in Article 3 of the Directive. A  third
        country national was  however  eligible  for  a  derived  right  of
        residence pursuant to article 21(1) TFEU, on conditions which  must
        not be stricter than those provided for by Directive 2004/38/EC for
        the grant of such a right to a  third-country  national  who  is  a
        family member of a Union citizen who has  exercised  his  right  of
        freedom of movement by settling in a Member State  other  than  the
        Member State of which he is a national.

    12. The Secretary of State essentially contends that Lounes disposes of
        the claimant's argument  under  the  Directive  and  that,  as  the
        claimant did not exercise Treaty rights before  naturalising  as  a
        British citizen, her circumstances are akin to those in McCarthy No
        1 and should  be  treated  as  a  purely  domestic  situation.  The
        claimant essentially contends that she benefits from the full range
        of rights under EU law as she  has  been  lawfully  resident  since
        entering the UK and  that  her  circumstances  disclose  sufficient
        links with EU  law  such  that  she  has  established  a  right  of
        residence under Article 21 TFEU.

The legislative framework

The TFEU

    13. Article 20 of the TFEU provides, in material part,

        1. Citizenship of the Union is  hereby  established.  Every  person
        holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen of the
        Union. Citizenship of the Union shall  be  additional  to  and  not
        replace national citizenship.


        2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be  subject  to
        the duties provided for in the Treaties.  They  shall  have,  inter
        alia:


        (a) the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the
        Member States;
        ...

    14. Article 21(1) provides,


         Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and  reside
         freely within the territory of the Member States,  subject  to  the
         limitations and conditions laid down in the  Treaties  and  by  the
         measures adopted to give them effect.

The Citizens Directive

    15.  Article  3(1)  of  the  Citizens  Directive,   which   is   headed
        "Beneficiaries", states,

         This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
         reside in a Member State other than  that  of  which  they  are  a
         national, and to their family members as defined  in  point  2  of
         Article 2 who accompany or join them.

    16. Article 6 of the Citizens Directive establishes an initial right of
        residence in another Member State  for  Union  citizens  and  their
        family members for up to 3 months. Article 7 establishes a right of
        residence for more than 3 months in another Member State for  Union
        citizens who are, inter alia, workers  and  self-employed  persons,
        and this right extends to their family members for as long  as  the
        Union citizen meets the requirements of Article 7. A Union  citizen
        and their family members will have attained a  permanent  right  of
        residence in a host Member State under  Article  16  if  they  have
        resided legally for a continuous period of 5 years. Once  acquired,
        the right of permanent residence shall be lost only through absence
        from the host Member State for more than  2  consecutive  years.  A
        person with the right to permanent residence can  only  be  removed
        from the territory of a host Member State  on  serious  grounds  of
        public policy or public security (Article 28).

The 2006 Regulations

    17. Regulation 13 of the 2006 Regulations gives effect to Article 6  of
        the Citizens Directive, and regulations  14  (read  in  conjunction
        with the definition of a 'qualified person' in regulation 6) and 15
        transpose Articles 7 and 16 of the Citizens Directive. Regulation 2
        is set out  in  paragraph  4  above.  Under  regulation  16(1)  the
        Secretary of State must  issue  a  registration  certificate  to  a
        qualified person on production of a valid ID card or  passport  and
        proof that the person is a qualified person.

Lounes

    18. Ms Ormazabal, a Spanish national, moved to the UK in September 1996
        to study, and had been employed since September 2004.  It  was  not
        disputed that she had exercised her right to  freedom  of  movement
        and had acquired a right of residence in the United  Kingdom  as  a
        Spanish national under the Citizens Directive. In August  2009  she
        became a naturalised British citizen. She continued to  retain  her
        Spanish nationality. She married Mr Lounes, an  Algerian  national,
        in May 2014 and he applied for  a  residence  card  as  the  family
        member of a qualified person. Following the amendment to regulation
        2 of  the  2006  Regulations  the  Secretary  of  State  no  longer
        considered Mr Lounes' wife as an EEA national and  his  application
        was refused.

    19. The issues the CJEU set as its task to consider  were  outlined  at
        [30].


         ... whether Directive 2004/38 and Article 21(1)  TFEU  are  to  be
         interpreted as meaning that, in  a  situation  in  which  a  Union
         citizen (i) has exercised his right of free movement by moving  to
         and residing in a Member State other than that of which  he  is  a
         national, under Article 7(1) or Article 16(1) of  that  directive,
         (ii) has then acquired the nationality of that Member State, while
         also retaining his nationality of origin, and (iii) several  years
         later, has married a third-country national with whom he continues
         to reside in that Member State, that third-country national has  a
         right of residence in the Member State concerned, on the basis  of
         either Directive 2004/38 or Article 21(1) TFEU.

    20. At [34] to [37]  the  CJEU  reiterated  that  the  purpose  of  the
        Citizens Directive is to "facilitate and strengthen the exercise of
        the right of Union citizens to move and reside  freely  within  the
        territory of the Member States", and that the subject matter of the
        Citizens Directive concerns the "conditions governing the  exercise
        of that  right."  As  Member  States  cannot,  as  a  principle  of
        international law, refuse their own nationals the  right  to  enter
        and remain, the Citizens Directive "... is not intended  to  govern
        the residence of a Union citizen in the Member State of which he is
        a national." Ms Ormazabal's naturalisation altered the legal  rules
        applicable to her because she now had  an  unconditional  right  to
        reside in the UK. As such, she ceased to fall within the definition
        of 'beneficiary' in Article 3(1) of the Citizens Directive and,  as
        the Citizens Directive is concerned with the  conditions  governing
        the exercise of the right to free movement, the CJEU concluded that
        the Directive no  longer  applied  to  her  as  her  residence  was
        inherently unconditional (paragraphs 41 & 42).


    21. The CJEU then considered whether Mr Lounes was  able  to  derive  a
        right of residence through the rights accruing to his wife directly
        under Article 21(1). At [49] the CJEU rejected the UK  government's
        contention that the case concerned a 'purely domestic situation'.
          In the circumstances of the present case, it must be  noted  that,
          contrary  to  what  the  United  Kingdom  Government  in   essence
          maintains, the situation of a national of one Member  State,  such
          as Ms Ormazabal, who has exercised  her  freedom  of  movement  by
          going to and residing legally in another Member State,  cannot  be
          treated in the same way as  a  purely  domestic  situation  merely
          because the person concerned  has,  while  resident  in  the  host
          Member State, acquired the nationality of that State  in  addition
          to her nationality of origin.
    22. At [50] the CJEU noted that there is a link with EU law with regard
        to nationals of one Member State who are lawfully resident  in  the
        territory of another Member State of which they are also  nationals
        and, at [51], stated,


          Accordingly, Ms Ormazabal, who is a national of two Member States
          and has, in her  capacity  as  a  Union  citizen,  exercised  her
          freedom to move and reside in  a  Member  State  other  than  her
          Member State of origin, may rely  on  the  rights  pertaining  to
          Union citizenship, in  particular  the  rights  provided  for  in
          Article 21(1) TFEU, also against one of those two Member States.


    23. The CJEU concluded, at [53],


          A national of one Member State who has moved to  and  resides  in
          another Member State cannot be denied that right  merely  because
          he subsequently acquires the nationality  of  the  second  Member
          State in addition to his nationality  of  origin,  otherwise  the
          effectiveness of Article 21(1) TFEU would be undermined.


    24. The CJEU set out its reasoning at [54] to [60] and  identified  the
        conditions for the grant of a  derived  right  of  residence  under
        Article 21(1).

          54     In the first place, denying him that right would amount  to
          treating him in the same way as a citizen of the host Member State
          who has never left that State,  disregarding  the  fact  that  the
          national concerned  has  exercised  his  freedom  of  movement  by
          settling in the host Member State and that  he  has  retained  his
          nationality of origin.

          55     A Member State cannot restrict the effects that follow from
          holding the nationality of another Member State, in particular the
          rights which are attendant thereon under  EU  law  and  which  are
          triggered by a citizen exercising his freedom of movement.

          56     In the second  place,  the  rights  conferred  on  a  Union
          citizen by  Article  21(1)  TFEU,  including  the  derived  rights
          enjoyed by his family members, are intended, amongst other things,
          to promote the gradual integration of the Union citizen  concerned
          in the society of the host Member State.

          57     Union citizens, such as Ms Ormazabal, who, after moving, in
          the exercise of their freedom of  movement,  to  the  host  Member
          State and residing there for a number of years pursuant to and  in
          accordance  with  Article  7(1)  or  Article  16(1)  of  Directive
          2004/38, acquire the nationality of that Member State,  intend  to
          become permanently integrated in that State.

          58     As is stated, in essence, by the Advocate General in  point
          86 of his Opinion, it would be contrary to the underlying logic of
          gradual integration that informs Article 21(1) TFEU to  hold  that
          such citizens, who have acquired rights under that provision as  a
          result of having exercised their freedom of movement, must  forego
          those rights -- in particular the right to family life in the host
          Member State -- because they have sought, by becoming  naturalised
          in that Member State, to become  more  deeply  integrated  in  the
          society of that State.

          59     It would also follow that Union citizens who have exercised
          their freedom of movement and acquired the nationality of the host
          Member State in addition to their nationality of origin would,  so
          far as their family life is concerned, be treated less  favourably
          than Union citizens who have also exercised that freedom  but  who
          hold only their nationality of origin.  The  rights  conferred  on
          Union citizens in the host Member State, particularly the right to
          a family life with a third-country national, would thus be reduced
          in line with their increasing degree of integration in the society
          of that Member State and according to the number of  nationalities
          that they hold.

          60     It follows from the foregoing that, if the rights conferred
          on Union citizens by Article  21(1)  TFEU  are  to  be  effective,
          citizens in a situation such as Ms Ormazabal's  must  be  able  to
          continue to enjoy, in the host Member State,  the  rights  arising
          under that provision, after they have acquired the nationality  of
          that Member State in addition to their nationality of origin  and,
          in particular, must be able to build  a  family  life  with  their
          third-country-national spouse, by means of the grant of a  derived
          right of residence to that spouse.

          61     The conditions for granting that derived right of residence
          must not be stricter than those provided for by Directive  2004/38
          for the grant of a derived right of residence to  a  third-country
          national who is a  family  member  of  a  Union  citizen  who  has
          exercised his right of freedom of movement by settling in a Member
          State other than that of which  he  is  a  national.  Even  though
          Directive  2004/38  does  not  cover  a  situation  such  as  that
          mentioned in the preceding paragraph of this judgment, it must  be
          applied, by analogy, to that situation (see, by analogy, judgments
          of 12 March 2014, O. and B., EU:C:2014:135, paragraphs 50 and  61,
          and of 10 May  2017,  Chavez-Vilchez  and  Others,  EU:C:2017:354,
          paragraphs 54 and 55).


    25. At [62] the CJEU formalised  its  response  to  the  Administrative
        Court's request, rejecting the argument of  a  right  of  residence
        based on the Citizens Directive but finding instead a derived right
        under Article 21 TFEU.

          In view of all the foregoing, the answer to the question  is  that
          Directive 2004/38 must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that,  in  a
          situation in which a Union citizen (i) has exercised  his  freedom
          of movement by moving to and residing in a Member State other than
          that of which he is a national,  under  Article  7(1)  or  Article
          16(1) of that directive, (ii) has then acquired the nationality of
          that Member State, while also retaining his nationality of origin,
          and  (iii)  several  years  later,  has  married  a  third-country
          national with whom he continues to reside in  that  Member  State,
          that third-country national does  not  have  a  derived  right  of
          residence in  the  Member  State  in  question  on  the  basis  of
          Directive 2004/38. The third-country national is however  eligible
          for a derived right of residence  under  Article  21(1)  TFEU,  on
          conditions which must not be stricter than those provided  for  by
          Directive 2004/38 for the grant of such a right to a third-country
          national who is a  family  member  of  a  Union  citizen  who  has
          exercised his right of freedom of movement by settling in a Member
          State other than the Member State of which he is a national.

    26. We were informed that  Mr  Lounes'  challenge  in  the  High  Court
        settled in April 2018, that the Secretary of State agreed to  quash
        his decision and to  remake  it  within  3  months,  and  that  the
        relevant EEA Regulations (now the  Immigration  (European  Economic
        Area) Regulations 2016) will be amended in the very near future  to
        implement the decision in Lounes.

The parties' submissions

    27. Mr Blundell's submissions pivot on what is said to be a fundamental
        distinction  between  the  present  case  and  Lounes.  Unlike   Ms
        Ormazabal, the claimant moved to the UK and  obtained  her  British
        citizenship before the accession of Croatia to the  EU.  The  prior
        exercise by Ms Ormazabal of her  free  movement  rights  as  an  EU
        national in order to move to and reside in  the  UK  before  taking
        British citizenship  was  critical  to  the  CJEU's  reasoning  and
        conclusion. Mr Blundell supports this contention  by  reference  to
        paragraphs 49, 51, 53 to 55, 58 to 59 and 62 of  Lounes  where  the
        CJEU  repeatedly  referred  to  Ms  Ormazabal's  exercise  of  free
        movement rights, indicating the  significance  of  that  fact.  The
        prior exercise of the  right  to  free  movement  was  a  condition
        precedent necessary to trigger a right of residence. Simply being a
        dual national in respect of two Member States was insufficient. The
        question whether the Secretary of State was entitled to revoke  the
        claimant's registration  document  (the  subject  of  this  appeal)
        therefore turns on whether the claimant  was  entitled  to  benefit
        from her rights as an EU national as a dual  national  resident  in
        one of her state of nationality. The CJEU  expressly  rejected  the
        contention that a right of residence  could  be  derived  from  the
        Citizens Directive based on its analysis of Article 3. There was no
        dispute that the claimant never exercised her free movement  rights
        before obtaining British citizenship. She entered  and  resided  in
        the UK under domestic immigration law until she  naturalised  as  a
        British  citizen.  The  claimant  and  her  husband  are  therefore
        substantially in the same position as the protagonists in  McCarthy
        No  1  and  their  circumstances  disclosed  a   'purely   domestic
        situation' only. Since Judge Herbert's decision was reached on  the
        simple basis that the claimant was a dual  national,  his  decision
        disclosed a material legal error and should be set aside.


    28.  Mr  de  Mello  contends  that  the  claimant  is  entitled  to   a
        registration certificate and that the certificate cannot be revoked
        simply because she is also a British citizen. Her entitlement stems
        from Articles 20 and 21 TFEU, which bestow rights on the  nationals
        of Member States as part of their 'legal  heritage'.  When  Croatia
        joined the EU the claimant acquired a new  right  (described  as  a
        'vested or inherited' right) to reside  in  the  UK  under  the  EU
        Treaties. Her previous acquisition of British citizenship  did  not
        affect  future  rights  that  she  may  derive  from  her  Croatian
        nationality and the rights of EU citizenship cannot be withdrawn or
        limited by the U.K.'s definition of an EEA  national  in  the  2006
        Regulations.

    29. Mr de Mello submits that the fact that the claimant moved to the UK
        before Croatia became a full member of the EU does not  alter  this
        analysis and he relies on the Opinion of  the  Advocate-General  in
        Micheletti (C-369/90) which considered the  decision  in  Auer  (C-
        136/78). The claimant's lawful right of residence in the UK,  which
        was said to be in compliance with the conditions in Article 7(1) of
        the Citizens Directive, could be taken  into  account  in  deciding
        whether she presently benefits from the terms of the Directive.  In
        submitting that the claimant remains a beneficiary under Article  3
        of the Citizens Directive Mr de Mello relied on several authorities
        including Ziolkowski and Szeja v Land Berlin [2011] ECR I-14051. He
        contends that Article 3 of the Citizen's Directive and  Article  21
        TFEU only requires one movement of  cross-border  activity  if  the
        claimant is to benefit under  Community  law,  and  that  the  more
        favourable treatment, compared with the position  of  UK  nationals
        and their spouses, is only conferred on  the  husband  which  is  a
        consequence of the obligations arising from the Directive  (Article
        7(2)). He submits, inter alia, that if  the  claimant  relinquished
        her British citizenship she will continue to be a beneficiary under
        Article 3 (1), that a UK national and his 3rd  country  spouse  who
        move to another Member State and return to the  home  Member  State
        will be in a better position because they only have to move once in
        order  to  become  Article  3(1)  beneficiaries  whereas  the  dual
        national will have to move twice,  that  the  appellant's  analysis
        would discourage integration and impede free movement, and that the
        claimant continues to be a worker within the meaning of  Article  7
        (1) of the Citizens Directive  as  evidenced  by  her  registration
        certificate.


    30. Mr de Mello contends that the current definition of an EEA national
        in regulation 2 of the 2006  Regulations  amounts  to  a  de  facto
        deprivation of EU citizenship as her Croatian nationality does  not
        benefit the claimant in the host member state. He places particular
        reliance on the decision of Garcia Avello v  Etat  Belge,  Case  C-
        148/02  [2004]  1  CMLR  1  and  submits  that  the  claimant   has
        demonstrated four links with Community law as (1)  she  has  always
        worked; (2) she was issued with a registration certificate; (3) she
        possesses the nationality of another Member  State  (Croatia);  and
        (4) she wants to regularise her husband's status under EU law.

    31. The claimant's submission that she is entitled  to  a  registration
        certificate, and that this cannot be revoked on the  basis  of  her
        acquisition of British citizenship, is consistent  with  The  Hague
        Convention of 12 April 1930 on certain questions  relating  to  the
        conflict of nationality laws. Article 3 of the Convention provides,
        "Subject to the provisions of  the  present  Convention,  a  person
        having two or more nationalities may be regarded as its national by
        each of the States whose nationality he  possesses."  Mr  de  Mello
        submits that the grant of a residence certificate to  the  claimant
        is confirmation of her entitlement to reside in  the  UK  under  EU
        law, which reflects her contention that a Croatian national holding
        dual UK nationality before Croatia joined the  EU  acquires  a  new
        right to reside under Community  law  by  reason  of  her  Croatian
        nationality without such rights being  pre-emptively  curtailed  by
        reason of her holding dual nationality.

    32. The CJEU case law, it is argued,  suggests  that  a  third  country
        national may be in a better position than a  dual  EU  national,  a
        situation that requires resolution. It remains unclear how the home
        Member State treats dual EU nationals in respect  of  issuing  them
        registration certificates. The claimant contends  that,  as  an  EU
        dual  national,  she  should  be  treated  in  a  better  and  more
        preferential way than a third country national family member  as  a
        consequence of having dual nationality.

Discussion

    33. Despite the impressive array of arguments utilised by Mr  de  Mello
        in reliance on the Citizens Directive, in our  judgment  he  cannot
        overcome the clear and decisive ruling  of  the  Grand  Chamber  in
        Lounes and the unambiguous terms of Article 3(1). The Grand Chamber
        concluded, at [41] and [42], that a Union citizen who resides in  a
        Member State of which she is a national is not a beneficiary  under
        the Citizen's Directive. We agree  with  Mr  Blundell's  submission
        that none of Mr de Mello's submissions can assail this  fundamental
        conclusion and the CJEU's reasoning.  The  subject  matter  of  the
        Citizens Directive concerns the conditions governing  the  exercise
        of the right to move freely and reside within the territory of  the
        Member States and, as a  national  of  a  Member  State  enjoys  an
        unconditional right to reside in that State, the Citizens Directive
        cannot govern the claimant's residence.


    34. We therefore need only briefly consider  some  of  the  cases  upon
        which Mr  de  Mello  placed  particular  reliance  to  support  his
        contention that the claimant acquired a new right to reside in  the
        United  Kingdom  when  Croatia  joined  the  EU.  Auer   (C-136/78)
        concerned  an  Austrian  national   who   obtained   a   veterinary
        qualification in Italy and then set up practice in France and later
        obtained French nationality. The European Court  of  Justice  (ECJ)
        stated, at [28]

         There is no provision of the Treaty which,  within  the  field  of
         application of the Treaty, makes it possible to treat nationals of
         a member-State differently according to the time at which, or  the
         manner in which, they acquired the nationality of that  state,  as
         long as, at the time at which they rely  on  the  benefit  of  the
         provisions of Community law, they possess the nationality  of  one
         of the member-States and that, in addition, the  other  conditions
         for the application of the rule on which they rely are fulfilled.

    35. Both this case  and  Micheletti  (C-369/90),  where  the  Advocate-
        General relied on Auer,  concerned  the  imposition  of  additional
        conditions in respect of  individuals  who  had  already  exercised
        their right to free movement  and  residence.  In  any  event,  the
        general principle stated by the ECJ is qualified with the important
        proviso that the other conditions for the application of the  rules
        of the Treaty must be met.


    36. In Ziolkowski and Szeja v Land Berlin [2011] ECR  I-14051  the  ECJ
        held that, although periods of residence completed in the territory
        of the host Member State by a national of another State before  the
        accession of the latter State to the EU did  not  fall  within  the
        scope of EU law, but solely within  the  law  of  the  host  Member
        State, provided the person could demonstrate that such periods were
        completed in compliance with the conditions in Article 7(1) of  the
        Citizens Directive, they  could  be  taken  into  account  for  the
        purpose of the acquisition of the right of permanent residence.  Mr
        de Mello submits that the claimant's period of lawful residence  in
        the UK prior to Croatia's accession to the EU  can  be  taken  into
        account in determining whether  she  is  a  beneficiary  under  the
        Citizens Directive. Ziolkowski however  does  not  concern  a  dual
        national, and relates to a situation where the  Citizens  Directive
        was clearly engaged  and  the  right  to  free  movement  had  been
        exercised. It is not  in  contention  that  the  claimant  has  not
        exercised any free movement rights. Nor does the case say  anything
        about the acquisition  of  citizenship,  which,  as  considered  in
        Lounes [39], gives rise to a change in the legal  rules  applicable
        to  an  individual,  under  both  national  law  and  the  Citizens
        Directive.

    37. With respect to rights derived directly from Article 21(1) TFEU, we
        see considerable force in Mr  Blundell's  analysis  of  Lounes.  Ms
        Ormazabal was able to claim a right of  residence  in  reliance  on
        Article 21(1) because  she  had  already  exercised  her  right  to
        freedom of movement in her capacity as a Union citizen. It was  the
        actual exercise  of  that  right  that  triggered  the  protections
        derived from EU law (Lounes,  at  [55]).  The  claimant  has  never
        exercised her right to freedom of movement as a  Union  citizen  as
        she was not a Union citizen when she entered and resided in the  UK
        before becoming a British citizen. In our judgment it  was  central
        to the CJEU's ruling that Mr Lounes' wife had exercised her  Treaty
        rights (see Lounes, at [24], [38], [49], [51],  [53],  [54],  [57],
        [58] and [59]). The CJEU's reasoning was clearly  premised  on  the
        prior exercise by Ms Ormazabal of her right to free  movement  when
        she was a beneficiary under Article 3(1) of the Citizens  Directive
        and her acquisition of an extended or permanent right of  residence
        in the UK before naturalisation. If she had not exercised her right
        to  move  and  reside  in  the  United   Kingdom   Ms   Ormazabal's
        circumstances would constitute a 'purely domestic situation'.


    38. Purely domestic situations were considered, in the context of  dual
        nationals, in McCarthy No 1. This case concerned a dual British and
        Irish citizen. Ms McCarthy was born and had always lived in the  UK
        and did not claim to be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
        sufficient person. She married a third country  national  and  then
        obtained an  Irish  passport.  She  and  her  husband  applied  for
        residence documents as,  respectively,  a  Union  citizen  and  the
        spouse of a Union citizen. These applications were refused  because
        Ms McCarthy was not a "qualified person". A preliminary ruling  was
        sought as to whether Article 3(1)  of  the  Citizens  Directive  or
        Article 21 TFEU was applicable to a situation  concerning  a  Union
        citizen who had never exercised the right to free movement, and who
        had always resided in a Member State of which she  was  a  national
        and who was also a national of another Member State.

    39.  The  CJEU  held  that  a  literal,  teleological  and   contextual
        interpretation of Article 3(1) of the Citizens Directive meant that
        it did not apply to someone who had never exercised their right  of
        freedom of movement, who had always resided in a Member State which
        they were a national and who was also a national of another  Member
        State (at [30] to [43]). The CJEU  held  in  particular,  that  the
        reference to residence in the Citizens Directive was linked to  the
        exercise of the freedom of movement for persons (at [35]), and that
        the fact that a Union citizen is a national of more than one Member
        State does not mean that she had made use of her right  of  freedom
        of movement (at [41]).

    40.  The CJEU then considered the applicability of Article 21 TFEU.  At
        [46] the CJEU observed that, "... the situation of a Union  citizen
        who, like Mrs McCarthy, has not made use of the right to freedom of
        movement cannot, for that reason alone, be assimilated to a  purely
        internal situation." The CJEU's  assessment  at  [47]  to  [49]  is
        particularly pertinent.

         47     Indeed, the Court has stated several times that citizenship
         of the Union is intended to be the fundamental status of nationals
         of the Member States (see Case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano [2011] ECR I-
         0000, paragraph 41 and case-law cited). Furthermore, the Court has
         held that Article 20 TFEU precludes national measures  which  have
         the effect of depriving Union citizens of the genuine enjoyment of
         the substance of the rights conferred by  virtue  of  that  status
         (see Ruiz Zambrano, paragraph 42).

         48     As a national of at least one Member State, a  person  such
         as Mrs McCarthy enjoys the status of a Union citizen under Article
         20(1) TFEU and may therefore rely on the rights pertaining to that
         status,  including  against  his  Member  State  of   origin,   in
         particular the right conferred by Article  21  TFEU  to  move  and
         reside freely within the territory of the Member States (see  Case
         C-33/07 Jipa [2008] ECR I-5157, paragraph 17 and case-law cited).

         49     However, no element of the situation of  Mrs  McCarthy,  as
         described by the  national  court,  indicates  that  the  national
         measure at issue  in  the  main  proceedings  has  the  effect  of
         depriving her of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of  the
         rights associated with her  status  as  a  Union  citizen,  or  of
         impeding the exercise of her  right  to  move  and  reside  freely
         within the territory of the  Member  States,  in  accordance  with
         Article 21 TFEU. Indeed, the failure by  the  authorities  of  the
         United Kingdom to take into account the Irish nationality  of  Mrs
         McCarthy for the purposes of granting her a right of residence  in
         the United Kingdom in no way affects her in her right to move  and
         reside freely within the territory of the Member  States,  or  any
         other right conferred on her by virtue of her status  as  a  Union
         citizen.


    41. Although the claimant has not resided in  the  UK  for  her  entire
        life, she has never, in common with  Mrs  McCarthy,  exercised  any
        Treaty rights. Her admittance  to  and  residence  in  the  UK  was
        accomplished through the provisions of  domestic  immigration  law.
        After she  naturalised  as  a  British  citizen  her  unconditional
        residence flowed from that status, as did her  right  to  work.  In
        similar vein to Mrs McCarthy, the claimant enjoys the status  of  a
        Union citizen under Article 20 TFEU and  can  rely  on  the  rights
        pertaining to that status, including the  right  to  free  movement
        under Article 21. The revocation of her registration document  does
        not have the effect of depriving her of the  genuine  enjoyment  of
        the substance of the rights associated with being a Union  citizen,
        and it does not impede the exercise of her right to move and reside
        freely within the territory of other Member States. In short, there
        is nothing preventing her from exercising her free movement rights.



    42. Mr de Mello submits however that the claimant's  residence  in  the
        UK, since Croatia became a Member State on 1 July 2013,  does  have
        sufficient links with EU law such as to bring  into  operation  the
        free movement rights and the  rights  of  residence  stemming  from
        Article 21(1) TFEU.

    43. We have carefully considered whether the four points advanced by Mr
        de Mello, as detailed in paragraph 30  above,  demonstrate  a  link
        with EU law sufficient to trigger Article 21 TFEU.  Mr  de  Mello's
        first point is that the claimant has always  worked.  This  may  be
        true, but she has never worked as a consequence of the exercise  of
        EU  Treaty  rights.  She  first  worked  in  accordance  with   the
        immigration rules, and then as a right flowing from the acquisition
        of British citizenship. We are not persuaded that her work  in  the
        UK constitutes a link with EU law. Mr De Mello's  second  point  is
        that she was issued with a registration certificate. We accept that
        she was issued with a registration certificate but, in light of the
        decision in Lounes and the decisive assessment of Article  3(1)  of
        the Citizens Directive, she was never entitled  to  a  registration
        certificate. Moreover, the certificate did not confer any right. It
        was merely issued in respect of what was, wrongly,  thought  to  be
        her right. The document has, in any  event,  been  revoked.  Mr  De
        Mello's third point is that the applicant has Croatian  nationality
        and this provides the link with EU law. We are prepared  to  accept
        that a national of one Member  State  residing  in  another  Member
        State of which they are also a national  can  establish  a  general
        link with EU law. What is pivotal however is the nature of the link
        and whether there is any  impediment  to  the  exercise  of  rights
        stemming from EU law. Given that the revocation of the registration
        certificate has not deprived the claimant of the genuine  enjoyment
        of the substance of her rights as an Union  citizen,  and  has  not
        impeded her right to move and reside freely within the territory of
        other Member States, we are not persuaded, in accordance  with  the
        principles enunciated in McCarthy No 1, that  Article  21  TFEU  is
        engaged. With  respect  to  Mr  de  Mello's  fourth  point,  it  is
        understandable that the claimant wishes to regularise her husband's
        immigration  status  but  this  does  not,  independently   or   in
        conjunction with any of the other  points,  establish  any  linkage
        with EU law.

    44. Mr de Mello relies on Garcia Avello v  Etat  Belge,  Case  C-148/02
        [2004] 1 CMLR 1. This case concerned a  Spanish  national  and  his
        Belgian wife who resided in Belgium and had 2 children,  both  dual
        nationals. Belgian law required the children to take  the  father's
        surname only, but Spanish custom was for the children to  take  the
        first surname of each of  their  parents,  placing  their  father's
        first and their mother's second. The CJEU had to determine  whether
        the issue in contention, a conflict of national rules, came  within
        the scope of Community Law. At [27] the CJEU concluded that a  link
        with Community law did exist in respect of persons in  a  situation
        such as that  of  the  children  of  Mr  Garcia  Avello,  who  were
        nationals of one Member State lawfully resident in the territory of
        another Member State. At [28] the CJEU stated,

         That conclusion cannot be invalidated by the fact that the children
         involved in the main proceedings also have the nationality  of  the
         Member State in which they have been resident since their birth and
         which, according to the authorities of that State, is by virtue  of
         that fact the only nationality recognised by the latter. It is  not
         permissible for a Member State to restrict the effects of the grant
         of  the  nationality  of  another  Member  State  by  imposing   an
         additional condition for recognition of  that  nationality  with  a
         view to the exercise of the fundamental freedoms  provided  for  in
         the Treaty.

    45. The judgment in Garcia Avello principally concerned the prohibition
        of  discrimination  on  the  grounds   of   nationality   and   the
        establishment of Citizenship of the  Union  and  the  corresponding
        rights conferred by the European Communities (EC)  Treaty  on  this
        citizenship. Although the request for a preliminary ruling referred
        to Article 18 EC, which gave citizens of the  Union  the  right  to
        move and reside freely within the territory of the  Member  States,
        Article 18 EC, which is the precursor to Article 21 TFEU,  did  not
        form a significant part of the CJEU's analysis.


    46. Garcia Avello was considered and distinguished in  McCarthy  No  1.
        The CJEU observed that the  application  of  the  law  relating  to
        surnames by one Member State, to nationals of that Member State who
        were also  nationals  of  another  Member  State,  meant  that  the
        children had two  different surnames under the  two  legal  systems
        concerned, and that "... that situation was liable to cause serious
        inconvenience for them at  both  professional  and  private  levels
        resulting from, inter alia,  difficulties  in  benefiting,  in  one
        Member State of which they are nationals, from the legal effects of
        diplomas or documents drawn up in the  surname  recognised  in  the
        other Member State of which they are  also  nationals"  (at  [51]).
        Thus, it was the conflict of  rules  and  the  liability  to  cause
        serious inconvenience for the Union citizens  that  constituted  an
        obstacle to freedom of movement (at [52]). No such obstacle  exists
        in the present case.

    47. As to Mr de Mello's reliance on The Hague Convention (see paragraph
        31 above), this is an unincorporated international treaty  and,  as
        such, is not directly enforceable in domestic courts. In any event,
        we find Article 3 of the Hague Convention takes matters no  further
        as it requires a person having two  or  more  nationalities  to  be
        recognised as a national by each state, a matter  that  is  not  in
        dispute in this appeal. Contrary to Mr de Mello's  submission  that
        the Secretary of State  is  treating  the  claimant  as  a  British
        citizen alone, it is her failure to exercise her right to move  and
        reside  as  a  Union  citizen  that,  in  essence,  motivated   the
        revocation of the registration certificate. We note once again that
        the revocation has not deprived the applicant of the  enjoyment  of
        her rights as a Union citizen  or  inhibited  her  rights  of  free
        movement.

    48. The claimant  additionally  relies  on  the  European  Commission's
        opinion  in  a  letter  dated  15  October  2015  in  response   to
        correspondence from  the  claimant's  solicitors  relating  to  her
        husband. The letter concerns the  interpretation  of  the  Citizens
        Directive and the amendment to regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations
        following the decision in McCarthy No  1,  and  expresses  concerns
        that regulation  2  may  be  drawn  too  widely  given  the  CJEU's
        conclusion that Article 21 TFEU "...is not applicable  to  a  Union
        citizen who has never exercised his right of free movement, who has
        always resided in a Member State of which he is a national, and who
        is also a national of  another  Member  State,  provided  that  the
        situation of that citizen  does  not  include  the  application  of
        measures by a Member State that would have the effect of  depriving
        him of the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the  rights
        conferred by virtue of his status as a Union citizen or of impeding
        the exercise of his right of free movement and residence within the
        territory of the Member States" (original emphasis).  This opinion,
        which was written prior to the decision in Lounes, has to  read  in
        light of the CJEU's conclusions in that  case  and  the  indication
        given by Mr Blundell that regulation 2 will be amended  to  reflect
        the principles established in that decision[1].


    49. The European Commission's letter also refers to joined cases C-7/10
        and C-9/10  Kahveci  and  Inan,  involving  Turkish  nationals  who
        entered  Member  States  pursuant  to  the  EEC-Turkey  Association
        Agreement, who then naturalised in the host Member  State  and  who
        were subsequently joined by members of their family.  According  to
        the European Commission  this  judgment  spoke  in  favour  of  the
        argument that the Citizens Directive is relevant  for  EU  citizens
        who move to and reside in another  Member  State  and  acquire  the
        nationality  of  that  State  in  addition   to   maintaining   the
        nationality they acquired at birth. The Grand Chamber's decision in
        Lounes makes clear that the Citizens Directive is not relevant.  We
        were informed by both representatives that, during  the  course  of
        submissions before the Grand Chamber, reference was made to Kahveci
        and Inan, but that these cases did  not  form  part  of  the  Grand
        Chamber's consideration. We note, in any event,  that  the  Turkish
        workers would have exercised their  rights  under  the  Association
        Agreement before acquiring the nationality  of  their  host  state,
        which is analogous to the position of Ms Ormazabal. We do not  find
        the Turkish  Association  Agreement  cases  inconsistent  with  our
        analysis of Lounes.


      Conclusion


    50. For the reasons we have given we are satisfied that the  claimant's
        circumstances are analogous to that of Ms McCarthy in McCarthy No 1
        as there has been no prior exercise of her free movement rights and
        her rights of residence as a Union citizen. The  claimant  has  not
        acquired a right of residence in the UK under Article 21 TFEU.  The
        First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  essentially
        because she was a dual national  and  because  the  judge  did  not
        consider that the Secretary of State was entitled to dictate  which
        nationality the claimant employed in respect  of  her  private  and
        family life. This conclusion  was  clearly  wrong  given  that  the
        claimant's circumstances constituted a purely  domestic  situation.
        We therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal  and  set  aside
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


    51. We proceed to re-make the decision pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii)
        of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. In light of  our
        detailed assessment we find that the claimant was not entitled to a
        registration  certificate  under   regulation   2   of   the   2006
        Regulations. Pursuant to regulation 20(2) of the  2006  Regulations
        the Secretary of State may revoke a registration certificate if the
        holder of the certificate never has a right  to  reside  under  the
        Regulations. We are satisfied that the claimant never had  a  right
        to reside under the Regulations, or indeed under Article 21 TFEU or
        the Citizens Directive. We therefore find  that  the  Secretary  of
        State was lawfully entitled to revoke the registration  certificate
        erroneously issued to the applicant on 9 January 2015  and  dismiss
        the claimant's appeal.

    52. We decline to make a reference to the CJEU. The decision in  Lounes
        conclusively demonstrates  that  the  claimant's  submissions  with
        respect to Article 3(1) of the Citizens Directive are unfounded. We
        are additionally satisfied that our interpretation  of  Article  21
        TFEU, following the judgments in Lounes and McCarthy No 1  is  acte
        clair.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material error of law and  is
set aside.
We re-make the decision, dismissing the appeal of Ms Kovacevic.


[pic]                                        4 July 2018
Signed                                           Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
-----------------------
[1] This has now been achieved through The Immigration (European Economic
Area) (Amendment Regulations 2018, 2018 No 801, coming into force on 24
July 2018

