
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons; EEA reg. 37 appeals) [2019] UKUT 00283 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 May 2019                                |                              |
|Further submissions                           |                              |
|made on 31 May 2019                           |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                               Amarildo isufaj
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     in person, accompanied by the sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


    (1) Judges deciding applications for permission to appeal should ensure
    that, as a general matter, there is no apparent  contradiction  between
    the decision on the application and what is said in  the  "reasons  for
    decision" section of the document that records  the  decision  and  the
    reasons for it. As was said in Safi and others  (permission  to  appeal
    decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  388  (IAC),  a  decision  on   a   permission
    application must be capable  of  being  understood  by  the  Tribunal's
    administrative staff, the parties and by the court or tribunal to which
    the appeal lies. In the event of  such  an  apparent  contradiction  or
    other uncertainty, the parties can expect the Upper Tribunal  to  treat
    the decision as the crucial element.

    (2) Although regulation 37(1) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 provides that a  person  may  not  appeal  under
    regulation 36 whilst he or she is in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the
    decision in question falls within regulation 37(1)(a) to (g), once  the
    appeal is instituted by  a  person  who  is  then  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, there is no statutory prohibition on the appeal continuing  if
    the person concerned thereafter is physically  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It will, however, be for the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide
    whether to give that person temporary  admission  for  the  purpose  of
    attending an appeal hearing, since regulation 41 does not apply to such
    cases.


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW
        AND SETTING ASIDE OF THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born in 1993,  who  having  been
    refused asylum in the United Kingdom in 2016, was  removed  to  Albania
    later that year.

 2. The appellant attempted to enter the United Kingdom on 4 February 2017,
    in the company of his wife, the sponsor, who is a citizen of Lithuania.
     Both the appellant and his wife were refused admission  on  the  basis
    that the Immigration Officer was satisfied that their  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience and that refusal of entry  was  appropriate  on
    the grounds of public policy and public security.

 3. The notice of decision, given to the appellant, told him that he had  a
    right of appeal  under  regulation  36  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 against the decision but that, pursuant
    to regulation 37(1)(a), he could exercise that right  "only  after  you
    have left the United Kingdom".

 4. The appellant did so.  His appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor  House  on  3
    November 2017 by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 November 2017, dismissed it.   At  the  hearing,  the
    judge heard oral evidence from the  sponsor.   The  appellant  remained
    outside the United Kingdom.

 5. Ms Masood of Counsel drafted grounds of application for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the judge's  decision.   Ground  1
    contended that the judge had wrongly treated the appellant  as  bearing
    the burden of showing that his marriage to the sponsor was not  one  of
    convenience.  It is trite law that, although there can be a shifting of
    the  evidential  burden,  the  legal  burden  lies  throughout  on  the
    respondent to show that the marriage  in  question  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience (and, thus, not a relationship that affords a non-EU  party
    to that marriage any relevant rights under EU law).

 6. There was, plainly, great force in ground 1.  As Ms Masood pointed out,
    at paragraph 52 of his decision, the judge said:-

         "On the evidence before me the Appellant has fallen  far  short  of
         showing that, on balance his marriage to the sponsor was genuine."

 7. That incorrect articulation of the burden of proof governed the way  in
    which the judge approached the oral and documentary evidence.   So  far
    as the documentary evidence was concerned, the judge said:-

         "49. There is no documentary evidence that the couple cohabited  in
             Rome.  Indeed, one of the striking things about this  case  is
             the lack  of  evidence  about  the  relationship  in  general,
             including communications, photographs and the sorts of  things
             one would expect to see where a  relationship  has  apparently
             been ongoing for 4 or 5 years."

 8. In her grounds, Ms Masood pointed out that  the  materials  before  the
    judge included over 100 photographs of  the  couple  taken  in  various
    locations at various times, including on their  wedding  day  and  with
    various  family  members,  such  as  the  sponsor's  son;  and  written
    evidence, such as booking documentation, showing that the  sponsor  had
    visited the appellant in Albania  a  number  of  times  in  2017.   The
    grounds submitted that none of that  evidence  was  challenged  by  the
    respondent.

 9. Unsurprisingly, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett  granted  permission
    on Ms Masood's grounds.  Judge  Grimmett's  decision,  dated  26  April
    2018, stated in terms "The application is granted".

10. Paragraph 1 of Judge Grimmett's "Reasons for decision", however,  noted
    that the application was fourteen days out of time and that  there  was
    no explanation for the delay.  Judge Grimmett said that, as a result "I
    do not extend time".

11. Paragraph 2 of the reasons went on to state that: "It is arguable  that
    the Judge erred in requiring the appellant to show  that  there  was  a
    genuine marriage when the initial burden was on the respondent to  show
    it was a marriage of convenience".

12. When the appellant's appeal came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Renton at Field House on 2 July 2018, Ms Masood appeared on  behalf  of
    the appellant.   Deputy  Judge  Renton  took  what  he  regarded  as  a
    jurisdictional point  on  the  decision  produced  by  Judge  Grimmett.
    Having heard submissions from Ms Masood and Ms  Pal,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Deputy Judge Renton found as follows:-

         "4.  My decision is that  there  is  no  valid  appeal  before  me.
             Although Judge Grimmett eventually granted  leave  to  appeal,
             the first decision was  that  the  application  for  leave  to
             appeal was made out of time and that there was no  reason  for
             her to extend time.  This is the first decision in  the  grant
             and therefore in my view takes  precedence.   What  the  Judge
             subsequently decided in paragraph 2 of the grant is  therefore
             irrelevant.  I took the  view  that  it  was  not  for  me  to
             overturn in some way the decision of  Judge  Grimmett  not  to
             extend time.  I decided not  to  consider  a  possible  review
             under Rules 34 and 35 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014  as
             there would be no compliance with  Rule  35(3).   I  found  it
             significant that Judge Grimmett had not decided to review  the
             decision in the appeal under the provisions of Rule 34."

13. Having reached that conclusion, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton held
    that there was "No valid appeal before  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which is therefore not set aside".

14. Ms Masood applied on behalf of the appellant for permission  to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal against Deputy Judge Renton's decision.  In that
    application, she drew a distinction between  what  Judge  Grimmett  had
    said was her "decision" and what she had expressed as her "reasons  for
    decision".

15. Upon receiving the application for permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill considered (as she was  permitted  to
    do by rule 45(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2018)
    whether to undertake a review of Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Renton's
    decision.  Upper Tribunal Judge Gill decided to do so.  She noted  that
    the Upper Tribunal decision in Safi and Others  (Permission  to  appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) had been reported.  The headnote  of
    Safi and Others reads as follows:-

         "(1) It is essential for a judge  who  is  granting  permission  to
             appeal only on limited grounds to say so,  in  terms,  in  the
             section of  the  standard  form  document  that  contains  the
             decision, as opposed to the reasons for the decision.

         (2)  It is likely to be only in very exceptional circumstances that
             the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission
             that a decision which,  on  its  face,  grants  permission  to
             appeal without  express  limitation  is  to  be  construed  as
             anything other than a  grant  of  permission  on  all  of  the
             grounds   accompanying   the   application   for   permission,
             regardless of what might be said in the reasons  for  decision
             section of the document."

16. Judge Gill considered that, if Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  had
    had the benefit of the judgment in  Safi  and  Others,  he  might  have
    appreciated,  by  analogy  with  the  reasoning  in  that   case,   the
    significance of the fact that the section of the standard form document
    that contained the decision of Judge Grimmett stated  "The  application
    is granted" as opposed to "Extension of time is refused".

17. Accordingly, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  decided  to  set  aside  the
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton, pursuant to rule 46  of
    the Upper Tribunal Rules.  In so doing, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  made
    it  plain  that  the  significance  of  the  distinction  between   the
    "decision" and the "reasons for decision" sections in the standard form
    document does not merely provide an answer to the  problem  that  faced
    the Upper Tribunal in Safi and Others of whether a grant of  permission
    is general or restricted, but that it is the general means whereby  the
    significance of  other  deficiencies  in  the  "reasons"  part  of  the
    document ought to  be  addressed.  In  the  present  case,  what  Judge
    Grimmett said about extending time had to be read in the light  of  the
    main or overarching decision that, "In the matter of an application for
    permission to appeal ... The application is granted". Her decision  was
    to grant permission  to  appeal.  Since  that  meant  time  had  to  be
    extended, paragraph 1 of the "REASONS  FOR  DECISION"  section  of  the
    document had to be construed in that light.

18. Judges deciding applications for permission to appeal should  therefore
    ensure that, as a general matter, there is  no  apparent  contradiction
    between the decision on  the  application  and  what  is  said  in  the
    "reasons for decision" section of the document. As was said in Safi and
    others, a decision on a permission application must be capable of being
    understood by the Tribunal's administrative staff, the parties  and  by
    the court or tribunal to which the appeal lies. In the event of such an
    apparent contradiction or other uncertainty, the parties can expect the
    Upper Tribunal to treat the decision as the crucial element.

19. As a result of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill's  "set-aside"  decision,  the
    appellant's appeal was listed for hearing on  17  May  2019.   At  that
    hearing, the appellant appeared in person, accompanied by the  sponsor.
    The appellant had,  apparently,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  shortly
    beforehand, with the  aim  of  attending  the  hearing.   He  had  been
    detained by the respondent but then released  on  temporary  admission,
    with directions being set for his removal, shortly after  the  hearing,
    to Malta, which is where the appellant and the  sponsor  are  currently
    living.

20. The Upper Tribunal invited submissions from the parties on whether  the
    appellant could pursue his  appeal  from  within  the  United  Kingdom,
    having instituted the appeal whilst outside it.  Written submissions on
    this matter were received from Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer, dated 31 May 2019.  No submissions have been received from the
    appellant.

21. Mr Deller states that the respondent's position is that no  prohibition
    on pursuing such an appeal can be derived from  the  2016  Regulations.
    Schedule 2 to the Regulations does not  import,  for  an  appeal  under
    regulation 36 (Appeal rights), any provision of section 92  or  104  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which determines  the
    place from which an appeal under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act  may  be
    brought or continued.  Accordingly, the respondent submits  that  there
    is no legislative bar to  the  appellant's  appeal  continuing  if  the
    appellant is physically present in the United Kingdom whilst the appeal
    is pending.

22. We see no basis for taking issue with Mr Deller's submissions  on  this
    matter. Provided that the appeal is instituted when  the  appellant  is
    outside the United Kingdom,  his  subsequent  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom does  not  cause  the  appeal  to  lapse  or  otherwise  become
    ineffective.

23.  We would, however, emphasise that the present appeal is not an  appeal
    under the 2016 Regulations against a decision to remove  the  appellant
    under regulation 23(6)(b).  As a result, the appellant does not have  a
    right to require the  respondent  under  regulation  41  to  admit  him
    temporarily to the United Kingdom  in  order  to  make  submissions  in
    person in his appeal (except where such appearance may  cause  "serious
    troubles to public policy or public security": regulation  41(3)).   In
    an appeal of the kind with which  we  are  concerned,  it  is  for  the
    Secretary of State to decide whether to grant temporary admission.

24. Regrettably, on 17 May 2019, no Albanian interpreter was  available  to
    enable the appellant to speak  to  us  in  his  native  language.   His
    knowledge of English was extremely limited.  The sponsor  was  able  to
    communicate with the appellant in  Italian  and,  to  some  extent,  to
    communicate to the Tribunal what the appellant was attempting  to  say.
    However, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted when the  sponsor  gave
    evidence before him, the sponsor's own knowledge of English is somewhat
    limited (albeit better than that of the appellant).

25. In the circumstances, we indicated that, subject to the  jurisdictional
    issue, we would decide whether  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, such that that decision should  be
    set aside.

26. For the reasons we have given, we are fully  satisfied  that  there  is
    such an error in the decision.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  wrongly
    placed the burden of proof on the  appellant  and,  as  a  result,  his
    analysis of the evidence and findings thereon cannot stand.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge also ignored a wealth of material that  was  before
    him, including extensive photographic evidence.

27. We accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   We
    shall re-make the decision in the Upper Tribunal.   To  that  end,  the
    respondent has indicated that  she  would  be  prepared  to  grant  the
    appellant temporary admission for the purposes of attending the resumed
    hearing.





                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

