
                                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                MK (deportation - foreign criminal - public interest) Gambia
                                                       [2010] UKUT 281 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |                        |
|On 14 July 2010                         |                        |
|                                        |                        |


                                   Before

                             LORD JUSTICE SEDLEY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     MK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shamin, Counsel, instructed by Rock, Solicitors


(1)    In automatic deportations made under s.32 (5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007 the respondent's executive responsibility for the public  interest
    in determining whether deportation is conducive to the public good  has
    been superseded by Parliament's assessment of where the public interest
    lies in relation to those deemed to be foreign criminals within s.32(1)-
    (3). In consequence the respondent's view of the public interest has no
    relevance to an automatic deportation.

(2)   In such cases by virtue of s32(4) it is not open to  an  appellant  to
    argue that his deportation is not conducive to the public good  nor  is
    it necessary for the respondent to argue that it is.

(3)   The seriousness of an offence and the public interest are  factors  of
    considerable importance when carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  in
    article 8. As Parliament has now determined where the  public  interest
    lies in cases of automatic deportation, that factor must be taken  into
    account together with the Tribunal's own assessment of the  seriousness
    of the offence.  The gravity of criminal  offending  will  normally  be
    clear from the facts and nature of the offence, the views expressed  by
    the sentencing judge and, importantly, the actual sentence.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing MK's appeal against the decision  made
    on 3 February 2010 to make a deportation order against him as a foreign
    criminal  within  s.32(1)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   In   this
    determination we will refer to the parties  as  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, MK as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of the Gambia born on 18 August  1983.   He
    came to the UK in 1986 with his mother to join his father who had  been
    studying here since September 1985. Further periods of leave to  remain
    were granted until April 1991.  The family overstayed and then made  an
    out of time application on 10 August 1994. This was refused and  on  11
    October 1995 the respondent decided to make a deportation order but  in
    the light of the ill-health of the appellant's father, the family  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 6 November 1997.

3.    The appellant has continued to live in the United Kingdom and in  2004
    he formed a relationship with his current partner and a son was born on
    12 November 2005.  The appellant's father has died but his  mother  and
    sister still live in this country.

4.    The  appellant  had  a  number  of  criminal  convictions  before  the
    conviction which gave rise to the decision to make a deportation order.
     On 6 August 2002 he was convicted  at  Inner  London  Crown  Court  of
    offences of damaging property,  affray  and  failing  to  surrender  to
    custody and sentenced to placement in a  Young  Offender's  Institution
    for a total of twelve months. On 23 July 2004 he was convicted at Tower
    Bridge Magistrates' Court of possession of cannabis and fined  �30  and
    on 12 September  2008  at  Cardiff  Magistrates'  Court  of  possessing
    cannabis and resisting a police officer, being fined for both offences.

5.    On 31 March 2009 the appellant was convicted at Kingston  Crown  Court
    of two offences of possessing Class A  drugs  with  intent  to  supply.
    When passing sentence, Saunders J said:

         "[MK], would you like to stand up please?  The court as I  am  sure
         you are aware take an extremely serious view of people involved  in
         the supply of Class A drugs.  It is peddling in  misery  and  those
         who are caught doing it I am afraid suffer serious penalties.   You
         are a small scale dealer but you are a street dealer and the number
         of wraps which were found indicated the  level  on  which  you  are
         actually dealing.


         You are to an extent at the bottom of  the  pile  of  dealers,  but
         nevertheless it is still serious.  The tariff for people  who  deal
         in Class A drugs and who plead not guilty and get  convicted  after
         trial are some six years' imprisonment, in your case,  because  you
         pleaded guilty at the very first opportunity - and I give you  full
         credit for that - the sentence is  therefore  one  of  four  years'
         imprisonment."

6.    Following his sentence the appellant was notified of his liability  to
    automatic deportation on 11 June 2009  and  given  the  opportunity  of
    making representations on why he should not be deported.  On 3 February
    2010 the respondent made a deportation order under  the  provisions  of
    s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (the  2007  Act)  in  the  following
    terms:

         "[MK] is a foreign criminal as defined by Section 32(1) of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007:


         The removal of [MK] is, under s.32(4) of that Act, conducive to the
         public good for the purposes of s.3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act
         1971;


         The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect  of
         a foreign criminal  under  s.32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
         (subject to s.32)


         Therefore in pursuance of s.5(1) of the Immigration 1971, once  any
         right of appeal under s.82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act is exhausted, and the  said  appeal  is  dismissed,  the
         Secretary of State, by this  order,  requires  [MK]  to  leave  and
         prohibits him from entering the United  Kingdom  so  long  as  this
         order is in force."

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

7.    The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  on  the  basis  that
    removal would be in breach of  article  8.   The  Tribunal  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant,  his  mother  and  his  partner.   In  his
    evidence the appellant confirmed that he had been continuously resident
    in the UK since arriving as  a  child  and  had  attended  primary  and
    secondary school.  He then went to Bromley College and Borough  College
    but only for very short periods, dropping out  of  his  courses  there.
    After he completed his time in the Youth Offender's Institution he  was
    not working but signing on.  His relationship with his partner began in
    2004 and they moved into temporary and  then  permanent  accommodation.
    He said that he had spent about three months in  Cardiff  staying  with
    friends in 2008 although his permanent place of residence was with  his
    partner in West London.

8.    It was argued on his behalf that he had spent 23 of his  26  years  in
    the UK and could not reasonably be expected to return to the Gambia,  a
    country with which he had no affiliation save that he and  his  parents
    had been born there.  He had taken various courses in prison  and  when
    asked why  he  considered  he  would  be  unlikely  to  re-offend,  the
    appellant explained that he wanted to have the chance to live with  his
    partner and he had gone through a difficult phase following the loss of
    his father.

9.    In her evidence the appellant's mother confirmed  that  the  appellant
    now had no relatives in the Gambia.  Her own mother had died in January
    2009 as had the appellant's uncle on 25 December 2009.  She  said  that
    in effect she had had to bring up her three children  single  handedly,
    one was a lawyer and the youngest training to be a social worker.   She
    expressed regrets  about  the  appellant's  conviction.   The  Tribunal
    finally heard evidence from the appellant's partner who confirmed  that
    she and the appellant had lived together since 2004 and their  son  had
    been born in November 2005.  She was finding it difficult to cope  with
    her son on her own whilst the appellant was in prison and she said that
    she would be unable to live in the Gambia.  She had been  diagnosed  as
    an epileptic  shortly  after  their  son  was  born  and  had  been  on
    medication since then. She had visited the appellant  twice  in  prison
    but he had discouraged her from visiting more frequently.

10.   The Tribunal found that the appellant had made little of his  life  in
    the UK so far.  It said that the appellant had  drifted  after  leaving
    school and did not actively seek employment.  It accepted that he had a
    continuing relationship with his partner and their son but  found  that
    there were concerns about the strength  of  that  relationship  in  the
    light of the fact that his partner had only visited him  in  prison  on
    two occasions.  It took the view that the appellant and his mother  had
    played down the strength of their remaining connections in  the  Gambia
    and that there were extended family members there with whom contact was
    maintained. So far as the appellant's convictions were  concerned,  the
    Tribunal concluded that he had been more active in drug dealing than he
    had been prepared to admit.

11.   The Tribunal went on to comment that one difficulty it faced  was  the
    fact that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  risk  assessment  of  the
    likelihood of the appellant  re-offending  or  of  the  risk  he  might
    present to the public.  It was the appellant's case that  the  presence
    of his partner and child would be an inducement for him not to reoffend
    and that he had now obtained  qualifications  whilst  in  prison.   The
    Tribunal found that there was inevitably a  likelihood  of  reoffending
    but there was no sufficient evidence to determine whether that risk was
    low, medium or high.

12.    It  summarised  its  findings  as  follows  in  paras  44-46  of  the
    determination:

         "44. The length of time  the  appellant  has  been  in  the  United
             Kingdom is an important factor in this case.  He has spent his
             formative years here despite our reservation that he has  made
             little  of  them.  He  has  a  relationship  although  not   a
             particularly strong one.   He  has  a  child  here.   We  have
             concluded there is a likelihood of reoffending but as  to  the
             level or risk of this, we are unable to inform ourselves.   It
             was reasonably open to the  Home  Office  to  defer  making  a
             deportation order until a probation report had been  obtained.
             The respondent needs to take  the  consequences  of  making  a
             decision earlier than he should have.


         45.      The offence of which the  appellant  was  convicted  is  a
             serious one.  We  are  not  satisfied  that  he  accepts  full
             responsibility for that offence or satisfactorily acknowledges
             his role.


         46.       We  find  this  case  a  difficult  one.   With  no  real
             enthusiasm we find the scales  just  tip  in  the  appellant's
             favour by virtue of the length of time that he has been in the
             United Kingdom, the absence of any  immediate  connections  in
             Gambia, particularly in the light of the appellant not  having
             been there since the age of 6, and  the  presence  here  of  a
             partner and child. Although the offence of which the appellant
             was convicted is serious, given the absence of any  persuasive
             evidence  otherwise,  although  there  remains   a   risk   of
             reoffending, it is not enough for us to be satisfied  that  in
             all  the  circumstances  of  this  case   removal   would   be
             proportionate.  It is not reasonable to expect the appellant's
             partner to accompany him together with their son in the  light
             of the fact that she has never been out of the United  Kingdom
             and all her connections were born and live  in  this  country.
             The public are entitled to be protected from individuals  such
             as the appellant but returning to the absence of  evidence  of
             the risk of reoffending, our conclusion is that the respondent
             has not made out a case for proportionate removal."

The Grounds and Submissions

13.   Mr Deller's principal submission was that the Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law by failing when striking the balance under article 8 to  take  into
    account the respondent's view of the seriousness of  the  offence.   He
    submitted that the guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in N (Kenya)
    v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1094
    repeated in OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694 and OP (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 440  had  not  been  followed.  These  cases
    confirmed that the Secretary of State's deportation policy was a matter
    to be weighed under article 8(2) as an important element of the  public
    interest in deportation.

14.   Mr Deller sought to resile from the concession which had been made  by
    the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that   an
    evidential burden lay on the decision-maker to demonstrate a propensity
    to reoffend before it could be weighed as  a  relevant  factor  but  he
    accepted that a propensity to reoffend was  not  determinative  of  the
    appeal but was only one factor.

15.   He also argued that the Tribunal appeared not to have  made  a  proper
    distinction between "deportation" and "removal" cases and this led to a
    real doubt as to  whether  the  proper  factors  had  been  taken  into
    account.  In this context he referred to the comments of Richards LJ in
    JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast) [2010] EWCA Civ 10 at paras 28 and  29
    where he emphasised that there was a  material  difference  between  an
    appeal  involving  deportation  following  a  criminal  conviction  and
    removal following a breach of immigration control.

16.   Mr Shamin submitted that the Tribunal had not made any error  of  law.
    When carrying out the assessment of proportionality it had followed the
    guidance of the ECHR in Uner v Netherlands  [2007]  INLR  273  and  had
    reached a decision properly open to it on the evidence.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

17.   In support  of  his  first  argument  Mr  Deller  has  relied  on  the
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in  N  (Kenya),  OH  (Serbia)  and  OP
    (Jamaica). These  authorities  have  established  that  when  assessing
    whether deportation is conducive to  the  public  good  proper  account
    should be taken of the respondent's view of the public interest.  In  N
    (Kenya), May LJ said in para 64 of his judgment:

         "... It is for the Adjudicator in the exercise of his discretion to
         weigh all relevant factors, but an  individual  Adjudicator  is  no
         better able to judge the critical public interest  factor  than  is
         the court.  In the  first  instance,  that  is  a  matter  for  the
         Secretary of  State.   The  Adjudicator  should  then  take  proper
         account of the Secretary of State's public interest view."

18.   In OH (Serbia) the law was summarised by Wilson J  at  para15  of  his
    judgment as follows:

        "From the above passages in  N  (Kenya)  I  collect  the  following
        propositions:


        (a)      The risk  of  reoffending  is  one  facet  of  the  public
        interest but, in the case of very  serious  crimes,  not  the  most
        important facet.


        (b)      Another important facet  is  the  need  to  deter  foreign
        criminals  from  committing  serious  crimes  by  leading  them  to
        understand that, whatever the other circumstances, one  consequence
        of them may well be deportation.


        (c)      A further important facet is the  role  of  a  deportation
        order as an expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes and
        in building public confidence in the treatment of foreign  citizens
        who have committed serious crimes.


        (d)      Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose view
        of it is likely to be wider and better  informed  than  that  of  a
        Tribunal, resides in the  respondent  and  accordingly  a  Tribunal
        hearing an appeal against the decision to deport  should  not  only
        consider for itself all the  facets  of  the  public  interest  but
        should weigh, as a linked but independent feature, the approach  to
        them adopted by the respondent in the context of the facts  of  the
        case.  Speaking for  myself,  I  would  not  however  describe  the
        Tribunal's duty in this regard as being higher than 'to weigh' this
        feature."


19.   In paras 29-31 of his judgment, Pill LJ said:

        "29. In making a decision under paragraph  364  the  Tribunal  must
        have regard to the 'public interest', the expression  used  in  the
        opening words of the paragraph.  In doing so, a factor to be  taken
        into account is the nature of the offence of which the  person  has
        been convicted. That is set out in paragraph 364 as a consideration
        to be  taken  into  account.   It  is  only  one  of  a  number  of
        considerations spelt out in the paragraph but N (Kenya) makes clear
        that it is an important one.  The decision makes it clear that  the
        Tribunal must have regard to the  public  interest  and  also  must
        'take proper account of the Secretary of  State's  public  interest
        view'.


        30.      I respectfully agree with  both  these  propositions,  the
        second because of the Secretary of State's responsibilities in  the
        administration of criminal justice. Expertise in that field is with
        the Secretary of State  and  with  the  members  of  the  judiciary
        hearing criminal cases. The risk of reoffending  is  not  the  only
        relevant factor when assessing the consequence of a serious offence
        having been committed, as May LJ  stated.   Broader  considerations
        were involved.  The Tribunal is required to take proper account  of
        the Secretary  of  State's  public  interest  view  and  the  views
        expressed by the sentencing judge or judges.  The  appellant,  aged
        19 when he committed the offence, was sentenced on a guilty plea to
        an extended sentence by which he was required to serve  four  years
        in a young offender  institution  with  a  further  four  years  on
        licence


        31.      I see dangers in the Tribunal  attempting,  when  applying
        paragraph 364, to reassess the gravity of  criminal  offending  and
        what has caused that offending when views have  been  expressed  by
        the sentencing judge and by the Secretary of State.  In  this  case
        the Tribunal may have  gone  too  far  in  that  direction  in  its
        reassessment of the situation. The emphasis  they  place  in  their
        determination on the offence and its causation may have  distracted
        them from the overall task to be performed."

20.   These judgments  were  all  concerned  with  cases  where  deportation
    orders  had  been  made  under  the  provisions  of  s.3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and under the provisions of paras 362-364.    Para
    364 sets out the matters to be taken into account when deciding whether
    a deportation order should be made  and  includes  a  presumption  that
    where a person is liable to deportation the  public  interest  requires
    deportation.  Following an amendment to the Rules in July  2006  it  is
    provided that it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  that
    presumption will be outweighed when it would not  be  contrary  to  the
    Human Rights Convention and the Refugee Convention to deport.

21.   However, the provisions of s.32-34 of the 2007  Act  now  provide  for
    the automatic deportation of foreign criminals as defined  in  s.32(1).
    A foreign criminal is a person who is not a British  citizen,  who  has
    been convicted in the UK of an offence and to whom either  Condition  1
    or 2 applies as defined in s.32(2) and (3).  Condition 1  is  that  the
    person has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12
    months. There is no dispute in the present appeal that the appellant is
    a foreign criminal within the meaning of s.32(1).

22.   The consequences are set out in  s.32(4)  and  (5)  which  provide  as
    follows:

         "4.      For the purpose of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971
             (c.77) the deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive  to
             the public good.


         5.       The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
             respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."

23.   Parliament has therefore provided that if the relevant  conditions  in
    s.32(1)-(3) are met, the respondent has no discretion but must, subject
    to s.33, make a deportation order  and  that  the  deportation  of  the
    foreign criminal is conducive to the public good.  Thus, as it seems to
    us, legislative policy has occupied what  was  formerly  the  field  of
    executive policy.

24.   S.33 then set outs out a number of exceptions  to  the  making  of  an
    automatic deportation order. These include as exception 1  in  s.33(2)a
    where the removal of a foreign criminal in pursuance of the deportation
    order would breach  that  person's  Convention  rights.  This  too  now
    represents legislative  policy.   None  of  the  other  exceptions  are
    relevant to the present appeal.  It  follows  in  the  light  of  these
    statutory provisions that it is not open to the appellant to argue that
    his deportation is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good;  nor  is  it
    necessary for the respondent to argue that it is. But the appellant may
    resist it on the basis that it  would  nevertheless  be  in  breach  of
    article 8.

25.   It follows that the argument advanced on the respondent's behalf  that
    the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  account  of   the
    respondent's view of the public interest or of the seriousness  of  the
    offence has no relevance to an automatic deportation prescribed by  the
    2007Act. If the conditions set out in s.32(1)-(3) are met,  deportation
    is conducive to  the  public  good  and  the  respondent  must  make  a
    deportation order pursuant to s.3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act.   Thus  the
    respondent's responsibility for the public interest which was the basis
    of N (Kenya) and  OH  (Serbia)  has  been  superseded  by  Parliament's
    determination of where the public interest lies in  relation  to  those
    deemed to be foreign criminals. Correspondingly, as the decision of the
    Tribunal in the present case illustrates, there is no longer a need  in
    such cases to carry out the always difficult task of  according  weight
    but not deference to the respondent's policy judgment.

26.   This is recognised by the amendment to the Rules  in  para  364A  that
    para 364 does not apply where the respondent must make an  order  under
    s.32(5).  The Tribunal did not therefore err in law by failing to  take
    the respondent's view of the public interest into account  albeit  that
    view remains a relevant factor in deportation cases not falling  within
    the provisions of the 2007Act.  On the contrary, the Tribunal began  by
    recognising (para 1) that the appellant ranked as  a  foreign  criminal
    within s.32 of the 2007 Act  and  that  in  consequence  (para  8)  the
    propriety of  the  deportation  order  was  not  challenged.  The  sole
    question was whether removal pursuant to it would breach Article 8.

27.   This is not to say that the seriousness of the offence and the  public
    interest are not matters  to  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing
    proportionality within article 8.  Far from it,  they  are  matters  of
    considerable importance.  The starting point  is  that  Parliament  has
    determined that provided the relevant conditions set out  in  the  2007
    Act are fulfilled, deportation is conducive to the public  good.   When
    carrying out the balancing exercise in article 8 it  will  be  for  the
    Tribunal to take  that  factor  into  account  together  with  its  own
    assessment of the seriousness of the offence. The gravity  of  criminal
    offending will normally be clear from  the  facts  and  nature  of  the
    offence, the views expressed by the sentencing judge and,  importantly,
    the actual sentence.

28.   The  second  point  raised  by  Mr  Deller  was  to  resile  from  the
    concession made at the hearing that the burden was on the respondent to
    prove that the appellant was at risk of reoffending.  In the grounds it
    is argued that although the Presenting Officer conceded that the burden
    of showing a propensity to re-offend  fell  upon  the  respondent,  the
    panel materially erred in law in accepting this concession.   Important
    though the burden and standard of proof can be in their proper context,
    the concession made in  this  case  had  no  material  bearing  on  the
    Tribunal's findings.  In para 41 the Tribunal made the point that there
    was no evidence before it of any risk assessment  being  undertaken  on
    the likelihood of the appellant reoffending and the risk  he  presented
    to the public.  In these circumstances the Tribunal had to do the  best
    it could when assessing those issues on the  evidence  available.   The
    appellant had a number of convictions before  his  conviction  for  the
    offence leading to the automatic  deportation  order.   The  Tribunal's
    conclusion that there was inevitably a likelihood  of  reoffending  was
    properly open to it on the evidence even though it did not have  enough
    evidence to determine whether the risk was low, medium  or  high  (para
    42).  Indeed  the  respondent  was  fortunate  that  the  Tribunal  was
    prepared to form the view it did in the  absence  of  any  professional
    risk assessment.

29.   The third point  taken  by  Mr  Deller  was  that  when  the  Tribunal
    referred to "removal" in para 46  it  gave  rise  to  a  concern  about
    whether the correct test had been applied in assessing  proportionality
    in a deportation case.   There  is  nothing  in  the  determination  to
    indicate or any reason to believe  that  the  Tribunal  made  any  such
    error. In any event, there was nothing wrong in referring to  "removal"
    in this context as those liable to deportation are in fact removed: see
    schedule 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 and s.33 of the 2007 Act  which,
    when setting out the exceptions to  automatic  deportation,  refers  to
    "the removal" of a foreign criminal in  pursuance  of  the  deportation
    order.  There is therefore no substance in this argument.

30.   The respondent was obliged to make a  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant by virtue of the provisions of s.32(2)  and  by  s.32(4)  his
    deportation was deemed to be conducive to the public  good.   This  was
    the starting point for the Tribunal.  It then had to assess whether his
    removal would lead to a breach of article 8.   We  are  satisfied  that
    when assessing this issue the Tribunal took all relevant  matters  into
    account and was  entitled  to  find  that  the  scales  tipped  in  the
    appellant's favour, particularly in the light of the fact that  he  had
    been in the UK for practically his entire  life,  the  absence  of  any
    continuing connections with  the  Gambia,  and  more  particularly  the
    presence in this country of his partner and young child who  could  not
    reasonably be expected to return to the Gambia with him.

Decision

31.   The Tribunal did not err in law.  Accordingly the respondent's  appeal
    is dismissed and the decision of the original tribunal stands.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Latter
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
