


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

R (on  the  application  of  Gabor)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Reg 29AA: interpretation) [2017] UKUT 00287 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                             19 October 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                     (ON The application OF milan GABOR)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before


                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS



                               - - - - - - - -

Mr D Chirico, Counsel, instructed by Wilsons appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr B Keith, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


   1. An application for Temporary Admission pursuant to  reg  29AA  of  the
      Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  must  be  granted  unless   the
      applicant's appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy  or
      public security.  Proportionality is not the test,  and  the  cost  of
      facilitating  the   applicant's   appearance   is   not   a   relevant
      consideration.  The test is whether it can be said properly that there
      is the necessary basis for refusing leave pursuant to para 29AA(3).


   2. "Appearance", in this context,  means  presence  in  the  UK  for  the
      purpose of attending the hearing (Kasicky doubted).

   3. Where admission is granted for this purpose it must take place  within
      a reasonable time to allow the  applicant  properly  to  instruct  his
      solicitors.  Normally, some 2 or 3 days before  the  hearing  will  be
      required.



                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

MR justice collins:


1.   The applicant in this case is from Slovakia.  He came to  this  country
    but committed serious offences and as a result it was decided  that  he
    should be removed on grounds of public policy  and  that  he  qualified
    under the relevant Regulations to be removed.  He appealed against that
    decision and what is in issue in this case is his right to be  returned
    in order to appear in person at the hearing of  his  appeal.   That  is
    fixed for 8 November next, which is a Tuesday.


2.   The relevant provision is paragraph 29AA of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  So far as material this states:


         "(1) This Regulation applies where -


               (a)    a person ("P") was removed from  the  United  Kingdom
                    pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(b); (which is the  position
                    here)


               (b)    P has appealed against the decision  referred  to  in
                    sub-paragraph (a);


               (c)    a date for P's appeal has been set by the First  Tier
                    Tribunal or Upper Tribunal; and


               (d)    P wants to make submissions  before  the  First  Tier
                    Tribunal or Upper Tribunal in person."


    All those sub-paragraphs apply to this applicant.


    The following sub-paragraphs provide:


         "(2) P may apply to the Secretary of State  for  permission  to  be
                temporarily admitted (within the meaning of paragraphs 21 to
                24 of Schedule 2  to  the  1971  Act  (as  applied  by  this
                Regulation)  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  order   to   make
                submissions in person.


         (3)  The Secretary of State must grant P  permission,  except  when
                P's appearance may cause serious troubles to  public  policy
                or public security.


         (4)  When determining when P is entitled to  be  given  permission,
                and  the  duration  of  P's   temporary   admission   should
                permission be granted, the  Secretary  of  State  must  have
                regard to the dates upon which P will be  required  to  make
                submissions in person.


         (5)  ...


         (6)  ...


         (7)  Where Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act so applies, it has effect  as
                if-


               (a)    the reference in paragraph 8(1)  to  leave  to  enter
                    were a reference to  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom
                    under these Regulations; and


               (b)    the reference in paragraph 16(1) to detention pending
                    a decision regarding leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
                    United Kingdom were to detention pending  submission  of
                    P's case in person in accordance with this regulation."


    It is also provided that the applicant can be kept in detention if that
    is considered necessary.


3.   It is to be noted that in sub-paragraph (3) the Secretary of  State  is
    required to grant permission unless the appearance  may  cause  serious
    troubles to public policy  or  public  security.   Sub-paragraph  3  is
    somewhat badly drafted because on the face of it, it is the  appearance
    which actually causes serious trouble rather than simply  the  presence
    in this country. The approach that has been adopted by the Secretary of
    State, and it seems to me to be the sensible approach, is that one  has
    to look at the presence in this country, the presence being as a result
    of the appearance that will take place.   These  particular  provisions
    have been considered by Mr Ockelton, Vice-President in  R  (Kasicky)  v
    SSHD [2016] UKUT 00107 (IAC), a case decided  in  October  2015,  which
    also involved a Slovakian national as it happened and Mr  Ockelton  had
    to decide amongst other things what was the meaning of sub-paragraph  3
    and the question of appearance.  As he said  in  paragraph  14  of  his
    judgment "It does seem very difficult to say that  a  person  who  will
    spend his time in the United Kingdom in custody will pose  any  serious
    risk to public policy or public security".  That seems to me to  be  an
    eminently sensible decision and of course as Mr Ockelton  indicated  it
    is important to bear in mind that it is a  requirement  that  leave  be
    given to enter to appear.


4.   He also at paragraph 9 considered the meaning of  sub-paragraph  3  and
    what was covered by the word "appearance", and as  he  indicated  there
    were three possible meanings.  The first was,  in  general  terms,  his
    presence on the scene; the second, what he looks  like,  and  that  was
    clearly discarded as impossible, and the third is the formal  sense  of
    attendance at court to take  part  in  the  proceedings.   The  general
    meaning of "presence on the scene", Mr Ockelton said,  appeared  to  be
    that adopted by the draftsman of the standard sentences to be  included
    in decision letters.  In his view that was unlikely to be  the  correct
    meaning of the word appearance in either  Regulation  29AA  or  Article
    31(4) of the Directive which had given rise to the Regulation.  If that
    was the sense intended, he continued, it was extremely surprising  that
    either the word "return" or the phrase "presence in the  Member  State"
    was not chosen rather than the word which had a precise meaning in  the
    very  context  of  the  matter  being  regulated.   He  concluded  that
    appearance in Regulation 29AA meant appearance in the  appeal  process.
    It did not mean presence in the United Kingdom in any general sense.


5.   As I have said sub-paragraph 29AA(3) is very badly drafted but it  does
    seem to me that when one looks at this it is a  matter  of  considering
    what was the purpose behind this provision.  It is  very  difficult  to
    limit it to appearance in that sense because clearly the  concern  must
    be that coming back here will create the necessary troubles within  the
    provisions in sub-paragraph 3.  I am afraid I  do  not  agree  with  Mr
    Ockelton's narrow construction albeit I can see  the  logic  that  lies
    behind it because otherwise it seems to me that the provision lacks any
    sensible application.  It seems to me that what is covered is that  the
    appearance before the Tribunal will mean that the applicant is in  this
    country and it is that wider sense of appearance that is to be  covered
    by that sub-paragraph.  In many cases it will  make  little  difference
    because obviously if there is considered to be a problem in relation to
    a violent offender then he will no doubt be kept in custody and  as  Mr
    Ockelton, as I have already indicated, stated, and I entirely agree, it
    would be very difficult to envisage a case in which there would be  the
    necessary troubles created if the applicant is to be kept  in  custody.
    Obviously if there is any further risk that he might be of trouble when
    appearing that can be taken into account but  it  seems  to  me  to  be
    somewhat unlikely.


6.   Let us then look at the decision letter which is in  issue  here  which
    led to the refusal.  The point was made that he had been  convicted  of
    serious  offences  in  Slovakia,  namely  sexual  abuse   and   various
    dishonesty offences and blackmail.  He has been convicted in 2006 of  a
    number of offences including causing grievous bodily harm  and  he  was
    sentenced for those to 93 months' imprisonment and a  probation  period
    of five years.  I should add too there were  sexual  offences  involved
    but there has been no conviction of any offence  since  those  matters.
    Again what was stated was that there would be  a  potential  to  commit
    further offences of the nature that had led him to  be  dealt  with  in
    Slovakia and that he therefore poses  a  significant  and  unacceptable
    risk of harm to the public or a section of the public and it  was  also
    held against him that in July of 2015 he displayed  complete  disregard
    for our laws by attempting to enter the United Kingdom in breach of the
    order made in May of last year that he should be deported.


7.   Then in paragraph 13 which is the important paragraph this is said:


         "Further we have considered whether  in  spite  of  the  fact  your
         client may cause  serious  troubles  to  public  policy  or  public
         security, it would be proportionate to refuse his entry."


    "Proportionality" is not the test, the test is whether it can  be  said
    properly that there is the necessary basis for refusing leave  pursuant
    to paragraph 29AA(3), that is to say that the Secretary  of  State  can
    establish that his appearance may  cause  serious  troubles  to  public
    policy or public security.


8.  Going on in paragraph 13 the author continues:


         "In  particular,  we  have  balanced  your  client's  interest   in
         providing his submissions in person against his  threat  to  public
         policy or public security.  While your client may wish  to  provide
         submissions in person, we see no reason why your client's  position
         could not be adequately presented without oral submissions  and  we
         do not consider that any benefit your client might gain from  being
         present outweighs the violent and sexual threat he poses  to  other
         members of society."


    Again, that is not the correct test because, I repeat,  the  Regulation
    is mandatory and there  must  be  admission  for  oral  representations
    unless the basis for refusal is established.


9.  It goes on:


         "This threat could, in theory, be mitigated by detaining  Mr  Gabor
         during the period  of  temporary  admission.   However,  given  the
         violent and sexual nature of his offences it is considered that  he
         poses the same risk of harm to staff and detainees as  he  does  to
         the general public.  Moreover, his previous attempt at entering the
         UK in breach of the deportation order indicates that he may fail to
         comply with removal directions after the appeal hearing."


    Frankly that seems to me to be  a  totally  irrational  decision.   The
    suggestion that he falls within sub-paragraph 3 because  he  may  cause
    serious troubles to public policy or public security by  assaulting  or
    committing offences against prison staff is frankly not to be  regarded
    as a sensible approach.  Furthermore, the suggestion that he might fail
    to comply with the rules or directions is equally not sensible  because
    if he is kept in custody he will be removed still  in  custody  and  he
    will have no basis whatever to enable him to stay unless of course  his
    appeal is allowed. One suspects the likelihood may  be  that  would  be
    deferred and of course he will have to leave pending the decision.


10. It goes on:


         "In  addition,  there  would  be  significant  costs  involved   in
         detaining Mr Gabor, which in light of the circumstances, would  not
         be proportionate for the government to incur."


    That has got absolutely nothing to do with  the  case.   It  is  not  a
    proper basis within the Regulations.  It may be that in two years' time
    the situation could change but as the law now stands  costs  is  not  a
    relevant consideration.


11.  Finally, it is said that refusing permission  to  temporarily  re-enter
    the United Kingdom to attend the hearing is disproportionate simply mis-
    applies the Regulation.  As I  have  said  it  is  not  a  question  of
    proportionality.  It follows that this decision cannot stand.


12.  To be allowed to enter to appear seems to me to mean that  it  must  be
    right that the admission takes place within a reasonable time to enable
    the applicant properly to instruct  his  solicitors.   True  it  is  of
    course that when the applicant is abroad one would expect  that  he  is
    able to make some submissions but in  any  case  it  is  necessary  for
    solicitors to take proper instructions, maybe  to  find  witnesses  who
    could assist him in the  given  case  and  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    requirement to give leave to enter to appear carries with it  that  the
    applicant should be enabled to make appearance which is  one  which  is
    based on proper advice and proper instructions  to  those  representing
    him.  This does not mean that there need be a lengthy period before the
    hearing.  Quite the contrary: I note that the solicitors  asked  for  a
    matter of weeks; that is not reasonable but it does  seem  to  me  that
    normally some two possibly  three  days  before  the  hearing  date  is
    required.  In this case the hearing date is fixed for 8 November  which
    happens to be a Tuesday and one has to bear  in  mind  the  intervening
    weekend.  In those circumstances what I propose to direct is  that  the
    admission be permitted to take place on the Thursday, that is  Thursday
    3 November.  He will then no doubt be taken  to  immigration  detention
    which should be Harmondsworth and the solicitors should then visit  him
    for the purpose of taking instructions on Friday, the 4th and the  Home
    Office must ensure that access on the 4th is allowed even if that  does
    mean perhaps jumping  the  queue  because  one  knows  that  there  are
    pressures on attending at the immigration centres for legal visits.


13.  Thus what I propose to do is to allow this application and  to  make  a
    mandatory order in the terms I have indicated.

