
[pic]

Khalid and Others (Ealing, West London  and  Hammersmith  College)  Pakistan
[2011] UKUT 00295(IAC)


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10th January 2011                          |                             |
|                                              |1 August 2011                |

                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                       IMMIGRATION JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                 FRAZ KHALID
                               SALMAN ALI SYED
                                TAHIRA SALMAN
                               MAHNOOR SALMAN
                            SHEIKH MUHAMMAD AKMAL

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

   1. Ealing, Hammersmith and West London  College  (EHWLC)  has  an  online
      management and record keeping system  called  Centime,  operated  from
      2003 and still in current use.   This  system  is  so  detailed,  well
      operated and robust that evidence from EHWLC based on its  records  to
      the effect that a person made no application to the college,  was  not
      enrolled on a course there and was not awarded any qualification will,
      in general, be cogent evidence to that effect.   Accordingly, it  will
      in general be extremely difficult for a person who does not feature in
      the records to demonstrate  that  they  were  enrolled  at  EHWLC  and
      studying there at the relevant time.


   2. Evidence of academic  achievement  at  EHWLC,  relied  upon  by  those
      claiming to have studied there, including certificates, results sheets
      and course work claimed to have been submitted for  assessment,  will,
      in general, include a student's unique data number, assigned to him or
      her under the Centime system and the absence  of  such  a  number  is,
      accordingly, likely to be an adverse factor of substantial weight.

   3. Genuine postgraduate diploma certificates issued by EHWLC will include
      a logo showing the full name of  the  college  rather  than  a  single
      campus or a combination of sites not reflecting the full name.

   4. Postgraduate courses in Hospitality Management  and  in  Business  and
      Management are of eighteen months  duration  and  any  work  placement
      arranged as part of a course will  begin  after  the  commencement  of
      studies and not beforehand; the catchment area  for  the  2008  course
      Hospitality Management course was Mumbai and the intake in  that  year
      was from that city and its environs and not elsewhere.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.    The appellants, Fraz Khalid, Salman Ali Syed, Tahira  Salman,  Mahnoor
    Salman and Sheikh Muhammad Akmal are citizens of Pakistan and were born
    on 18th December 1978, 23rd August 1971, 15th March 1982, 27th December
    2007 and 19th August 1978 respectively.  The  second  and  third  named
    appellants  are  Mr  Syed's  dependants  (his  wife  and  his  daughter
    respectively) and their appeals depend on  the  outcome  of  his.   The
    first, second and last named  appellants  each  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  In
    support of their applications, each submitted what purported  to  be  a
    Postgraduate Diploma from Ealing, Hammersmith and West  London  College
    ("EHWLC").  Mr Khalid and Mr  Syed  claimed  to  have  been  awarded  a
    Diploma in Hospitality Management.   Mr  Akmal  claimed  to  have  been
    awarded a Diploma in  Business  and  Management.   In  each  case,  the
    Secretary of State found that the qualification relied upon  was  false
    and that, in consequence, each application fell  to  be  refused  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.   The  Secretary  of  State
    also found that the appellants  had  failed  to  show  that  they  were
    entitled to points claimed under Appendices A and B of the  Immigration
    Rules and that they had therefore not shown that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245Z(c) and (d) were met.  The applications made by Mr Syed's
    dependants were refused as they could not show that the requirements of
    paragraph 319C and 319H of the rules were met.

2.    In a determination promulgated on 14th August  2009,  appeals  brought
    against  the  adverse  decisions  were  dismissed   by   a   Designated
    Immigration  Judge  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   An  application   for
    reconsideration under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 was made on behalf of  appellants.   On  16th  November
    2009, a panel consisting of Senior Immigration Judge Storey and  Senior
    Immigration Judge P R Lane found that  the  determination  contained  a
    material error of law, such that no part of the findings  could  stand,
    with the result that a fresh hearing was required on  all  issues  (see
    Appendix 1).  Detailed case management directions were  given  on  10th
    September 2010 and the matter came before us on 10th January 2011.

3.    The appellants did not appear at the hearing  on  10th  January  2011.
    It was apparent from the case management file that each was served with
    notice of the hearing and directions at the addresses provided by them.
     There was no explanation for their absence and no application  for  an
    adjournment.  We were satisfied that the appellants had  been  notified
    of the hearing and that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed,
    as permitted under rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In so  deciding,  we  took  into  account  the  overriding
    objective (and the parties  obligation  to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal) in rule 2 of those Rules.

The Documentary Evidence of the Appellants

4.    Before us were copies of the applications for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, the notice of decision in each  case,  the  notices  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and documents relied upon in support.
     Short bundles were prepared in readiness for the hearings  before  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal by the solicitors then acting  for  the
    appellants.  In Mr Khalid's case, a witness statement  and  a  document
    purporting to be an academic assignment were provided.   In  Mr  Syed's
    case,  a  witness  statement  and  documents  purporting  to   be   two
    assignments were provided.  Mr Akmal also provided a witness  statement
    and documents purporting to be two assignments.

5.    In response to the case  management  directions  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and  Mr  Akmal  each  provided  a  further
    witness statement (dated 7th January, 6th January and 5th January  2011
    respectively).  The respondent provided a composite bundle,  consisting
    of witness statements made by Victoria Charles, a course  director  for
    the Foundation Degree in Hospitality Management at  EHWLC,  dated  27th
    September 2010 and by Kathryn Vines, Head of  International  Operations
    at the same college,  dated  27th  September  2010.   The  respondent's
    bundle also included copies of documents provided by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed
    and Mr Akmal in support of their applications  (including  postgraduate
    diploma certificates, results sheets and  letters  purporting  to  have
    been written by members of staff  at  the  college),  sample  documents
    provided by EHWLC, further copies of the  respondent's  original  trial
    bundle and a copy of a second witness statement made by  Ms  Vines,  on
    17th June 2009.

6.    Also before us were the original  diploma  certificates,  letters  and
    transcripts provided by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal in  support  of
    their  applications  for  further  leave.   Mr  Tarlow  handed  up  the
    International Course Guide for 2009 and 2010 published by EHWLC and  we
    were also provided with examples of  certificates  issued  by  Edexcel,
    certificates of eligibility, letters to students at  the  college  from
    course directors, transcripts, results sheets and diploma  certificates
    issued by the college.

7.    The case management  file  included  letters  sent  by  fax  from  the
    solicitors who had previously represented  the  appellants,  confirming
    that they were no longer instructed.

The Appellants' Cases

Mr Khalid

8.    Mr Khalid submitted a Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality  Management.
     The Secretary of State was satisfied that the document  was  false  as
    the signatures which appeared were not ones  that  would  appear  on  a
    genuine diploma certificate issued by  EHWLC.    He  also  submitted  a
    transcript and a letter, each signed by  Ms  Charles.   The  respondent
    found that these documents were also false and not genuinely issued  by
    the college.   In his grounds of appeal to the Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal, Mr Khalid contended that he had  provided  genuine  documents
    from his college and that the respondent had failed to show  that  they
    were false.  He maintained this stance in a witness statement  made  on
    22nd July 2009.    He stated that the transcript issued to him included
    Ms Charles' signature and that his course began on  17th  January  2008
    and continued until 9th October that year.  There  were  nine  modules,
    listed in the transcript  he  provided  and  the  course  consisted  of
    assignments and examinations, which he passed.  He had provided genuine
    examples of his course work.  In the witness statement he made  on  7th
    January 2011, Mr Khalid maintained that all the documents  he  provided
    in support of his application  were  genuine  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence  showing  that  they  were  false.   It  was  evident  that  a
    certificate issued to him included Ms Charles' signature and he had  no
    reason to doubt the document.  He stated that he had  learnt  that  the
    respondent had obtained a witness statement from Ms Charles,  in  which
    she denied signing it.  He found this surprising as it  clearly  stated
    her name.   He had no reason to believe that Ms Charles did not sign it
    and, even if she had not done so, this was a matter for the college  to
    investigate.  He maintained that he was a genuine student and was still
    in possession of some of the academic  work  that  he  had  undertaken,
    which he had provided  to  the  respondent.   He  stated  that  he  was
    prepared to answer any questions in relation to his course and had  not
    been dishonest.

Mr Syed

9.    Mr Syed relied upon a Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality  Management,
    a transcript and a letter (the latter two signed by Ms  Charles).   The
    respondent found that the documents were false as the signatures  which
    appeared in them were not ones that would  appear  in  items  genuinely
    issued by EHWLC.  Mr Syed contended in his grounds of appeal  that  the
    documents were genuine.  He  maintained  this  stance  in  his  witness
    statement, claiming  that  he  enrolled  on  a  course  in  Hospitality
    Management which began on 17th January 2008 and came to an end  on  9th
    October that year.  Mr Syed stated that there were nine modules on  the
    course, listed in the transcript he provided.  He completed assignments
    and passed examinations.  The certificates he received were  pre-signed
    and responsibility for them lay with the college and not with  Mr  Syed
    himself.  In the statement he made on 6th January 2011, he claimed that
    he acted in good faith and was a genuine student at  the  college.   He
    received a diploma certificate and, to the best of  his  knowledge,  it
    was genuine.  He had no reason to doubt that Ms Charles had signed  the
    items which bore her name.  If in fact she had not done so, this was an
    "internal matter for the establishment  to  investigate  further".   Mr
    Syed stated that he had provided some of the work he completed and  was
    prepared to answer questions in relation to his  course.   He  had  not
    been dishonest.

Mr Akmal

10.    Mr  Akmal  relied  upon  a  Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Business   and
    Management, a transcript and a letter (the  latter  two  signed  by  Ms
    Charles).  The respondent concluded that the documents were  false,  as
    they contained signatures which would not appear in genuine items.   Mr
    Akmal maintained in his grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the documents were genuine.  In the witness statement he  made  on
    22nd July 2009, he stated that he believed that  in  the  absence  of
    evidence to substantiate the respondent's  allegations,  he  should  be
    given the benefit of the doubt.  He commenced his  postgraduate  course
    in Business and Management on 19th January 2008 and  completed  it  on
    12th December that year.  His course consisted of nine modules,  listed
    in the transcript he provided.  He  completed  assignments  and  passed
    examinations and provided examples of his coursework in support of  the
    application.  He received a diploma certificate from  the  college  and
    submitted  it  to  the  respondent.   It   was   pre-signed   and   any
    responsibility for it lay with the college.  In the statement  he  made
    on 5th January 2011, he maintained his stance  that  the  documents  he
    submitted were genuine.  Ms Charles had signed his transcript.  When he
    received it, he did not find it necessary to investigate whether it was
    signed by the correct person.  He had no reason to doubt it.  He stated
    that to the best of his knowledge, his diploma certificate was genuine.
     He was still in possession of some of the coursework he completed  and
    had provided this  to  the  respondent.   He  was  prepared  to  answer
    questions relating to his course and had not been dishonest.

Response to case management directions

11.   On 10th September 2010, detailed and precise directions were given to
    the parties.  Mr Khalid and Mr Akmal were each to serve  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the respondent his six-figure identification number issued
    by the college, or a written explanation as to why  that  evidence  was
    unavailable to the appellant concerned.  Mr Syed had  earlier  provided
    an explanation that he had returned his identity card  to  the  college
    and could not recall the number.  We consider that  explanation  below.
    The appellants (including  Mr  Syed)  were  also  required  to  provide
    evidence of the sum, means of payment and date of payment of  the  fees
    said to have been paid by each for the course  taken  at  the  college.
    No evidence was adduced by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed  or  Mr  Akmal  on  these
    matters and the witness statements  made  shortly  before  the  hearing
    merely contained assertions that each was a genuine  student  and  that
    the documents and examples of work relied upon were  genuine.   Perhaps
    surprisingly in view of their non-attendance, the statements they  made
    contained the following, in  paragraph  4  of  each  statement:  "I  am
    prepared to answer any  questions  in  relation  to  my  course  and  I
    respectfully  request  the  Immigration  Judge  to  consider  my   case
    favourably."


The Respondent's Evidence

12.   The respondent's evidence  included  written  statements  made  by  Ms
    Victoria Charles on 27th September 2010 and by Ms  Catherine  Vines  on
    17th June 2009 and 27th September 2010.  We heard  from  each  witness.
    We have set out in detail the evidence contained  in  their  statements
    and the oral  evidence  we  heard  in  Appendix  2,  attached  to  this
    determination.

13.   In brief summary, Ms Charles and  Ms  Vines  gave  evidence  that  the
    former had not signed the transcripts and letters  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal,  purporting  to  include  her  signature.
    Those documents were not genuinely issued by EHWLC  and  nor  were  the
    diploma certificates relied upon.   Ms  Vines  gave  detailed  evidence
    regarding  the  Centime  System  in  use  at  the  college,  an  online
    management system supported by detailed paper records on each  student.
    This provides a  unique  six  digit  data  number  which  remains  with
    students as soon as a completed application is received and  throughout
    their time at the college and thereafter.  The student  number  appears
    on all correspondence from the college and each piece of work submitted
    by students must also bear their unique  number.   The  Centime  System
    holds records of all students since it was installed in 2002 and  2003.
    The system records the student's presence at EHWLC as it is  linked  to
    the gates at the entrance to each campus, access to the  college  being
    impossible without passing through these gates.   Students  are  issued
    with an electronic access card which must be presented to an electronic
    sensor to effect entry and exit.  Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr  Akmal  had
    failed to produce any  documents  containing  their  unique  six  digit
    number and searches of the college's database, using the names given in
    their passports (and variations on their names) revealed no  record  of
    any of them on the system.  Cards linked to the Centime System,  issued
    to students, were not collected at the end of a student's  course,  the
    college making no attempt to recover the cards as they "went dead"  (ie
    became incapable of operating college systems) and access  through  the
    gates was no longer permitted.  Should a student enrol on a new course,
    the system would once again recognise the card and  permit  access  for
    the duration of the new studies.

14.   The documents relied upon by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and  Mr  Akmal,  which
    were not genuinely issued by  EHWLC,  contained  many  defects.   These
    included incorrect logos, inaccurate details regarding the  Hospitality
    and Business Management courses, the incorrect name of the Principal at
    EHWLC in  post  at  the  time  the  documents  were  issued  and  false
    signatures, purporting  to  be  those  of  the  Principal  and  College
    Director.  The assignments made available by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and  Mr
    Akmal as examples of work  completed  by  them  and  submitted  to  the
    college included many features strongly suggesting that they  were  not
    examples of genuine work,  including  the  absence  of  each  student's
    unique data number, the name of their tutor and the  absence  of  tutor
    marks, highlighted errors or comments.

Submissions


15.   Mr Tarlow made submissions on behalf of the respondent.  EHWLC  was  a
    prestigious institution with a high turnover of international students.
     The college had received the Queen's Award and the institution  was  a
    highly trusted UKBA partner.  The evidence given by Ms Vines  was  that
    the Centime system in place was the driver of  the  administrative  and
    academic records and the  physical  presence  of  students  within  the
    college boundaries.  Everything was driven by a data  number  given  on
    application by a student.  The case management directions made prior to
    the hearing required production of the data  numbers  and  evidence  of
    payment of college fees but no evidence had been provided by Mr  Khalid
    or Mr Akmal in response.  Mr Syed responded by claiming that he did not
    have the number issued to him because he returned his card.  This claim
    was refuted by the evidence given by Ms Vines.  Cards fell  dormant  at
    the end of the academic year but the college did  not  try  to  recover
    them from students.  Mr Syed's suggestion was far-fetched.

16.   The catchment area of the Hospitality Management course was Mumbai  in
    India and the intake in 2008 was comprised of students from that  city.
    Ms Vines had commented  on  the  letterhead  and  certificates  in  the
    documents relied upon  by  the  appellants.   There  were  obvious  and
    substantial errors.  The course dates were wrong.  Both Ms Vines and Ms
    Charles gave evidence that work placements began after academic studies
    had commenced and not the other way round.  Both witnesses commented on
    the  signatures  in  the  postgraduate  diploma  certificates.  Neither
    recognised "Salvi" or "Galvi"  as  Course  Director.   Both  recognised
    Kevin Finnegan as having once been Principal but  the  specimens  which
    form part of the documentary evidence showed that  Mr  Finnegan's  real
    signature was markedly different from the  one  that  appeared  in  the
    certificates.  Ms Charles gave clear evidence that she would  not  sign
    certificates if she were not the Course  Director  for  the  particular
    programme and had not signed any of the results sheets  or  transcripts
    relied upon.  An example of her true signature appeared at the  end  of
    her statement.  She would use her Christian name in signing  documents.
    The presence of Mr Finnegan's  name  on  some  of  the  documents  was
    distinctly odd as he ceased to be Principal  at  the  end  of  December
    2007.  The marking pattern and attendance rate which  appeared  in  the
    results sheets were the same for Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal, which
    was improbable.  Ms Charles also gave evidence that she would not  sign
    results sheets although her name would appear at the  bottom  of  these
    items if she were Course Director on  the  particular  programme.   The
    appellants relied on letters addressed "To Whom It  May  Concern".   Ms
    Charles said that the capitalisation and use of English in the  letters
    were not hers.  In addition, she would not have  used  an  abbreviation
    for the particular qualifications referred to.  It  was  most  unlikely
    that the qualifications would have been issued on  the  very  same  day
    that the courses concluded.

17.   Mr Tarlow submitted that the evidence showed that  the  qualifications
    relied upon were not  in  fact  awarded  by  EHWLC  to  the  appellants
    claiming to have received them.  Each used  the  qualifications,  which
    were not genuine, in their applications for further  leave.  They  used
    them deceitfully, with the intention of  misleading  the  Secretary  of
    State.

18.   So far as the coursework submitted by the  appellants  was  concerned,
    Ms Charles' evidence was that no front sheet  appeared  and  there  was
    nothing to show that the assignments had been seen or marked by  EHWLC.
    That evidence had to be weighed carefully as the  appellants  may  have
    submitted non-marked copies, perhaps downloaded from  their  computers.
    However, Ms Charles' evidence on the title of the assignments did  have
    weight.  They were too wide-ranging and EHWLC would not have  set  such
    coursework.  In one case, Ms Charles had not recognised the name of the
    lecturer apparently supervising the work. Ms Charles was in a  position
    to identify the areas in relation to which  coursework  might  be  set.
    The applications for further leave made by Mr Khalid, Mr  Syed  and  Mr
    Akmal had all been refused under paragraph 322(1A) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof  upon
    her and had shown that the ground of refusal relied upon in  each  case
    was made out.  All the appeals,  including  those  made  by  Mr  Syed's
    dependents, fell to be dismissed.

Findings and Conclusions

Burden and Standard of Proof

19.   The applications for further leave made by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed  and  Mr
    Akmal were refused by the respondent under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and also on the basis that none had  shown  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 245Z(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules were
    made out.  So far as the former paragraph is concerned, the  burden  of
    proof in showing that the ground of refusal is made out lies  with  the
    respondent (JC (Part 9, HC 395 - burden of proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027).  The standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities, a
    single standard of proof (Re B [2009] UKHL 35).  At  paragraph  101  of
    the determination of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  in  NA  and
    Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031,  it
    was accepted that for the Secretary of  State  to  show  that  she  has
    discharged the burden of proof  in the context of this  type  of  case,
    where the consequences of refusal under Part 9 of the Immigration Rules
    are serious, evidence would need to be furnished of sufficient strength
    and quality and the Tribunal would need to subject it to a  "critical",
    "anxious" and "heightened" scrutiny.  Paragraph 322(1A) is a  mandatory
    ground available where false representations have been  made  or  false
    documents or information have been submitted (whether or  not  material
    to the application, and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge),
    or  material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
    application.  In AA (Nigeria) [2009] EWCA Civ 773, the Court of  Appeal
    held that dishonesty or deception is  needed,  albeit  not  necessarily
    that of the applicant himself, to render  a  "false  representation"  a
    ground for mandatory refusal.

20.   So far as refusal under paragraph 245ZX of  the  rules  is  concerned,
    the burden of proof in this context lies with the  appellants  and  the
    standard of proof is, again, that of a balance of probabilities.

Our findings regarding EHWLC

21.   Ms Vines and Ms Charles were not cross-examined,  although  we  put  a
    number of questions to them  where  appropriate.   Each  gave  detailed
    evidence in relation to the documents relied upon  by  the  appellants,
    drawing on their experience and expertise as senior members of staff at
    the EHWLC.  Ms Vines is Head of International Operations and joined the
    college nearly seven years ago in that capacity.  Ms Charles  has  been
    Course Director on a number of programmes and currently has  that  role
    in relation to a Foundation Degree  in  Hospitality  Management.   Each
    gave clear and cogent evidence and was well placed to  comment  on  the
    documents relied and to compare them  with  letters,  certificates  and
    other material issued  and  published  by  the  college.   We  have  no
    hesitation in finding that each is a transparently honest and  credible
    witness and we give weight to their evidence.  A number of certificates
    issued by Edexcel, a professional partner of the college in relation to
    some of the courses offered, grade  transcripts,  college  certificates
    and postgraduate diplomas  were  produced  on  10th January 2011  and
    enabled a comparison  to  be  made  between  genuine  items  and  those
    produced by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal.  Copies of these documents
    were available to the parties.

The Postgraduate Diplomas and related items

22.   We deal first with the documents made available by Mr Khalid, Mr  Syed
    and Mr Akmal.  Mr Khalid and  Mr  Syed  each  produced  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Hospitality Management; Mr  Akmal  produced  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Business Management.  These items appear at pages B1, B4 and
    B8 of the respondent's composite bundle before us.  Each contained  two
    signatures at the bottom, above the words College Director on the left-
    hand side and Principal on the right-hand side.  Ms Vines gave evidence
    that Mrs Paula Whittle was the Principal of the college, at the date of
    the awards in 2008.  The signature  "Kevin  K"  was  not  that  of  the
    Principal at the time.  Mr Kevin Finnegan had  been  Principal  at  the
    college until the end of December 2007.   Ms Vines' evidence  was  that
    nobody in such a senior position would use an  initial  for  a  surname
    when applying his or her signature.  Ms Vines said  that  she  did  not
    recognise the signature of the College Director  in  each  certificate,
    which may  have  been  "Galvi"  or  "  Salvi".   A  search  of  records
    maintained at the college from 2000 showed that nobody with  this  name
    had been  employed  in  that  capacity.   So  far  as  the  Hospitality
    Management course was concerned,  this  was  developed  in  Mumbai  and
    students were drawn from that city.  They were Christian and Hindu  and
    there were no Muslim students on the course.  A search of the college's
    Centime system from 2005, when the course  began,  showed  that  nobody
    with the names of Mr Khalid or Mr Syed had studied on the course.   The
    diploma certificates they  relied  upon  showed  a  work  placement  as
    commencing some months before the course  programme  and  recorded  the
    programme dates as April to July 2008, whereas the  course  lasted  for
    eighteen months.  Students on the course could  not  have  taken  their
    work placement before the programme began.  The logo in the  top  right
    of the diploma was incorrect, describing the  college  as  "Hammersmith
    and West London College," omitting the word "Ealing".   The  particular
    diploma was awarded in partnership with Edexcel and a  genuine  student
    would have received both a certificate from the college  and  one  from
    Edexcel itself.  So far as Mr Akmal's Business and  Management  diploma
    was concerned, she gave similar evidence  about  the  signatures  which
    appeared at  the  bottom,  for  the  College  Director  and  Principal.
    Neither name was known to the college.  The  diploma  at  page  B8  she
    described as a "poor fake".  The title of the college was  again  wrong
    and a genuine diploma certificate would not have shown the  surname  of
    the Principal only as an initial, in the signature applied  to  it.   A
    certificate would also have been issued by Edexcel, the  partner  body,
    if a student genuinely  completed  the  course.   Ms Vines  said  that
    missing from all three diploma certificates was the Queen's Award logo.
     A genuine diploma certificate was made available to us and the Queen's
    Award logo does indeed appear in the bottom right of a redacted  letter
    to a student recording the  successful  completion  of  a  postgraduate
    course.  It is apparent from that item that the college is described as
    "Ealing, Hammersmith  and  West  London  College"  in  the  logo  which
    appears.  Ms Vines said that the Business  and  Management  course  was
    offered to overseas students and that only two intakes  occurred.   The
    course was developed in 2008 to two small cohorts, one a group of seven
    and one a group of five.  Mr Akmal was not in either cohort.

23.   Ms Charles' evidence was to similar effect.  She  is  Course  Director
    for Hospitality Management programmes in the business division but  has
    never been a Course Director for a postgraduate  diploma  in  Business.
    Between January and December 2008, she was not a Course Director on any
    of  the  college's  postgraduate  programmes,  including  the   courses
    described in the documents relied upon by Mr Khalid,  Mr  Syed  and  Mr
    Akmal.  The dates which appeared in  the  diploma  certificates  relied
    upon by Mr Khalid and Mr Syed made no sense as they suggested that  the
    work placements began before the start of the course.  Ms  Charles  has
    been at the college for  eight  years  and  has  not  known  a  College
    Director with the name "Salvi" or "Galvi".  Mr Kevin Finnegan was  once
    Principal but he left at the end of December 2007 and  his  name  would
    not have appeared in  diplomas  issued  in  the  following  year.   The
    signatures in the results sheets  or  transcripts  were  not  hers.   A
    sample of her true  signature  appeared  at  the  end  of  her  witness
    statement and she usually applied her Christian  name  rather  than  an
    initial.  She would generally not sign results sheets although her name
    might appear at the bottom of  such  a  document.   The  logo  appeared
    strange, suggesting that the document came from  the  Hammersmith  site
    and not the college as a whole.  The logo for  the  Sixth  Form  Centre
    also appeared, but Ms Charles had not seen any document from EHWLC with
    that mix of logos.  If the results were given on proper college  headed
    notepaper, the name would include Ealing as well.

24.   The letters provided by Mr Khalid and Mr Syed, addressed "To  whom  it
    may concern", included a logo, although the full name  of  the  college
    did not appear in it.  Missing were addresses and telephone numbers, as
    one would expect on genuine EHWLC headed notepaper.  The  qualification
    was abbreviated to "PGDHM" whereas it would appear in full in a genuine
    item.  The date of the conclusion of the course, 9th October 2008,  was
    the same as in the results sheets.   However,  the  Examinations  Board
    would meet one or two months  after  a  student  finished  his  or  her
    course, so that marking and cross marking could be  considered.   After
    that, a student might receive a  results  sheet  but  the  postgraduate
    diploma certificate would not arrive until later.  Ms Charles' evidence
    was that the phrasing and capitalisation in the letters  were  odd  and
    inappropriate and that "DIUS Listed Body" was an abbreviation  she  had
    not seen in genuine letters from the  college.   The  signatures  which
    appeared in the results sheets and the letters above her name were  not
    hers.

25.   So far as Mr Akmal is concerned,  the  diploma  certificate  described
    the programme as running from January to December  2008.   Ms  Charles'
    evidence was that it would start in September or October and finish  in
    May and June the following year.  She made the same comments about  the
    signatures in the document, the logo,  the  absence  of  addresses  and
    telephone numbers,  as  she  had  in  relation  to  the  other  diploma
    certificates.   The signatures which appeared in the results sheet  and
    the letter addressed "To whom  it  may  concern"  were  not  hers.   Ms
    Charles has never been Course Director on the business  and  management
    diploma programme and so would not  have  issued  a  results  sheet  or
    transcript.  The  phrasing,  capitalisation  and  abbreviation  in  the
    letter were unusual and not hers.  Mr Akmal's letter  showed  that  his
    course ended on 12th December 2008, the same date as  appeared  in  the
    results sheet.   Ms Charles' evidence was that  EHWLC  would  not  mark
    work, agree those marks and make an award all on the same  day  as  the
    course ended.

26.    The  diploma  certificates,  the  results  sheets  and  the   letters
    purporting to have been signed by Ms Charles all omitted a data number,
    the unique signifier given to each student at  the  college  and  which
    would appear in all genuine documentation.  A salient  feature  of  the
    results sheets provided by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal was that the
    grade pattern and attendance rate were identical in all three.

The claims to have studied at Ealing, Hammersmith and  West  London  College
and to have submitted coursework

27.    Mr Khalid and Mr Syed claimed that they commenced  their  studies  at
    EHWLC in January 2008 and completed them on 9th October that year.   Mr
    Akmal claimed that he began his course in  January  2008  and  that  it
    ended on 12th December that year.  Each provided coursework in  support
    to their claims to have been genuine students at the college.  Ms Vines
    gave detailed evidence  regarding  the  college's  Centime  system  and
    examples of genuine student identity cards were  before  us.   Students
    are given a unique data number once an application is completed and the
    same number is retained as the student enrols and  begins  his  or  her
    studies.  The system was introduced even before Ms Vines  arrived  some
    ten years ago.  A card is issued to a student once fees have been  paid
    and enables access to the college's four campuses by means of "swiping"
    at each entrance.  Each card also includes, in  addition  to  the  data
    number, a seven-digit number which records, amongst other  things,  the
    issue number of the card, whether the student is taking a first  course
    and information regarding examination passes.  Every time an assignment
    or piece of work is handed in, the student must provide the data number
    and staff  would  not  accept  coursework  without  that  number  being
    present.  The unique data number given to each student is important not
    least because assignments might go to external  bodies  for  assessment
    and marking.  The number would appear on every page of  an  examination
    book and a student would not be allowed  into  an  examination  or  any
    building without the number identifying him or her.  Ms Vines' evidence
    was that about half of the students leave EHWLC  each  year  and  their
    identity cards become redundant at that  point.   They  are  unable  to
    enter any of the college's buildings or sites.  If, however, they  join
    another course,  the  same  number  would  be  retained  and  the  card
    reactivated.  Importantly, EHWLC makes  no  attempt  to  collect  cards
    because the system "goes dead" (the cards cannot be used to gain access
    to any of the sites) at the end of the academic year or the end of  the
    course.  The system begins again in the following academic year or when
    a new course is started.  The system is in place at all  four  campuses
    and there is one, central database.

28.   As each student is given a unique data number and an identity card  to
    gain access to the college, it might reasonably have been expected that
    Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and  Mr  Akmal  would  have  made  mention  of  this
    essential feature of college life in  their  statements  and  that  the
    documents they relied upon, including the diplomas, the results  sheets
    and the letters giving details of awards would have included the unique
    number given to each of them.  None was able to provide his data number
    and no such numbers appear in any of the documents  they  relied  upon.
    Mr Syed's explanation, in response to  directions  given  in  September
    2010, that he returned his own card and could not remember the  number,
    is not remotely satisfactory in the light of the clear  evidence  given
    by Ms Vines that the college makes no attempt to recover cards and  her
    description of the extensive use made of each student's data number  in
    college documents.  A genuine student at EHWLC would have no difficulty
    at all, we find, in producing  evidence  of  his  or  her  unique  data
    number, perhaps in the form of the identity card itself, or  in  making
    available at least some documentation properly issued by  the  college,
    showing the number.

29.   So far as coursework is concerned, Mr Khalid, Mr  Syed  and  Mr  Akmal
    each produced what were claimed to be examples of  genuine  coursework.
    Ms Charles gave evidence on the items submitted.  In Mr  Akmal's  case,
    she noted that no assignment top sheet had been attached,  which  would
    contain the student's name, data number and the  name  of  his  or  her
    tutor.  There would also be space for the tutor  to  enter  grades  and
    comments.  At that time, assignments were marked by hand and one  would
    have expected highlighting of errors and comments by  tutors.   Neither
    of the two pieces of work submitted by Mr Akmal  showed  any  of  this.
    The titles of the two assignments were very broad and general  and  the
    college would have asked for something more specific.  Ms Charles  made
    similar comments about the work  assignment  submitted  by  Mr  Khalid.
    This too had no top sheet, grading grid, no tutor marks and  the  title
    was rather strange for a piece of  work  on  a  hospitality  management
    course.  It invited discussion of instrumental stakeholder theory.  She
    said that that would not be the sort of thing  EHWLC  would  ask  their
    hospitality management students to write about.  Moreover,  nowhere  in
    the assignment was it clear which module on the course it  related  to.
    Ms Charles said that she could not see how work on  stakeholder  theory
    would fit in with any of the modules on the course.  Mr  Syed  produced
    two pieces of work.  Ms Charles said that there  was  nothing  to  show
    that the work had been submitted to the  college,  no  mention  of  the
    module each assignment related to and no marks from a tutor.  The first
    piece of work concerned the impact of working practices and patterns on
    individual and business performance but this was not something that the
    college would have set as an assignment.  EHWLC would have related  the
    assignment to the hospitality industry.   In  addition,  the  level  of
    English was very good compared with what one  would  expect  from  most
    overseas students.  Ms Charles said that it was  unusual  to  see  that
    level of English, so early  in  the  course,  the  date  of  the  first
    assignment being 14th April 2008.

Our Assessment of the Evidence

30.   The evidence adduced  by  the  respondent  is  clear  and  cogent,  in
    relation to both the documentary evidence relied upon by the appellants
    and their claims to have been genuine students  at  the  college.   The
    witness statements made by Mr Khalid, Mr  Syed  and  Mr  Akmal  contain
    assertions that each completed his studies successfully but there is  a
    marked lack of detail, in stark contrast to the accounts  given  by  Ms
    Vines and Ms Charles of the  practical,  day-to-day  administration  of
    student life at the college.

31.   EHWLC has an online management and  record  keeping  system,  Centime,
    operated from 2003 and still in use at the  date  of  the  hearing.   A
    record is created as soon as a completed application is received from a
    potential student, who is  then  assigned  a  six  digit  number  which
    remains unique to the individual throughout their time at the  college.
    We find that the Centime System  is  so  detailed,  well  operated  and
    robust that evidence from the college based on its records, adduced  by
    the respondent, to the effect that a person made no application to  the
    college, was not enrolled on a course there and  was  not  awarded  any
    qualification will in  general  be  cogent  evidence  to  that  effect.
    Accordingly, it will in general be extremely difficult for a person who
    does not feature in the records to demonstrate that they were  enrolled
    at EHWLC and studying there during the relevant time.

32.   We find that the postgraduate diploma certificates relied upon by  the
    appellants are not genuine and do not relate to any studies  undertaken
    at EHWLC.  The certificates omit the unique data number which would  be
    present in genuine items.   The  signatures  at  the  bottom  of  each,
    purporting to come from the College Director  and  Principal,  are  not
    those of any genuine office holder.  The programme and  work  placement
    dates do not reflect any genuine enrolment or placement, suggesting  as
    they do that the work placement pre-dated the beginning of  the  course
    programme, in Mr Syed and Mr Khalid's cases.  The logo which appears in
    each item is inaccurate and there is an omission of the full  addresses
    and telephone numbers that would be expected in genuine documents.   We
    find that the results sheets are, similarly, not genuine  documents  at
    all.  Ms Charles' name appeared in each as a Course Director,  although
    she did not hold such a post on any postgraduate programmes at EHWLC in
    October and December 2008,  the  dates  of  the  results  sheets.   The
    signature which appears above her name in each document  is  not  hers.
    Each results sheet contains an identical range of marks and  attendance
    rate, which is a remarkable coincidence and a logo different  from  the
    one which would appear in genuine items.  In the lower  right  of  each
    results sheet the name of the Principal is  given  as  Kevin  Finnegan,
    although he ceased to be Principal at the end of the previous year.  We
    find that the letters addressed "To Whom It May Concern", purporting to
    have been signed by Ms Charles as a Course Director,  are  not  genuine
    documents emanating from her or from anyone else at the college.

33.   We accept Ms  Vines'  evidence  regarding  searches  made  of  EHWLC's
    Centime system.  This was supported by documentary  evidence  including
    the series of emails appearing at pages C4 and C5 of  the  respondent's
    bundle.  There is no record of the college ever having received  money,
    or payment for fees, from any of the appellants and no record of any of
    them  having  attended  EHWLC  or  enrolled  on  courses  there.    The
    assignments they produced were unaccompanied by any  top  sheet,  which
    might be the case if a document were downloaded  from  an  individual's
    computer, in the form  it  took  before  the  top  sheet  was  applied.
    However, the absence of any evidence of marking, or indeed  of  receipt
    by the college of these pieces of work, weighed with all  the  evidence
    before us, leads us to conclude that they are  not  genuine  pieces  of
    work undertaken as part of postgraduate diploma  courses  taken  by  Mr
    Khalid, Mr Syed or Mr Akmal.

34.   In summary, we find that the evidence shows that Mr  Khalid,  Mr  Syed
    and Mr Akmal were not at any time genuine  students  at  EHWLC.   They
    neither enrolled on postgraduate diploma courses  there  nor  completed
    them.  Each sought to rely upon diploma  certificates,  results  sheets
    and letters purporting to describe their qualifications,  knowing  that
    the documents were not genuine and were wholly unreliable  as  evidence
    of real achievement.  We reject the  claim  made  by  each  that  their
    diplomas  were  genuinely  issued  to  them  and  that  any  difficulty
    appearing on the face of the documents is a matter for the college.  We
    find that each has sought to  rely  upon  coursework  in  the  form  of
    assignments knowing that these were not genuine items produced as  part
    of real studies.

35.   To assist judicial fact finders in appeals concerning claimed  studies
    at EHWLC and qualifications purportedly issued by the college, we  have
    set out at Appendix 3 a table setting out  details  of  the  particular
    documents relied upon in these appeals and the  defects  or  errors  in
    them, revealed by the evidence.

36.   We find that the respondent has discharged the burden  of  proof  upon
    her and has shown that the ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) of
    the rules is made out.  So  cogent  is  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    respondent in  these  appeals,  and  so  relatively  insubstantial  the
    appellants' cases in contrast that we find that the ground  of  refusal
    relied upon would be made out even if the standard of proof were higher
    than the ordinary civil standard.

37.   The respondent's conclusion that false representations had  been  made
    or false documents submitted led to adverse  findings  in  relation  to
    paragraph 245Z(c) and (d) of the  rules.   Reliance  upon  the  diploma
    certificates and other items, being false documents, led to  no  points
    being awarded to Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal in relation  to  their
    qualification, institution of study, immigration status in  the  United
    Kingdom during their period of  study,  the  date  of  obtaining  their
    awards and English language requirements, all contained in  Appendix  A
    and Appendix B of the rules.  In the light of our conclusion  that  the
    mandatory ground of refusal in paragraph 322(1A) is made out,  we  find
    that the respondent's decision to award no points to Mr Khalid, Mr Syed
    and Mr Akmal is sound and manifestly in accordance with  the  law.   So
    far as Miss Mahnoor Salman and Ms Tahira Salman are concerned,  in  the
    light of our conclusions in relation to Mr Syed,  we  find  that  their
    applications for further leave as his dependants were properly  refused
    by the respondent as  neither  could  show  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319H(b) or 319C(b) respectively were met.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

38.   None of the appellants made any mention of Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights in  his  or  her  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    witness statements made by Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr  Akmal  contained
    very little in relation to any ties and associations they have  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Mr Syed, his wife and his daughter  would  be  removed
    together as an entire family unit.  He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
    with leave as a student in June 2004, his wife joining him in July 2007
    as his dependant.  Their daughter, Miss Salman was born in this country
    on 27th December 2007.  She is not a British citizen.   There  was  no
    evidence at all to indicate  that  she  has  a  particular  reason  for
    remaining the United Kingdom.  She is still at a very  young  age  and,
    applying ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, we find that her  best  interests
    clearly lie in remaining with her parents and, if they are  removed  in
    consequence of refusal to vary their leave to remain, in being  removed
    with them to Pakistan.  There was no evidence showing that Mr Syed  and
    his family would have any difficulty in re-establishing  themselves  in
    Pakistan or in maintaining contact with  friends  or  associates  here,
    from abroad.  Mr Akmal arrived with leave as  a  student  in  September
    2003.  There was, similarly, no detailed evidence regarding any private
    life he may have established here since then and nothing to  show  that
    he would be unable to re-establish himself on  return  to  Pakistan  or
    that he would be unable to maintain any  friendships  made  here,  from
    abroad.  Mr Khalid arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  with  leave  as  a
    student in September 2001.  There was, similarly, no detailed  evidence
    in his case regarding any private life he may have established here and
    nothing to show that he would be  unable  to  re-establish  himself  on
    return or maintain contact with friends here, from abroad.   The  false
    documents relied upon by  all  three  lead  appellants  and  the  false
    representations they made in support of their applications for leave to
    remain are adverse factors of substantial weight, clarifying the strong
    public interest in  their  removal.   Notwithstanding  the  paucity  of
    evidence in this context, we find that the  appellants  may  well  have
    established private lives here since their arrival  and  Article  8  is
    engaged in each case in this context (but not  engaged  in  the  family
    life context in relation to Mr Syed, his wife and his daughter as  they
    would be removed together).  The decision in each  case  to  refuse  to
    vary leave was made in accordance with the law  and  in  pursuit  of  a
    legitimate aim, the maintenance of immigration control in the interests
    of the economic wellbeing of the  United  Kingdom.   Weighing  all  the
    evidence before us, we find that the decision to refuse to  vary  leave
    in each  case,  and  any  consequent  removal  of  the  appellants  are
    manifestly proportionate responses on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

39.   For the reasons we have given, the appeals are dismissed.






Signed                                             Date


Immigration Judge R C Campbell,
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 APPENDIX 1






APPELLANTS:   FRAZ KHALID
                  SALMAN ALI SYED
                  SHEIKH MUHAMMAD AKMAL
                  MAHNOOR SALMAN
                  TAHIRA SALMAN


DATE OF RECONSIDERATION HEARING:  4 November 2009

PANEL:                 Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                                          Senior Immigration Judge  P R Lane



Representation

For the 1st, 4th & 5th Appellants:      Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed
                               by Messrs Ali Sinclair Solicitors
For the 2nd & 3rd Appellants:           No appearance and no representation
For the Respondent:                             Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home
                               Office Presenting Officer


REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW
IN THE DETERMINATION


1.    At the reconsideration hearing on 4 November 2009, the Tribunal  found
    that there was a material error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
    Designated  Immigration  Judge,  who  had  dismissed  the   appellants'
    appeals.

2.    The Designated Immigration Judge heard on 3 August 2009  a  number  of
    conjoined appeals in respect of appellants  who  had  claimed  to  have
    obtained postgraduate diplomas from Ealing, Hammersmith and West London
    College, but whose certificates allegedly issued by that  college  were
    in each case regarded by the respondent as false.   As  a  result,  the
    respondent refused the applications of  the  appellants  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrants, both because they failed
    to amass the requisite number of points required by paragraph  245Z  of
    the Immigration Rules and because they had  falsely  represented  their
    certificates to be valid, and thus fell foul of  paragraph  322(1A)  of
    those Rules.

3.    The Designated Immigration Judge had before him  a  witness  statement
    of Miss Catherine Vines, the head of international  operations  at  the
    Ealing, Hammersmith and West London  College.   Miss  Vines'  statement
    said that the  college  taught  and  issued  postgraduate  diplomas  in
    hospitality and management travel, tourism and business to students who
    had successfully completed the course.  Victoria Charles had  been  the
    course director "of the CIPD and PG hospitality management  programmes"
    and  she  was  currently  "the  course  director  for  HND  hospitality
    management and FDA business".  The  certificates  put  forward  by  the
    appellants purported to have been signed by Victoria Charles.  However,
    according to Miss Vines' statement "Victoria Charles has not signed any
    certificates and would not do so in her current role or  previous  role
    and her signed name is not  on  any  examination  board's  statements".
    Catherine Vines went on to say, in respect of each of  the  appellants,
    that the documents supplied to the respondent "are all  fake  and  were
    not issued by the college for  the  following  reasons;  that  Victoria
    Charles has not signed the documents in question nor would she do so in
    her role, all  of  the  college's  postgraduate  courses  are  eighteen
    months' duration with start dates in September, January and April only,
    that this person has never applied to study  at  the  college  and  has
    never studied at the college".

4.    The position  of  the  appellants  was  that  they  had  been  genuine
    students and had genuinely obtained their postgraduate certificates.

5.    It appears from paragraph 71 of  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge's
    determination  that  he  decided  the  appeals  by  reference  only  to
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules  and  not,  separately,  by
    reference to paragraph 245Z.  So far as paragraph 322(1A) is concerned,
    despite the  fact  that  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge  made  his
    findings "on a balance of probabilities" (paragraph 71), it is  unclear
    whether  he  appreciated  that  the  burden  of  proof  lay  with   the
    respondent.  This leads to the first of Mr Burrett's grounds of appeal;
    namely, that the Designated  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  appreciate
    that, whilst the burden on the respondent in this  regard  was  to  the
    balance of  probabilities,  the  respondent  needed  to  adduce  cogent
    evidence, having regard to the  nature  of  the  assertions  made.   Mr
    Burrett pointed to paragraph 101 of the determination of  the  Tribunal
    in NA and Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009]  UKAIT
    00031, where the Tribunal found as follows:

         "101. However, we do agree with Mr Macdonald that the  consequences
             of refusal under Part 9  can  be  serious  and  that  this  is
             certainly true for persons such as the three  appellants  who,
             depending on findings of fact made by the Tribunal,  may  find
             themselves, if removed from the UK, faced with a 5-10 year re-
             entry ban under para 320(7B)  albeit  para  320(7B)  and  (7C)
             contain exemptions designed, inter alia, to ensure  compliance
             with an applicant's human rights).  Whilst we would note  that
             Lord  Hoffman  in  Re:  B  (Children)  emphasised   that   the
             seriousness of the consequences do  not  require  a  different
             standard of proof, we do accept that  for  the  respondent  to
             satisfy us he has discharged the burden of proof on him on the
             balance of probabilities he would, in the context of this type
             of case, need to furnish evidence of sufficient  strength  and
             quality and he (and the Tribunal) would need to subject it  to
             a 'critical', 'anxious' and 'heightened' scrutiny."

6.    It is important to emphasise that any such application of the kind  of
    scrutiny just described is not to be equated with an actual standard of
    proof.  Nevertheless, we find that  there  is  force  in  Mr  Burrett's
    submission.  As we shall now explain, it is evident that the Designated
    Immigration Judge erred in law in his approach to the evidence.

7.    There were two significant aspects  about  the  respondent's  evidence
    presented to the Designated Immigration Judge in these appeals.  First,
    there was no evidence of any kind from  Victoria  Charles,  the  person
    whose signature was, according to the respondent, not  placed  (or  not
    validly placed) on the certificates submitted by  the  appellants.   At
    paragraph 68 of the determination,  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    said:-

         "68. Importantly the college  has  not  produced  a  document  from
             Victoria Charles to the fact  that  she  has  not  signed  the
             documents asserted."

8.    As Mr Burrett said, this finding was, in effect, left "hanging in  the
    air" by the Designated Immigration Judge, who did not return to  it  in
    the course of his analysis of the evidence.  He should have  done;  and
    his failure is,  we  find,  an  instance  of  his  not  having  applied
    sufficient scrutiny to the evidence as a whole.

9.    The other matter related to the statement  of  Catherine  Vines.   She
    did not give oral evidence  at  the  hearing.   At  paragraph  70,  the
    Designated Immigration Judge said that the:-

          "assertion by or on behalf of the Appellants is in reality that  I
         can rely on the Appellants' written  statements  and  diplomas  and
         ignore the Respondent's written statements and  exhibits.   I  find
         that is a  totally  simplistic  approach  and  I  reject  it.   The
         Respondent does not call Catherine Vines, any one of the Appellants
         could have if the had  wished  to  content  that  Catherine  Vines'
         statement was made without due  authority  could  have  called  and
         witness summoned  one  of  the  principals  to  attend  with  their
         relevant student records [sic]. They did not do so."

10.   The Designated Immigration Judge went on to say that  he  could  place
    weight upon "a senior officer of the college signed  witness  statement
    made in a Criminal Justice Act format confirming that she had access to
    college records as  confirmation  that  all  the  Appellants  were  not
    students at the college as they have claimed".  Paragraph 70,  however,
    ends with the following sentence: "It is a weighty  assertion  to  make
    against these  Appellants  and  I  have  given  these  appeals  careful
    consideration".

11.   In deciding what weight to place upon a particular piece of  evidence,
    judicial fact-finders are expected to have some regard,  at  least,  to
    whether the person providing that evidence has done so orally or merely
    in writing. This is in no sense incompatible with  what  the  House  of
    Lords had to say in Khawaja [1983] UKHL 8 (as cited in paragraph 101 of
    NA), where the House held that a court in judicial  review  proceedings
    involving an alleged illegal entrant is  entitled  to  have  regard  to
    evidence  that  has  not  been  tested  by  cross-examination.  In  our
    jurisdiction, the question is one of weight. It is  perfectly  possible
    for significant weight to be afforded to  written  testimony.  But  the
    issue needs  to  be  properly  addressed.  In  the  present  case,  the
    Designated Immigration Judge's  conclusion,  that  any  differentiation
    between oral and written evidence could effectively be  brushed  aside,
    on the basis that the party not relying on  that  evidence  could  have
    summonsed the other side's witness, was not a proper approach.

12.  Mr Burrett's grounds state that the appellants were unaware  until  the
    hearing that Catherine Vines was not being called  by  the  respondent.
    Mr Tarlow did not seek to challenge that assertion,  which  we  see  no
    reason to reject.  Mr Burrett told us that,  once  it  became  apparent
    that Catherine Vines was not being called,  he  took  the  decision  on
    behalf of the appellant he represented to make the submission that  the
    weight to be accorded to her evidence should be tempered by her failure
    to appear. That was an understandable stance  and  was  not  adequately
    addressed by the Designated Immigration Judge, because of the  latter's
    reliance upon the witness summons issue. As a  result,  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge  was  led  into  legal  error,  in  relation  to  his
    assessment and weighing of the  evidence.   That  is  particularly  so,
    given the point made in paragraph 101 of NA.

13.   On 4 November, the Tribunal announced that it  had  found  a  material
    error of law in the determination, such that no part  of  the  findings
    could stand, with the result that a fresh hearing was required  on  all
    issues.







                               Signed: Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane


                               Date:    16 November 2009




                     Appendix 2:  respondent's evidence


The respondent's evidence

Written statement of Victoria Charles

1.    Ms Victoria Charles made a statement  on  27th  September  2010.   She
    teaches on hospitality and business courses at Ealing, Hammersmith  and
    West London College.  She was on maternity leave in June 2009 when  the
    UKBA last made enquiries regarding Mr Akmal, Mr Syed  and  Mr  Khalid.
    She is currently Course Director for a Foundation Degree in Hospitality
    Management.  She stated that she is not now and has never  been  Course
    director for the Postgraduate Diploma in Business at the college.

2.    So far as Mr Akmal is  concerned,  he  provided  a  document  entitled
    "Postgraduate Diploma  in  Business  -  Results  at  12/12/2008".   The
    document did not bear a student data number.  It included  a  signature
    purporting to be Ms Charles' own  and  she  was  identified  as  Course
    Director.  Ms Charles stated "categorically" that she did not sign  the
    document, or any other document relied upon by Mr Akmal.  Her signature
    has been the same since her marriage in May 2000 and comprises her full
    name "Victoria Charles".  She never uses her initial in  place  of  her
    first name and the angle of her signature is  different  from  the  one
    which appears at the bottom of the document relied upon  by  Mr  Akmal.
    The signature which appears in the document is very different from  her
    true one.  The same  observations  apply  in  relation  to  the  letter
    addressed "To Whom It May Concern", also relied upon by Mr  Akmal.   Ms
    Charles noted, in addition, that the letter refers to  the  college  as
    "one of the DIUS listed body" (sic).  She stated  that  she  has  never
    made any reference to the college being such a body and does  not  know
    what the abbreviation DIUS stands for.

3.    So far as Mr Syed and Mr Khalid are concerned, Ms Charles stated  that
    the same observations applied  to  the  documents  submitted  by  those
    appellants, which appeared in copy form in the respondent's  bundle  at
    pages B2, B3, B5 and B7.  She believed that the documents  relied  upon
    by all three were forgeries.

Written statement of Catherine Vines

4.    Ms Catherine Vines made two statements.  The first is dated 17th  June
    2009.  She described herself as employed by the Ealing, Hammersmith and
    West London College as the Head  of  International  Operations  and  as
    having access to  college  records  in  respect  of  the  enrolment  of
    students, attendance records and awards gained by  them.   The  college
    has a number of sites, one of which was referred to as Hammersmith  and
    West London College, the address  being  Gliddon  Road,  Barons  Court,
    London W14 9BL.  The college taught  Postgraduate  Diploma  courses  in
    Hospitality Management, Travel and Tourism and  Business  and  students
    who successfully completed courses would be issued with  diplomas.   In
    her statement, Ms Vines confirmed that a letter  was  sent  to  the  UK
    Border Agency on 17th December 2008, stating that Ms  Victoria  Charles
    had not signed any postgraduate diploma certificates and would  not  do
    so in her current or previous roles and that her name did not appear on
    any examination board statements.  Ms Vines received a request from the
    UK Border Agency on 24th June 2009 regarding a number  of  students  at
    the college and she was sent copies of documents apparently  issued  to
    those students.  So far as Mr Khalid was concerned, he had submitted to
    the UK Border Agency an  undated  letter  addressed  "To  Whom  It  May
    Concern" regarding an award of a Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Hospitality
    and Management and his successful completion of a course, a document on
    Hammersmith and West London College headed paper entitled  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Hospitality, giving results as at 9th October  2008,  these
    two items apparently signed by Ms Victoria Charles, and a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Hospitality Management at pass level on Hammersmith and West
    London College headed paper, giving the dates of the  course  programme
    as April 2008 to July 2008.  Ms Vines stated  that  these  items  were
    "fake" and not issued by the college.  Ms Victoria Charles did not sign
    the documents bearing her name and would not do so in her role.  All of
    the postgraduate courses were of eighteen months' duration  with  start
    dates in September, January  and  April  only.   Mr  Khalid  had  never
    applied to study at the college and had never studied there.

5.    So far as Mr Syed was concerned, he submitted to the UK Border  Agency
    an undated letter addressed "To  Whom  It  May  Concern",  regarding  a
    Postgraduate Diploma in Hospitality Management, providing course  dates
    of 17th January to 9th October 2008, in which it was  claimed  that  he
    had successfully completed his course.  The letter was  signed  in  the
    name of  Victoria  Charles,  Course  Director.   He  also  submitted  a
    document on  Hammersmith  and  West  London  College  headed  notepaper
    showing results as at 9th October  2008  and  signed  in  the  name  of
    Victoria  Charles.   He  also  submitted  a  Postgraduate  Diploma   in
    Hospitality Management at pass level on  Hammersmith  and  West  London
    College headed paper, giving programme dates of April to July 2008.  Ms
    Vines stated that these  items  were  "fake"  and  not  issued  by  the
    college.  Ms Charles had not signed the documents nor would she do  so.
    The postgraduate courses were of eighteen months' duration, with  start
    dates in September, January and April only.  Mr Syed had never  applied
    to study at the college and had never studied there.

6.    So far as Mr Akmal was concerned, he had also submitted  documents  to
    the UK Border Agency.  These included an undated letter  addressed  "To
    Whom It May Concern", providing course dates of 19th  January  to  12th
    December  2008,  claiming  that  he  had   successfully   completed   a
    postgraduate diploma course.  The letter was  signed  in  the  name  of
    Victoria Charles, Course Director.  Mr Akmal also submitted a  document
    on Hammersmith and West London College headed notepaper, giving results
    as at 12th December 2008, also signed in the name of Victoria  Charles.
    Mr  Akmal  also  submitted  a  Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Business  and
    Management at pass level on Hammersmith and West London College  headed
    paper, giving programme dates of January to December  2008.   Ms  Vines
    stated that these items were also "fake" and not issued by the college.
     Mr Akmal had never applied to study  at  the  college  and  had  never
    studied there.

7.    Ms Vines' second statement was  made  on  27th  September  2010.   She
    joined Ealing, Hammersmith and West London College nearly  seven  years
    ago as Head  of  International  Operations.   She  is  responsible  for
    recruiting international students from overseas and managing  contracts
    with international partners.  Her  responsibilities  include  reviewing
    all international  students'  applications  to  join  the  college  and
    issuing and signing documents now known as "Confirmation of  Acceptance
    for Studies" if appropriate.  The college is one of the two largest  in
    the United Kingdom, with four campuses in west London.  24,000 students
    are currently enrolled of  whom  just  under  2,000  are  international
    students.   They  come  from  120  different  countries.   The  college
    provides both academic and vocational  courses.   In  2008,  Ms  Vines'
    department  was  awarded  the   Queen's   Award   for   Excellence   in
    International Trade, in recognition of their responsible recruitment of
    international  students  and  their  contribution   of   an   estimated
    30,000,000 to the west London  economy.   The  college  was  rated  as
    highly trusted on the UK Border Agency Tier  4  Register  of  Sponsors.
    The  college  has  an  on-line  management  system,  called  "Centime",
    supported by detailed paper records on each student.  Full  details  of
    all recruitment activities are also  retained.   The  college's  record
    keeping system is entirely electronic and bespoke.   It  was  in  place
    when Ms Vines began working at the college and has been  enhanced  over
    the years.  A record is created on the Centime  system  as  soon  as  a
    completed application is received from a potential student.  A  student
    is then assigned a six-digit data number which remains  unique  to  the
    individual throughout their time at the college and  thereafter.   This
    student data number appears on all correspondence from the  college  to
    the student.  Each piece of work submitted by  the  student  must  also
    bear their student  data  number.   The  issuing  of  the  data  number
    represents the start of what becomes an individual learning plan.   The
    college does not  destroy  or  delete  these  records  when  a  student
    finishes his or her course or  courses.   The  system  therefore  holds
    records of all students since it was installed in 2002 and 2003.

8.    Ms Vines stated that academic and administrative staff have access  to
    Centime at different levels.  Upon payment of the full fee for a course
    a full record is set up, containing the student's full  name,  address,
    telephone number and other basic details.  It also contains a record of
    the student's attendance at classes which is updated electronically  by
    the course tutor or lecturer at the time the student does or  does  not
    attend a  scheduled  class.   The  system  automatically  generates  an
    attendance warning when a student's attendance falls below 90 per cent.
     If a student requests details of attendance at classes, as they  often
    do for visa purposes, the Centime system can provide  a  percentage  of
    classes attended in each module.  The system also records  a  student's
    presence on the campus because  it  is  linked  to  the  gates  at  the
    entrance to each campus.  No one can access the college  without  going
    through these gates and each student is given an electronic access card
    which must be presented to the electronic sensor on the gate to  effect
    entry and exit.  As soon as a  student  enters  or  exits  the  campus,
    Centime records the date and time of that entry or  exit.   Details  of
    all modules undertaken and examinations and assessments  attempted  are
    also recorded on Centime, together with results in each.

9.    Mr Khalid, Mr Syed and Mr Akmal claimed to have been students  at  the
    college and supplied certificates  purporting  to  show  completion  of
    their course, issued by the college.  Ms Vines stated  "with  absolute
    certainty" (at paragraph 15 of her second statement) that Mr  Syed,  Mr
    Akmal and Mr Khalid had never applied to the college, studied there  or
    been awarded any qualifications by the college.  She had  searched  the
    Centime system for the individuals.  None  of  them  had  produced  any
    documents containing a six-digit data number and so  she  searched  the
    database using the names given in their  passports  and  variations  on
    their names (set out at paragraph 14 of her second  statement).   There
    was no record of any of the three on the system.  It was  inconceivable
    that a student could have attended the college and  graduated  from  it
    without such a record.  They could not have entered the  campus,  their
    attendance at classes could not have been recorded and there  would  be
    no record of progress or achievements to  put  before  an  examinations
    board prior to the awarding of a qualification.

10.   Before the introduction of the  Tier  4  scheme,  the  college  issued
    letters which were similar in content to  CAS  letters,  called  "offer
    letters".  Since she joined the college, Ms Vines  has  assessed  every
    application and signed every offer letter, visa letter  or  CAS  letter
    issued to an international student.  No one else is  authorised  to  do
    so.  Where the international centre issues offer letters to students  a
    paper file  is  created  containing  an  application  form,  supporting
    academic documents and a copy of the offer letter.  This  is  kept  for
    three academic years.  When students accept an offer and make full  fee
    payment, the paper  files  are  held  for  five  years  to  meet  audit
    requirements.  Having checked the paper  records,  Ms  Vines  confirmed
    that no such offer letter has ever been issued to any of Mr Khalid,  Mr
    Syed and Mr Akmal.  In the  electronic  internationals  folder  on  the
    Centime system, copies of all offer letters created from 1999  to  date
    are kept.  This folder has been searched for the names of  these  three
    appellants, including the variations that they have used, and there  is
    no record of an offer letter being created for any of them.

11.   Ms Vines asked the Finance Department  to  check  whether  any  record
    existed of payments and these enquiries revealed  that  none  had  been
    received from any of them.

12.    Mr  Khalid,  Mr  Syed  and  Mr  Akmal  each  relied  upon  a  diploma
    certificate  purporting  to  come  from  the   college,   showing   two
    signatures.  Ms Vines stated that  she  had  not  seen  the  signatures
    before being shown the certificates.  The first, on the  left  of  each
    document appeared to be of someone called "Galvi" or "Salvi".  She  has
    never known a Course Director by either name and a search made  by  the
    Personnel Department showed that the  college  had  never  employed  an
    individual by either name in any capacity.  The second signature, which
    purported to be that of the college Principal, appeared  to  be  "Kevin
    K".  The college's Personnel Department records showed that  no  "Kevin
    K" had been Principal during the relevant period.  Insofar as it  might
    be suggested that the signature was that of  Kevin  Finnegan,  who  was
    Principal from 1st May 2006 until 31st  December  2007,  the  Personnel
    Manager at the college provided a copy of  Kevin  Finnegan's  signature
    (which appeared with other specimen signatures at pages C6 to C8 of the
    respondent's bundle) which bore no resemblance to the signature on  the
    certificates.  In any event, Kevin Finnegan left the college at the end
    of December 2007, some months before the certificates  were  apparently
    issued.  Ms Vines stated that she is aware that one of  the  appellants
    responded to directions from the Upper Tribunal to provide his  student
    data number and claimed that he was unable to  provide  it  as  he  was
    required to  return  his  identification  card  to  the  college.   The
    suggestion that the college required students to return their cards was
    completely incorrect.  Cards were linked to the Centime  system,  which
    also contained start and end dates of each course.  Following  the  end
    of a course, the system no longer permitted a person access through the
    gates of the campus.  There was  therefore  no  reason  to  attempt  to
    recover the cards.  Should a student enrol  on  a  new  course  in  the
    future, the system would once again recognise the card and permit  them
    access to the college for the duration of the new  course.   For  those
    reasons, the college was happy for  former  students  to  retain  their
    cards.

Oral Evidence of Victoria Charles

13.   Ms Charles adopted the witness statement she made  on  27th  September
    2010 and said that the contents were true and accurate.  She  described
    herself as a lecturer  and  also  a  Course  Director  responsible  for
    running certain programmes.   She  was  the  Course  Director  for  the
    hospitality management programme in the business division.  She was not
    and had never been Course Director  for  the  Postgraduate  Diploma  in
    Business.  Mr Tarlow asked about the period from  January  to  December
    2008.  Ms Charles said that she  was  not  a  Course  Director  on  any
    postgraduate diploma programmes, although she was Course Director for a
    Foundation Degree in Business and a Foundation  Degree  in  Hospitality
    Management.

14.   Part B of the respondent's bundle was placed before Ms  Charles.   The
    document at B1 appeared to be a diploma certificate issued  to  a  Syed
    Salman Ali.  The dates shown in the document  made  no  sense  as  they
    suggested that his work placement began before the course  of  studies.
    The signature applied above the words College Director appeared to show
    a surname of "Salvi" or "Galvi" and the  first  name  might  have  been
    "Robi".  She had not known any College Director with those names in the
    eight years she had been with the college.  The name of  the  principal
    appeared as "Kevin K" or "Kevin F".  The college  at  one  time  had  a
    Principal called Kevin Finnegan, but he had left by the dates shown  in
    the document.  The Principal in 2008 was Paula Whittle.   The  document
    at B2 appeared to show results  from  an  examination  board  for  Syed
    Salman Ali.  The format was as one would expect.  Ms Charles said that
    her name appeared in the document but she was not a Course Director  at
    that time.  The signature in the document was not hers.   A  sample  of
    her true signature appeared at the end of her witness  statement.   She
    used "Victoria" usually and when she issued exam results, she would not
    sign although her name would appear in the results sheet or transcript.
     She did not recall signing this particular document.  On the right  at
    the bottom, the Principal's name appeared as  Kevin  Finnegan  and  the
    date of issue was 9th October 2008.  Mr Finnegan was not the  Principal
    at that time.   Moreover,  the  document  appeared  to  come  from  the
    Hammersmith campus and not from the college as a whole.   There  was  a
    second logo for "The Sixth Form  Centre  Hammersmith  and  West  London
    College" but no logos for the other sites.  The Sixth Form  Centre  was
    at the Southall site and she did not know why  it  would  appear  in  a
    document of this type.  She had not seen any document from the  college
    that had this mix of logos.  If the contents appeared on college headed
    paper, the title of the college would include "Ealing"  as  well.   The
    subjects taken, appearing as "unit  titles"  appeared  similar  to  the
    units or modules on the programme.

15.   Ms Charles said that the letter at page  B3,  giving  Mr  Syed  Salman
    Ali's name and showing her as Course Director, looked strange.  A  logo
    appeared for the college but there  was  no  address.   Genuine  headed
    paper would contain addresses and telephone numbers.  The qualification
    was described as "PGDHM" but nobody would know what the abbreviation or
    acronym stood for.  The college would write out  the  qualification  in
    full.  The date of the letter was 9th October 2008, the  same  date  as
    appeared in the results sheet at B2.  This too was strange.  A  student
    would finish the course and then the examination board would  meet  one
    or two months later to consider marking and cross marking.  After  that
    a student would get something like the document at B2 showing  results.
    The certificate would not be issued until later.  It was very odd  that
    the documents contained the same date.  The description of the  college
    as one of the "DIUS Listed  Body"  was  also  odd.   It  would  not  be
    appropriate to describe the college in that way in a letter.  Nor would
    capitals have been used in "Certify" and "Successfully".   The  capital
    would not have been omitted from "Bachelor's" degree.  Ms Charles  said
    that this was the first time she had seen "DIUS" in a  letter  of  this
    sort and she could not guess what it stood for.

16.   Ms Charles said that neither signature appearing  above  her  name  in
    documents B2 and B3 was hers.  She would not have used the phrase "this
    course is a Post Graduate diploma above level of United Kingdom" (sic),
    as appeared in the letter at B3 and she would not state  what  level  a
    particular qualification was at, as that would be a matter for  others.
    The format of  the  certificate  at  B1  looked  strange.   The  headed
    notepaper referred to just one site and did not include the  full  name
    of the college.  However, the body of the document referred to  Ealing,
    Hammersmith and West London College.  That would  have  been  the  name
    that appeared in a genuine logo.  The typeface  was  rather  "artistic"
    and she had not seen one like it before.  The dates  of  the  programme
    and the work placements made  no  sense.   The  address  and  telephone
    numbers of the college would also have appeared in a genuine  document.
    Hammersmith was just one of the  sites.   In  the  past  there  was  an
    institution called Hammersmith College but she was  not  aware  of  any
    legal entity called Hammersmith and West London College, as appeared in
    the logo.  The Barons Court site might be described as the  Hammersmith
    campus but not as Hammersmith and West London College.  A  postgraduate
    diploma would be issued in the name of  Ealing,  Hammersmith  and  West
    London College.

17.   The postgraduate diploma certificate  at  B4  appeared  to  have  been
    issued to Khalid Farz.  Ms Charles said that she had the same  comments
    in relation to this document as to the certificate at B1  and  had  the
    same comments about the results sheet at B5 as made in relation to  the
    similar  document  at  B2.   It  appeared  that  the  same  grades  and
    attendance figure appeared in each of those  documents,  although  they
    were apparently issued to different people.  At B6 was a results  sheet
    in Mr Khalid's name.  She was not sure what "results from first  block"
    meant and she had never issued anything that included the  phrase.   It
    was also very odd to see something from the college without  a  student
    data  number  as  this  unique  signifier  would  appear  in  all  such
    documentation.  She had the same comments to make about the  letter  at
    B7, addressed "To Whom It May Concern", showing Mr Khalid's name, as in
    relation to the similar letter at B3 in Mr Syed's name.

18.   At B8 was a postgraduate diploma certificate in  the  name  of  Sheikh
    Muhammad Akmal.  Ms Charles said that she had the same comments to make
    regarding the logo which appeared and the signatures  for  the  College
    Director and Principal as with the similar documents in the names of Mr
    Khalid and Mr Syed at B4 and B1.  The course was described  as  running
    from January to December 2008, but courses would start in September  or
    October and finish in May or June the following year, if run without  a
    work placement.  At B9 was a results sheet  in  Mr  Akmal's  name.   Ms
    Charles said that she had never been Course Director on this  programme
    and so she would not have issued such a document.   The  grade  pattern
    and attendance rate appeared the same as in the  other  results  sheets
    issued to Mr Syed and  Mr  Khalid.   She  would  not  have  issued  any
    Postgraduate Diploma in Business results sheets as she had  never  been
    Course Director on the  programme.   She  would  never  have  issued  a
    document relating to students on  another  course.  She  had  the  same
    comments to make in relation to the letter at page B10 as  in  relation
    to the similar letters issued to Mr Syed and Mr Khalid at  B7  and  B3.
    She wished to add that a student who finished a course on 12th December
    2008 would not have been awarded a postgraduate  diploma  on  the  same
    day.  The college would not mark, agree results and make an  award  all
    on the same day as a course came to an end.

19.   The assignments made available by  Mr  Akmal,  which  accompanied  the
    witness statements made in readiness for the hearing before the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal, were placed before  Ms  Charles.   Mr  Tarlow
    asked her to comment first  on  the  assignment  in  Mr  Akmal's  name,
    bearing the title "Going Forward: the Strategic Position of Dell".   Ms
    Charles said that the document suggested review  by  Mehdi  Farr.   She
    said that she would expect the tutor's name to appear and there was  no
    assignment top sheet attached.  This would include the student's  name,
    data number and the name of the tutor.  There would also be  space  for
    the tutor to enter a grade and comments.  These would  be  expected  on
    such an assignment.  There were also no tutor marks on the work itself.
     At the time of submission in September 2008, assignments  were  marked
    by hand and would include highlighted errors and  comments.   The  same
    comments applied to Mr Akmal's  second  assignment,  "Response  of  HR
    Function to the Constraints  of  Resourcing  Strategies  Faced  by  the
    Nature of External Employment Market".  This  was  to  be  reviewed  by
    Maria Pelley.  Ms Charles said she  had  never  heard  of  this  person
    although she had heard of Mehdi Farr, who worked at the  college.   The
    titles of the assignments  were  very  broad  and  general,  which  was
    unusual. Something more specific would have been required.

20.   Mr Khalid also provided a copy of an assignment in his  appeal  bundle
    before the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Ms Charles said  that  she
    had the same comments to make.  There was no top sheet or grading  grid
    and no tutor marks.  The title  was  very  strange  for  a  hospitality
    management course.  It was "Instrumental  Stakeholder  Theory  Suggests
    that Those Businesses that are Managed in the Name of All  Stakeholders
    Tend to Maximise Profits  for  Shareholders.   Discuss."   The  college
    would not have asked for a discussion of stakeholders on such a course.
     Something would have been required in relation to the organisation the
    students worked for.  The  assignment  did  not  say  which  module  it
    related to.  She could not see how work on stakeholder theory would fit
    in with any of the modules on the hospitality management course.

21.   Mr Syed's appeal bundle also included two assignments,  placed  before
    Ms Charles.  She said that she had the same comments  to  make.   There
    was no evidence that this work had been submitted to  the  college,  no
    mention of modules and no marks from the tutor.  The title of the first
    assignment was  "Impact  of  New  Working  Practises  and  Patterns  on
    Individual and Business Performance" but she did not consider that this
    would have formed the subject of an assignment.  Something  would  have
    been required relating to  the  hospitality  industry.   The  level  of
    English in the assignment was very good compared with  what  one  would
    expect from most of the overseas students.  It would be very unusual to
    see this level of English, particularly so early in  the  course.   The
    assignment was dated 14th April 2008.

Oral Evidence of Catherine Vines

22.   Ms Vines adopted the witness statements she made  on  17th  June  2009
    and 27th September 2010.  She said that the contents of each  statement
    were true.  Her role as Director and Head of the  International  Centre
    was a hybrid one.  It was not  academic  in  the  teaching  sense;  she
    checked the documentation submitted by students and  interviewed  them.
    She identified new courses, new  international  markets  and  developed
    programmes for groups of  international  students.   She  produced  the
    International Course Guide  for  2009  and  2010.   This  document  was
    different from the home prospectus and was aimed  at  non-EC  students.
    It had sections on visa requirements and  a  price  list  for  students
    outside Europe.  The Ealing, Hammersmith and West London College was  a
    market leader and the only one to be given the Queen's  Award  for  its
    international work.  Ms Vines said that  she  was  appointed  a  United
    Kingdom national advisor in  September  2010  for  the  Association  of
    Colleges in the development of their international charter.

23.   Students were given a unique data  number  from  the  time  they  made
    enquiries.  If a person moved to application and enrolment  he  or  she
    still kept the same number throughout.  The system had been in place at
    the college since before she arrived some ten years ago.   Once  checks
    were completed a student was invited  to  join  and  would  receive  an
    identity card once the fees were paid.   This  would  be  used  at  the
    entrances to  the  four  campuses,  where  entry  would  be  gained  by
    "swiping" the card.  The system would be brought in my all colleges  in
    the United  Kingdom  in  due  course.   The  card  was  generated  from
    information held on the database.  Ms Vines produced  examples  of  the
    cards, one of the type issued to a student and the other a card  issued
    to her as a staff member.  The  staff  card  had  a  six-figure  number
    whereas the student card had seven figures and a data number consisting
    of six figures.  The identity number was the data number  at  the  top.
    The seven-figure number  might include figures showing the first course
    completed, results in examinations and the  number  "1"  meant  that  a
    student had not asked for a replacement card and was the issue  number.
    The data number was the one against which copies of qualifications  and
    other documents would be held and accessed.  Every time  an  assignment
    or a piece of work was handed in, it could be accessed by means of  the
    data number.  No member of staff would accept  coursework  without  the
    student providing  that  number  on  it.   The  number  was  especially
    important as assignments might go out for assessment by universities or
    external bodies.  Students would also have to complete the data  number
    on every page in an exam book.  They would  not  be  allowed  into  the
    examination hall or any building without this number.  The  Hammersmith
    campus had 12,000 students, 5,000 full time and 7,000 part time, taking
    classes in the evenings and  for  professional  qualifications.   About
    half of those students would leave each year when their courses came to
    an end.  The  6,000  cards  issued  to  those  who  left  would  become
    redundant and they would not be able to  re-enter  the  buildings.   If
    they joined another course, this would be in September and  they  would
    go through the same process and keep the same data number, although  an
    updated photograph might be needed.  Most courses ran for a maximum  of
    two years and so there would not be a lot of  change  in  this  regard.
    There was no attempt to collect cards because the card "went dead"  (ie
    became incapable of operating college systems) at the end of each year.
     The cards were not collected.  The system would then  begin  again  in
    the following academic year.   The  same  system  applied  at  all  the
    campuses.  There was one database for all of them.

24.    Section  B  of  the  respondent's  bundle,  consisting  of  documents
    provided by the appellants, was placed before Ms Vines.  At  pages  B2,
    B5 and B9 were documents showing results.  In relation to Mr  Syed  and
    Mr Khalid, the results sheets or transcripts  were  dated  9th  October
    2008; in relation to  Mr  Akmal,  the  results  sheet  was  dated  12th
    December 2008.  Ms Vines said that the name of the Principal  shown  in
    the documents was Kevin Finnegan.  In fact, Mrs Paula Whittle  was  the
    Principal at the time.  At pages B1, B4 and B8 were copies of documents
    purporting to be postgraduate diplomas issued to Mr Syed and Mr  Khalid
    in Hospitality Management and to Mr Akmal in Business  and  Management.
    Each showed in the bottom right of the document a  signature  appearing
    as  "Kevin  K"  above  the  word  Principal.   Before  Ms  Whittle  was
    appointed, a Kevin Finnegan had been Principal but Ms Vines  said  that
    nobody in that position would have used an initial for  their  surname.
    The other signature, above College Director in each item,  appeared  to
    be "Gaji Salvi".  Each one of the four campuses had a College Director,
    similar to a Vice Principal.  The College Director for the courses  and
    at the Hammersmith campus was Mrs Lyn Pearson.  Records at the  college
    from 2000 showed that nobody called Salvi or Galvi had  been  appointed
    as a College Director.

25.   The diploma at B1 appeared to have been issued to Syed Salman Ali  but
    in her position as head of the International  Division,  Ms  Vines  had
    never known anyone with that name  at  the  college.   The  course  was
    developed in Mumbai.  Students were drawn from the Christian and  Hindu
    communities  there,  from  the  Institute  of  Hospitality  at   Mumbai
    University.  The course was only for students from that city.  They had
    no Muslim students and the name was not known to her.  Checks had  been
    made of the Centime system from 2005, when the  course  in  Hospitality
    Management first began but nobody with that name had joined the course.
     Ms Vines said that she would travel to Mumbai and  interview  students
    there.  If they were successful they were admitted.   They  were  drawn
    exclusively from Mumbai.  The programme was then opened out  to  Poona,
    as a satellite.

26.   Ms Vines said that the document at B1 also showed an  incorrect  logo.
    The name of the college was  given  as  "Hammersmith  and  West  London
    College" and the word "Ealing" had  been  omitted.   In  addition,  the
    length of the programme was wrong.   The  copy  diploma  showed  it  as
    running from April to July 2008, whereas it ran  for  eighteen  months.
    It also showed a work placement between January and October  2008  even
    though the course programme was described as beginning  in  April  that
    year.  Students could not have had a work placement before  the  course
    began.  Students were placed in partner hotels and the  first  part  of
    the course was concerned with general principles.  The  work  placement
    would then follow.  The awards themselves would be given in association
    with  partnership  or  external  institutions.   The  partner  in   the
    postgraduate diploma course was Edexcel and  successful  students  were
    given exemption from some modules on an MBA course with the  University
    of Wales.  A graduate would be given a certificate by the  college  and
    also by Edexcel.

27.   At B4 was a similar document in the name  of  Khalid  Farz.   Ms  Vine
    said that she had the same  comments  and  observations  regarding  the
    signatures which appeared.  The wrong logo appeared at the top right of
    the document whereas "Ealing" appeared in the name of  the  college  in
    the body of the document, as was also the case with  the  item  at  B1.
    She had the same comments to make in relation to the work placement and
    the course programme dates as with the diploma in Mr Syed's  name.   At
    page B8 was a document in the name of Sheikh Muhammad Akmal, purporting
    to be a Postgraduate Diploma in Business and Management.  She  had  the
    same comments to make regarding the signatures which  appeared  at  the
    bottom of the document, showing  "Kevin  K"  as  Principal  and  "Salvi
    Galvi" as College Director.  Neither was known  to  the  college.   The
    diploma would have been validated by Edexcel.  Mr Tarlow asked  whether
    the college would have issued a certificate in  this  form.   Ms  Vines
    replied that they would not have done so.  It  was  a  poor  fake.   It
    contained the wrong title for  the  college,  the  Principal's  surname
    appeared as an initial only and they would not have issued the document
    in this form.  A person  who  had  genuinely  obtained  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Business and Management would have  received  a  certificate
    from the college and a document from Edexcel.  Also  missing  from  all
    three documents was the Queen's Award logo which marked out the college
    as unique in the whole United Kingdom Ms Vines said that the particular
    postgraduate diploma course stood out in her mind.  It was developed in
    2008.  Once it was launched, the visa requirements changed.  The course
    was offered twice to two small cohorts, one a group of  seven  and  the
    other a group of five.  The  course  ran  for  twelve  months,  between
    January and December 2008.  There was no person called Sheikh  Muhammad
    Akmal in either cohort.
               Appendix 3: documents relied upon by Appellants


|Document relied  |Feature             |Defect shown by     |Other Comments      |
|upon by          |                    |Evidence            |                    |
|Appellants       |                    |                    |                    |
|1.  Postgraduate |The document is     |Signatories not     |Principal at EHWLC  |
|Diploma in       |signed by "Galvi" or|known as College    |in October 2008 was |
|Hospitality      |"Salvi" as College  |Director or         |Ms P Whittle; if    |
|Management       |Director and by     |Principal; names    |"Kevin F" or "Kevin |
|(undated).       |"Kevin K" or "Kevin |suggested by        |K" purports to be   |
|                 |F" as Principal.    |signatures not      |signature of Kevin  |
|                 |                    |associated with     |Finnegan, then (a)  |
|                 |                    |either role.        |Mr Finnegan was     |
|                 |                    |                    |Principal from 1st  |
|                 |                    |                    |May 2006 until 31st |
|                 |                    |                    |December 2007 and   |
|                 |                    |                    |(b) signature bears |
|                 |                    |                    |no relation to      |
|                 |                    |                    |genuine signature,  |
|                 |                    |                    |specimen of which   |
|                 |                    |                    |was supplied to     |
|                 |                    |                    |Tribunal.           |
|                 |Programme dates     |Postgraduate courses|                    |
|                 |shown as April 2008 |were of eighteen    |                    |
|                 |to July 2008.       |months duration.    |                    |
|                 |Work placement shown|Work placements on  |                    |
|                 |as commencing       |genuine courses     |                    |
|                 |January 2008.       |commenced after     |                    |
|                 |                    |course of studies   |                    |
|                 |                    |began.              |                    |
|                 |Logo in top right   |Genuine Postgraduate|                    |
|                 |showing "Hammersmith|Diplomas would      |                    |
|                 |and West London     |include logo showing|                    |
|                 |College".           |full name of        |                    |
|                 |                    |college: "Ealing,   |                    |
|                 |                    |Hammersmith & West  |                    |
|                 |                    |London College".    |                    |
|                 |Absence of Queen's  |Genuine Postgraduate|                    |
|                 |Award logo at foot  |Diplomas would      |                    |
|                 |of document.        |include Queen's     |                    |
|                 |                    |Award logo.         |                    |
|2.  Postgraduate |Signed by "Galvi" or|As above in relation|As above.           |
|Diploma in       |"Salvi" as Course   |to Postgraduate     |                    |
|Business and     |Director; signed by |Diploma in          |                    |
|Management       |"Kevin K" or "Kevin |Hospitality         |                    |
|(undated).       |F" as Principal.    |Management.         |                    |
|                 |Programme dates     |As above; courses   |                    |
|                 |shown as January    |were of eighteen    |                    |
|                 |2008 to December    |months duration.    |                    |
|                 |2008.               |                    |                    |
|                 |Logo in top right   |As above, in        |                    |
|                 |showing "Hammersmith|relation to         |                    |
|                 |and West London     |Postgraduate Diploma|                    |
|                 |College".           |in Hospitality      |                    |
|                 |                    |Management.         |                    |
|                 |Absence of Queen's  |Genuine diplomas    |                    |
|                 |Award logo at foot  |would include       |                    |
|                 |of document.        |Queen's Award logo. |                    |
|3.  Results sheet|Signed by Victoria  |Victoria Charles was|Exam results issued |
|(Postgraduate    |Charles as Course   |not a Director on   |in the name of      |
|Diploma in       |Director.           |any Postgraduate    |Victoria Charles    |
|Hospitality ):   |                    |Diploma Programme   |would not have      |
|9th October 2008.|                    |between January and |included her        |
|                 |                    |December 2008;      |signature.          |
|                 |                    |signature applied   |                    |
|                 |                    |was not hers.       |                    |
|                 |Principal shown as  |Kevin Finnegan not  |                    |
|                 |"Kevin Finnegan".   |Principal at date of|                    |
|                 |                    |issue of document.  |                    |
|                 |Logo appearing in   |Genuine logo has    |                    |
|                 |top right bears name|full name of College|                    |
|                 |"Hammersmith & West |(see above).        |                    |
|                 |London College".    |                    |                    |
|                 |Second logo appears |Genuine results     |                    |
|                 |beneath first: "The |sheet or            |                    |
|                 |Sixth Form Centre". |notification of     |                    |
|                 |                    |performance would   |                    |
|                 |                    |not include this    |                    |
|                 |                    |logo or mix of      |                    |
|                 |                    |logos.              |                    |
|4.  Results sheet|Signed by Victoria  |As above, in        |                    |
|(Postgraduate    |Charles as Course   |relation to results |                    |
|Diploma in       |Director.           |sheet dated 9th     |                    |
|Business):12th   |                    |October 2008;       |                    |
|December 2008.   |                    |signature applied   |                    |
|                 |                    |was not hers.       |                    |
|5.  Undated      |Bears name of       |Ms Charles was not  |                    |
|letter addressed |Victoria Charles as |Course Director on  |                    |
|"To whom it may  |Course Director and |any Postgraduate    |                    |
|concern",        |signature purporting|Diploma Course in   |                    |
|purporting to    |to be hers          |2008; signature     |                    |
|certify          |                    |appearing in letters|                    |
|successful       |                    |not hers.           |                    |
|completion of    |                    |                    |                    |
|course.          |                    |                    |                    |
|                 |Logo appears in top |Genuine items would |                    |
|                 |right, showing      |contain full name of|                    |
|                 |"Hammersmith & West |college in logo (see|                    |
|                 |London College".    |above).             |                    |
|                 |Letters contain no  |Genuine items would |                    |
|                 |address.            |include address,    |                    |
|                 |                    |telephone numbers   |                    |
|                 |                    |and other contact   |                    |
|                 |                    |details.            |                    |
|                 |Letters include     |Abbreviation or     |                    |
|                 |abbreviation or     |acronym would not be|                    |
|                 |acronym for course  |used in genuine     |                    |
|                 |described: "PGDHM"; |item; qualification |                    |
|                 |"PGDBM".            |would appear in     |                    |
|                 |                    |full.               |                    |
|                 |Description of      |College would not be|                    |
|                 |college as "DIUS    |described in this   |                    |
|                 |Listed Body" (sic). |way in genuine item.|                    |
|                 |Odd phrasing: "This |Genuine item would  |                    |
|                 |course is a Post    |not include phrase  |                    |
|                 |Graduate diploma    |or attempt to state |                    |
|                 |above level of      |the "level" of a    |                    |
|                 |United Kingdom"     |particular          |                    |
|                 |(sic).              |qualification.      |                    |
|                 |Letters show date of|This is the same    |Completion of       |
|                 |award as 9th October|date as appears in  |course, shown as    |
|                 |2008 (Syed and      |the results sheets  |date of publication |
|                 |Khalid) and 12th    |in each case.       |of results, would   |
|                 |December 2008       |                    |not have led to an  |
|                 |(Akmal),            |                    |award of diploma on |
|                 |                    |                    |the same day.  EHWLC|
|                 |                    |                    |would not mark,     |
|                 |                    |                    |agree results and   |
|                 |                    |                    |make an award all on|
|                 |                    |                    |the same day.       |
|                 |                    |                    |                    |
|6.  All documents|Absence of unique   |Genuine Diploma     |All genuine students|
|relied upon.     |student data number.|Certificates would  |are allocated a     |
|                 |                    |include unique      |unique student data |
|                 |                    |student data number.|number by the       |
|                 |                    |                    |Centime Recording   |
|                 |                    |                    |System which is     |
|                 |                    |                    |retained throughout |
|                 |                    |                    |their course of     |
|                 |                    |                    |studies.            |



