












R (on the application  of  TM  (A  Minor)  by  his  litigation  friend,  The
Official Solicitor) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Minor  -
asylum - delay) [2018] UKUT 00299 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice




                The Queen on the application of TM (A Minor)
              By his litigation friend, The Official Solicitor
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

In considering whether the delay  in  determining  a  person's  ('P)  asylum
application is unlawful all the circumstances  must  be  considered  in  the
round including, inter alia: length of delay; whether P was a minor  at  the
date of his application; whether P continues to be a minor; if a minor,  P's
best interests; the complexities of the claim; the explanation  provided  by
the SSHD and resource allocation; compliance with timeframes  provided;  the
impact of delay on P.

                  Application for judicial review: decision

Having considered all documents lodged and  having  heard  from  Mr  Jacobs,
Counsel on behalf of the Applicant and Mr Chapman, Counsel on behalf of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House on 8 August 2018.


             Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

Introduction

   1. This is a judicial review  application  in  which  the  Applicant  has
      challenged  the  Respondent's  ongoing  delay  in  making  a  decision
      regarding his claim for asylum in the United Kingdom ('UK'), which was
      made on 28 October 2016  (over  21  months  before  the  date  of  the
      hearing).  The Respondent's position is that  he  has  reasonably  and
      lawfully placed a "hold" on all asylum claims made  by  asylum-seeking
      minors in the UK, who were transferred to the UK from France under  an
      "expedited process" in October to December 2016, the  Applicant  being
      one of this cohort.


   2. I have granted the Applicant an anonymity order because he is a  minor
      and this decision  refers  to  sensitive  aspects  of  his  claim  for
      international protection.

Background

   3. The Applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He is  a  minor  aged  17.
      The Respondent accepts for the purposes of these proceedings  that  he
      was born in January 2001.


   4. According to the Applicant, he left Afghanistan when he was 14 in 2015
      - see his solicitors'  representations  dated  24  November  2016  and
      paragraphs 5 to 12 of his witness statement dated 22 November 2016.  I
      merely summarise his claim for  asylum,  which  is  comprehensive  and
      includes  independent  supporting  evidence  from  Afghanistan.    The
      Applicant's  father  was  a  pharmacist  in  Nangarhar   province   in
      Afghanistan and provided polio vaccinations on behalf  of  the  Afghan
      authorities.  He was captured and killed by the Taliban for doing  so.
      The Taliban threatened to do the  same  to  the  Applicant  unless  he
      joined them.  The Applicant refused to do so and two days  later,  the
      family home was attacked and his eight-year-old sister was killed.  In
      addition, the doctor who was working with the Applicant's  father  was
      killed by the Taliban.  The authorities considered the Applicant to be
      implicated in this and  sought  to  pursue  him  on  this  basis.   He
      therefore claims to have fled Afghanistan when he  was  14  years  old
      because he feared both the Taliban and the Afghan authorities.


   5. The Applicant claims that his maternal uncle made arrangements for him
      to flee Afghanistan.  He travelled overland over the course of a  year
      before reaching France where  he  lived  in  the  camp  known  as  the
      "jungle", but which I shall refer to as the Calais camp.  He lived  in
      the Calais camp until he entered the  UK  on  28  October  2016  under
      "Operation Purnia".  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Applicant's
      paternal uncle was resident in the UK and it was appropriate  for  the
      Applicant to be transferred from France to the UK in what  has  become
      known as the "expedited process". The lawfulness of this  process  has
      recently been considered in R (on the application of  Citizens  UK)  v
      SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1812.  The  court  determined  that  the  process
      adopted  was  procedurally  unfair.   However,  this   Applicant   was
      successful in establishing that he should be transferred to the UK  to
      be united with his uncle, with whom he  continues  to  live.   In  his
      submissions before me Mr Chapman expressly accepted, for  the  purpose
      of these proceedings, that the Applicant is a minor and that he  lives
      with his uncle in the UK.  Nothing in this case therefore turns on the
      fairness of the "expedited process" generally or in relation  to  this
      Applicant.


   6.  The  "expedited  process"  was  established  by  the  Respondent   in
      conjunction with the French authorities in October 2016 in response to
      the impending demolition of the  Calais  camp.  By  this  process  the
      Respondent sought to assess the eligibility of  unaccompanied  asylum-
      seeking children ('UASC'), who claimed to  have  a  family  member  or
      relative in the UK, to be transferred to the UK.


   7. A summarised history of the "expedited process" is set out in Citizens
      UK at [9] to [18] and the following description of it  is  taken  from
      that judgment.  Mr Chapman indicated that he was content for me to  do
      so albeit he had no instructions as to the  accuracy  of  the  summary
      contained in the judgment. In short, demolition of the Calais camp was
      announced on 7 October 2016.  This  led  to  discussions  between  the
      Respondent and the French authorities on 12 October 2016 with  a  view
      to expanding and modifying a pilot process for an "accelerated" Dublin
      III procedure, which had been under consideration over the  summer  of
      2016. The "expedited process" was established  in  the  light  of  the
      impending  demolition  of  the  Calais  camp  and   the   Respondent's
      acceptance that there were likely to be  at  least  200  unaccompanied
      asylum-seeking children who had close family links in  the  UK  living
      there and who therefore would be eligible for transfer to the UK under
      Dublin III.


   8.  The  "expedited  process"  formed  part  of  "Operation  Purnia"  and
      ultimately consisted of two phases. The first phase was an  interview,
      decision-making and transfer phase,  which  took  place  at  the  camp
      itself in the last two  weeks  of  October  2016.   Approximately  200
      children were transferred to the UK in the first  phase.    Given  the
      timing of this Applicant's arrival in the UK it seems  clear  that  he
      was subject to and successful under the first phase.  Mr  Chapman  did
      not dispute this analysis.

   9. On 28 October 2016 the French  authorities  asked  the  Respondent  to
      cease interviewing at the camp. In early November children began to be
      dispersed across France. That dispersal gave rise to second  phase  of
      the "expedited process". The interview process under the second  phase
      lasted from 7  November  2016  to  25  November  2016.  As  a  result,
      transfers to the UK took place until 9 December 2016.

  10. Following both phases a  total  of  approximately  550  children  were
      identified as being eligible for transfer and transferred  to  the  UK
      between October and December 2016.  I shall refer  to  this  group  of
      children as the "Purnia family children".


  11. I now turn to the chronology of events after the  Applicant  made  his
      asylum claim in the UK on 28 October 2016.  By 23  November  2016  the
      Respondent was  satisfied  that  the  Applicant  (then  aged  15)  was
      properly residing with his uncle in the UK.  His solicitors  submitted
      representations and a detailed statement setting out his asylum  claim
      on  24  November  2016.   I  have  already   summarised   this.    The
      representations attached: letters from the Nangarhar  police,  letters
      from  the  Taliban,  news  reports  and  detailed  country  background
      evidence on Afghanistan.


  12. The representations were returned  because  there  was  a  failure  to
      include photo identification and a letter  of  authority.   They  were
      resubmitted and received on 5 January 2017.   Although  received  some
      six weeks after the time limit, they were initially sent on  time  and
      both Counsel confirmed that little turned upon this particular period,
      given the length of the subsequent delay.

  13. The Applicant attended an asylum interview on 17 March 2017, but  this
      was cancelled as the Respondent did not accept  that  the  responsible
      adult who attended with him was appropriate.  His uncle was said to be
      away at the time.  In a letter dated 25  April  2017,  the  Respondent
      notified the Applicant that his asylum claim would not  be  determined
      within six months of the date it was made (which would be on 27  April
      2017) and that he was unable to advise when it would  be  able  to  be
      dealt with.  In the case notes disclosed for the first time  with  the
      amended detailed grounds of defence served  on  1  August  2018  ('the
      amended detailed grounds'), the following is stated in the  entry  for
      24 April 2017:


           "This is an OP Purnia case.  Policy issued  on  21/4/17  to  say
           that all such cases should be flagged as NSF now pending further
           guidance. ASY Cat 4 - Blocked.  Country Guidance Case.


           To be reviewed 1 month to see whether  further  policy  guidance
           provided.


           Standard NSF delay letter issued."


  14. Mr Chapman explained that 'NSF' means  'not  straightforward'.   There
      was  no  explanation  available  to  me  as  to  why  the  Applicant's
      solicitors were not told at that time that his application for  asylum
      was delayed because he was an "Operation Purnia case".  The case notes
      clearly indicate that this information was available to the author  of
      the 24 April 2017 letter.


  15. On 15 May 2017 the Applicant's solicitors wrote a pre-action  protocol
      ('PAP') letter pointing out that the Applicant had been in the UK  for
      seven months and the continued delay in determining his claim was  not
      in his best interests.  They requested an  interview  date  within  14
      days and a decision on his asylum claim in 30 days.  In a letter dated
      31 May  2017,  the  Respondent  addressed  the  former  by  giving  an
      interview date of 31 May 2017 but there was no response to the  latter
      request.


  16. The interview took  place  on  31  May  2017.   This  was  a  detailed
      interview that lasted for two hours and 45 minutes  and  included  143
      questions.  At the end of  the  interview,  the  interviewing  officer
      permitted the Applicant's solicitors to provide any clarification  and
      further information within five working days.  Shortly after this, the
      Applicant's solicitors made further detailed representations  dated  7
      June 2017.  These clarified answers  at  the  interview  and  provided
      updated country background evidence relevant to the asylum claim.   Mr
      Jacobs was keen to stress that these representations did not start the
      clock again but were in keeping with the obligation to  determine  the
      asylum claim by reference to updated country conditions.  It  is  well
      known that the situation in Afghanistan is fluid.  Mr Chapman did  not
      disagree with Mr Jacobs' analysis of the further representations.


  17. On 14 July 2017 the Applicant's solicitors requested  an  update  from
      the Respondent.  There was no response to this letter.  There has been
      no explanation for this.  The case notes are silent as to whether  the
      case was reviewed in accordance with the 24 April 2017 entry.


  18. In  a  second  PAP  letter  dated  22  August  2017,  the  Applicant's
      solicitors pointed out that despite numerous chasers there had been no
      decision some three months since the asylum interview.  Reference  was
      again made to the  delay  adversely  impacting  the  Applicant's  best
      interests.   The  Applicant's  solicitors   expressly   requested   an
      explanation for the delay and a decision to be made  within  30  days.
      In the PAP response dated 4 September 2017, the Respondent  apologised
      for the delay in making a decision  on  the  asylum  application.   No
      explanation was offered for the delay, but the following assurance was
      provided (my emphasis):


           "The points you raised were noted and enquiries were  made  with
           the relevant casework team.  I have been  advised  by  the  team
           that they are aware of your client's case and they are  actively
           seeking to progress it.  Whilst the casework team are unable  to
           provide a timescale for when a decision will  be  made  at  this
           time, they have confirmed that they remain committed into making
           a decision  on  your  client's  case  promptly.   Your  client's
           continued patience in this matter is  appreciated  and  we  hope
           that he would avoid pursuing litigation at this time."


  19. There has been no explanation as to why the Respondent indicated  that
      they were "actively seeking to progress" the Applicant's case when, as
      Mr Chapman acknowledged, it was known that it had already been  placed
      on "hold", consistent with the policy referred to in the 24 April 2017
      case notes entry.


  20. Mr Jacobs indicated that out of deference to  the  terms  of  the  PAP
      response, the Applicant and his solicitors did not immediately lodge a
      claim for judicial review and hoped as promised that the case would be
      considered promptly.  Their patience ran out and on  7  February  2018
      they lodged the claim form challenging the delay in making a  decision
      regarding the Applicant's outstanding asylum claim.


  21. In the acknowledgment of service dated 23 March 2018,  the  Respondent
      invited the Applicant to agree  to  a  stay  of  the  proceedings  and
      attached a draft consent order in which the following is recorded:


           "Upon the SSHD confirming that she is reviewing the position  of
           individuals who have entered  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
           section 67 of  the  Immigration  Act  2016  which  included  the
           applicant and that she will confirm her position by the  end  of
           June 2018"


  22. On 14 May 2018 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  granted  permission  and
      refused the Respondent's application for a stay.   At  that  point  in
      time, the information available to  the  Tribunal  from  both  parties
      supported the mistaken belief that the Applicant was a child  who  had
      been relocated to the UK pursuant to section 67 of the Immigration Act
      2016 ('the 2016 Act'), known as the "Dubs amendment".  I  shall  refer
      to the children relocated pursuant to section 67 of the  2016  Act  as
      the "Dubs children" in this judgment.  Mr Chapman emphasised that  the
      "Dubs children" are a discrete cohort, and distinct from  the  "Purnia
      family children".  The Applicant is part of the latter cohort.   Judge
      Smith's observations must therefore be read with this in mind:


           "The Dubs amendment was passed in May 2016, some two years  ago.
           The Applicant  is  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child  who
           arrived in the UK over eighteen months ago.  The fact  that  the
           Respondent has yet to formulate a policy regarding  support  for
           children in the category of the Applicant is arguably not a good
           reason for the delay and it is not appropriate  to  extend  time
           for this issue to be resolved whilst the Respondent continues to
           consider her position."


  23. The Respondent sought an  extension  of  time  to  file  his  detailed
      grounds of defence.  The Applicant objected  to  this.   In  a  letter
      dated 29 June 2018, the Respondent clarified that "the  Applicant  did
      not come to the UK pursuant to section 67 of the Immigration Act  2016
      but rather under an expedited process  whereby  unaccompanied  asylum-
      seeking children in Calais were brought to the UK  if  the  Respondent
      was satisfied that they had family members...lawfully present  in  the
      UK".  The Respondent acknowledged that the position ought to have been
      clarified sooner but explained that at the time the claim was  brought
      he was considering which form of leave to provide the "Dubs  children"
      and it was on this mistaken basis that an application for a  stay  was
      made.


  24. The Tribunal granted the Respondent an extension of time to  file  his
      detailed grounds.  These were settled by Mr Chapman and are  dated  11
      July 2018.  The detailed grounds make it clear that the Applicant  did
      not enter pursuant to the Dubs amendment but in  accordance  with  the
      "expedited process".  Paragraph 5 of the detailed grounds is the first
      occasion that the Applicant was given any explanation for the delay in
      determining his case.  It states as follows:


           "Following the assessment of  their  asylum  claims,  it  became
           clear that not all of the children transferred to the  UK  under
           the expedited process to join family would qualify  for  asylum.
           Given the complex nature of this cohort, a review of these cases
           is on-going and as a result decisions in these cases  have  been
           placed on hold."


  25. The Applicant then submitted amended grounds and sought permission  to
      do so at the same time as lodging his skeleton  argument  on  22  July
      2018.  The Applicant's solicitors  also  sought  permission  to  place
      reliance upon a witness statement from the  Applicant  dated  18  July
      2018.  The application to amend the grounds was not  resisted  by  the
      Respondent and I granted permission to rely upon them at the  hearing.
        I set out the amended grounds in full below:


      Ground 1 - Breach of Procedures Directive 2005/85/EC


      The conduct of the Respondent in delaying to reach a decision  on  the
      Applicant's  asylum  application  is  unlawful  and  contrary  to  the
      Respondent's obligations under the Procedures Directive  and  contrary
      to Immigration Rule 333A, which  incorporates  Article  23(2)  of  the
      Directive.


      Ground 2 - section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
      2009 (the '2009 Act')


      The conduct of the Respondent in delaying to reach a decision  on  the
      Applicant's  asylum  application  is  unlawful  and  contrary  to  the
      statutory duty imposed upon her by section 55 of the  2009  Act.   The
      Respondent has acted unreasonably and has failed to act in  accordance
      with the best interests of the Applicant as a child.


      Ground 3 - Wednesbury unreasonableness


      The continuing delay of the Respondent to  reach  a  decision  on  the
      asylum application of the Applicant, an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
      child, is unreasonable.  In particular, the  Respondent's  conduct  in
      seeking to delay consideration of the claim pending a policy  decision
      in relation to section 67 cases (which the Respondent  avers  are  not
      relevant to the Applicant) is unreasonable.


  26. The Respondent then filed his amended detailed  grounds  on  1  August
      2018.  These repeat the assertion already made in the detailed grounds
      regarding the complex nature of the cohort transferred to the UK under
      the expedited process being such that decisions have  been  placed  on
      hold - see paragraph 6 of the amended detailed grounds.   The  amended
      detailed grounds then deny that a period of reasonable time  has  been
      exceeded in the case and deny that the Respondent has failed  to  take
      proper  account  of  the  Applicant's  best  interests.   The  amended
      detailed grounds do not refer to but attach a print out  of  the  GCID
      Case Record Sheet for the Applicant containing the  Respondent's  case
      notes for the period from his arrival date on 28 October  2016  to  25
      June 2018 ('the case notes').  The majority of the entries from  March
      2018 have been wholly redacted.


Evidence

Policy

  27. Apart from the case notes, the Respondent filed no  evidence  in  this
      case.  As a consequence, the Tribunal had not  been  provided  with  a
      copy of the policy referred to in the case notes entry dated 24  April
      2017 or any explanation for or justification of the  policy  to  place
      the determination of the asylum claims of the "Purnia family children"
      on "hold".  During the course of the hearing I indicated that I  would
      be assisted in seeing a copy of the relevant  policy  and  Mr  Chapman
      undertook to file and serve this within 24 hours.  In compliance  with
      this undertaking, the day after the hearing, I  was  provided  with  a
      copy of an email dated 21 April 2017, containing  the  instruction  to
      place the relevant cases on hold.  The subject  matter  of  the  email
      states "URGENT: Operation Purnia Hold until further notice".  The body
      of the email states:


           "All,


           As of immediately there will  be  a  hold  on  interviewing  and
           deciding  all  Operation  Purnia   cases   regardless   of   the
           anticipated outcome until further notice.  Please can you  raise
           NSF flag "Block Country Guidance Case" type barrier  on  all  of
           your outstanding Operation Purnia cases.


           It's anticipated the hold will last a couple of months.  If  you
           have cases which are booked in for an interview in the next week
           which you cannot replace with another key  event  or  cancel  in
           time please let me and Jen know and we will advise"

  28. After I circulated a draft judgment  and  in  'comments'  provided  in
      relation to that judgment on 21 August 2018, Mr Chapman  set  out  the
      Respondent's "updated position concerning the  Operation  Purnia  hold
      instruction" and apologised for the late stage at which this was being
      brought to the Tribunal's  attention.   It  is  regrettable  that  the
      "updated position" was not made clear  at  the  hearing  or  when  the
      Respondent was provided with additional time to provide a copy of  the
      relevant policy.  It is inappropriate for updated instructions  to  be
      provided by way of comment to a draft judgment.  However, for the sake
      of clarity I record that the Mr Chapman's instructions as they  appear
      in the comments to  paragraph  10  above:  "It  is  correct  that  all
      children brought to the UK under "Operation  Purnia"  who  had  asylum
      claims outstanding at the time of the instruction dated 21 April  2017
      had their asylum claims placed on  "hold".   The  Respondent  confirms
      that the "hold" instruction  has  since  been  lifted  for  s  67/Dubs
      children and (sometime in summer 2017) to permit  decisions  to  grant
      asylum to "expedited process children" in cases  where  a  preliminary
      assessment indicated that they were likely to be entitled to  a  grant
      of asylum." Given that these  instructions  were  provided  after  the
      draft judgment was circulated, I do not make any further reference  to
      them in this judgment, save to observe that  this  "updated  position"
      would not have changed my judgment in any material way.

Witness statement

  29. Although Mr Chapman argued that the Respondent had not  had  a  proper
      opportunity to address  the  Applicant's  witness  statement,  he  was
      content with my  suggestion  that  it  did  no  more  than  "typically
      represent" the anxiety and uncertainty likely to be caused  by  delay,
      upon an asylum-seeking child. He also accepted that the  challenge  in
      these proceedings is to a continuing failure  to  act  i.e.  a  moving
      target, and that I must consider the lawfulness of the delay as at the
      date of hearing. In light of these matters  I  granted  permission  to
      rely upon the witness statement in so far as it  confirmed  that  this
      Applicant was impacted by the delay in a manner that was  unsurprising
      and acknowledged by the Respondent in  a  manner  that  is  "typically
      representative".

Legal framework

Timeframe for determining asylum claims

  30. There are no specific time limits within  which  the  Respondent  must
      reach a decision on an asylum case.  His obligations about the time in
      which decisions must be made on asylum  claims  are  to  be  found  in
      Immigration Rule 333A, which provides:


           "333A. The Secretary of State shall ensure that  a  decision  is
           taken on each  application  for  asylum  as  soon  as  possible,
           without prejudice to an adequate and complete examination.


           Where a decision on an application for asylum  cannot  be  taken
           within six months of the date it was recorded, the Secretary  of
           State shall either:
           (a) inform the applicant of the delay; or
           (b) if the applicant has made a specific written request for it,
           provide information on the timeframe within which  the  decision
           on their application is to be expected. The  provision  of  such
           information shall not oblige the Secretary of State  to  take  a
           decision within the stipulated time-frame."


  31. This reflects Article 23 of Council Directive 2005/85/EC of 1 December
      2005 on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for  granting
      and withdrawing refugee status.  Article 23 is  entitled  'Examination
      procedure', and provides:


           "1. Member States shall process applications for  asylum  in  an
           examination procedure in accordance with  the  basic  principles
           and guarantees of Chapter II.


           2. Member States shall ensure that such a procedure is concluded
           as soon as  possible,  without  prejudice  to  an  adequate  and
           complete examination.


           Member States shall ensure that,  where  a  decision  cannot  be
           taken within six months, the applicant concerned shall either:
           (a)      be informed of the delay; or
           (b)      receive, upon his/her request, information on the time-
           frame within which the decision on his/her application is to  be
           expected. Such information shall not  constitute  an  obligation
           for the Member State towards the applicant concerned to  take  a
           decision within that time-frame.


           3. Member States may prioritise or accelerate any examination in
           accordance with the basic principles and guarantees  of  Chapter
           II, including where the application is likely to be well-founded
           or where the applicant has special needs."

  32. Directive 2013/32/EU ('the 2013 Directive')  provides  at  Article  31
      that not  only  should  Member  States  ensure  that  the  examination
      procedure is concluded as soon as possible but this must be within six
      months of the lodging of the application - see Article 31(3).  This is
      of limited relevance because as the parties agreed, the UK did not opt
      into the 2013 Directive and is not bound by its terms.


  33. R (FH & Others) v SSHD [2007] EWHC 157 (Admin) involved 10 cases heard
      together. In each case it was alleged that the Respondent  had  failed
      to decide an application to be  allowed  to  remain  in  this  country
      within a reasonable time. Each of the cases brought by  the  claimants
      were described as incomplete asylum cases. That  phrase  was  used  to
      encompass the situation where an initial decision had been made  on  a
      claim for asylum and rejected and the application  to  be  allowed  to
      remain in this country was a subsequent application  or  fresh  claim,
      albeit there was some variation from this basic case  type.   None  of
      the cases considered by Collins J involved a claimant who had been  an
      unaccompanied minor at the time of  his  application  for  asylum  and
      whose initial claim for asylum had  been  over  a  year.   The  delays
      considered by Collins J were lengthy and covered a  minimum  of  about
      two years  and  a  maximum  of  about  five.  The  Respondent  adduced
      substantial and detailed  evidence  to  explain  why  the  delays  had
      occurred.


  34. Collins  J  rejected  each  claim.  He  accepted  that  there  was  an
      obligation upon the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine  applications
      within a reasonable time but he held that a reasonable  time  had  not
      elapsed in each case.  Collins J set out the appropriate  approach  at
      [11].


           "As was emphasised by Lord Bingham,  the  question  was  whether
           delay produced a breach of Article 6(1). Here  the  question  is
           whether the delay was unlawful.  It  can  only  be  regarded  as
           unlawful if it fails the Wednesbury test and is shown to  result
           from actions or inactions which can be regarded  as  irrational.
           Accordingly,  I  do  not  think  that  the  approach  should  be
           different from that indicated as appropriate in  considering  an
           alleged breach of the reasonable  time  requirement  in  Article
           6(1). What may be regarded as undesirable or a failure to  reach
           the best standards is not unlawful. Resources can be taken  into
           account in considering whether a decision has been made within a
           reasonable time, but (assuming the threshold has  been  crossed)
           the defendant must produce some material to show that the manner
           in which he has decided to deal with the relevant claims and the
           resources put into the exercise are reasonable.  That  does  not
           mean that the  court  should  determine  for  itself  whether  a
           different and perhaps better approach might have  existed.  That
           is not the court's function. But the court can and must consider
           whether what has produced the delay has resulted from a rational
           system. If unacceptable delays have  resulted,  they  cannot  be
           excused by a claim that sufficient resources were not available.
           But in deciding whether the delays are unacceptable,  the  court
           must recognise that resources are not infinite and  that  it  is
           for the defendant and not for the court to determine  how  those
           resources should be applied to  fund  the  various  matters  for
           which he is responsible."


  35. Collins J noted that the vast number of largely  unmeritorious  claims
      placed a burden on the Respondent and that some  delay  was  therefore
      unsurprising - see [25].  He also observed at [28] that  it  might  be
      possible to devise a better system but that does  not  mean  that  the
      existing one  is  unlawful,  notwithstanding  the  unsatisfactory  and
      undesirable delays, and concluded at [30]:


           "It follows from this judgment that claims such as  these  based
           on delay are unlikely, save in very  exceptional  circumstances,
           to succeed and are likely to be regarded as  unarguable.  It  is
           only if  the  delay  is  so  excessive  as  to  be  regarded  as
           manifestly  unreasonable  and  to  fall   outside   any   proper
           application of the policy or if the Claimant is  suffering  some
           particular  detriment  which  the  Home  Office  has  failed  to
           alleviate then the claim might be entertained by the court."


  36. In MK (Iran) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 115; [2010] WLR 2059, Carnwath  LJ
      said at [34]:


           "It was not in dispute that, at least under  domestic  law,  the
           Secretary of State was under a public law  duty  to  decide  the
           asylum application within a reasonable time. Both parties, as  I
           understood them, accepted what I said  in  Home  Secretary  v  S
           [2007] EWCA Civ 546 para 51:


                 "The Act does not lay down  specific  time-limits  for  the
                 handling  of  asylum  applications.  Delay  may   work   in
                 different ways for different groups: advantageous for some,
                 disadvantageous for others. No doubt it is implicit in  the
                 statute that applications should be dealt  with  within  'a
                 reasonable time'. That says  little  in  itself.  It  is  a
                 flexible concept, allowing scope  for  variation  depending
                 not only  on  the  volume  of  applications  and  available
                 resources to deal with them, but also on differences in the
                 circumstances and  needs  of  different  groups  of  asylum
                 seekers. But (as was recognised  by  the  White  Paper)  in
                 resolving such competing demands fairness  and  consistency
                 are also vital considerations.""


  37. Carnwath LJ went on to observe at [35] that "although the  concept  is
      flexible, and the dividing line may often not be easy to  define",  in
      MK's case the position was "reasonably clear".   In  short,  in  April
      2005, the relevant department accepted responsibility for the case. By
      February 2006, after some nine months' inaction, they were  or  should
      have been fully aware of the circumstances, including the fact that MK
      had been accepted  as  a  minor,  and  was  mentally  ill.  Everything
      therefore pointed to the need for an early decision yet  progress  was
      halted because the case was placed in storage and  got  'lost  in  the
      system'.  The particular facts of that case were such that Carnwath LJ
      was prepared to observe at [36]:


           "Had  an  application  for  judicial  review  come   before   an
           administrative judge on those facts, I have  little  doubt  that
           the case for a mandatory order, if necessary,  would  have  been
           accepted (even if in practice an undertaking would probably have
           been offered). That to my mind is a sufficient  indication  that
           by 11th July 2006, at the  latest,  the  dividing  line  between
           reasonable and unreasonable delay had been crossed, and I  would
           so hold."


      The application did not come before the court until  well  after  this
      because a decision to refuse asylum was taken in 2008 with a statutory
      appeal process that followed.  The application made to the  court  was
      therefore not for a mandatory order for a decision to be made, but for
      damages arising from the period of delay, in relation to which MK  was
      ultimately unsuccessful.


  38. The court has been prepared to find that the delay in  determining  an
      outstanding application had become unlawful in MJ v SSHD  [2010]  EWHC
      1800. That case involved an unaccompanied minor who  made  his  asylum
      application when he was 15.  By the time  his  claim  for  asylum  was
      determined he was aged over 18. During the period of three years which
      followed the application for asylum and when he was  a  minor  MJ  was
      cared  for  by  social  services.   During  this   three-year   period
      solicitors acting on behalf of MJ issued regularly reminders that  his
      asylum claim was outstanding.  The Respondent adduced no evidence  and
      did not seek to explain or excuse the period of delay.


  39. However unlike in the instant case, there was a  policy  in  existence
      relevant  to  MJ's  asylum  application  which   envisaged   that   an
      application for asylum made by a child should be determined within  35
      days of the application being made.  Wyn Williams J concluded at  [43]
      that this was not a case of "mere delay" but  a  delay  in  breach  of
      published policy, wholly unexplained by any evidence on  the  part  of
      the Secretary of State.  In addition, at [44]  Wyn  Williams  J  found
      that the delay had disadvantageous consequences upon MJ including  the
      fact that had his asylum application been considered  when  he  was  a
      minor, and assuming it was refused, he would have been  granted  leave
      until his 18th birthday and it would have been open to  him  to  apply
      for a variation of that leave.  Wyn Williams J was therefore satisfied
      that MJ's claim for asylum was not determined within a reasonable time
      and summarised his reasons at [47]:

           "Had the Defendant complied with  her  own  policy  (even  after
           March 2007) the application would  have  been  dealt  with  much
           earlier. The consequence  of  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
           Defendant was that the Claimant suffered conspicuous unfairness.
           I have  no  doubt  that  by  the  time  these  proceedings  were
           commenced a judge of the Administrative Court would have granted
           a mandatory order to compel  the  determination  of  the  asylum
           claim had not the Defendant removed the need for the  making  of
           such an order by reaching a decision on  the  Claimant's  asylum
           claim. Further, I am satisfied that such a mandatory order would
           have been made, if sought, long before the issue of  proceedings
           in this case. Doing the best I can my view is that such an order
           would have been made any time after 12 months had  elapsed  from
           the making of the application on the  grounds  that  by  then  a
           reasonable time for the making of a decision had passed and  the
           Claimant was suffering conspicuous unfairness."


  40. Like MK, S (supra) turned entirely upon its own facts and  involved  a
      delay of over four years with particular consequences as a  result  of
      the applicable policies at that time.  As observed by Moore-Bick LJ at
      [67] this was not a simple delay case.


  41. There have been examples of cases in which notwithstanding a period of
      lengthy delay, the court  found  the  Respondent  not  to  have  acted
      unlawfully.  Mr Chapman placed reliance upon R (AO) v SSHD [2011] EWHC
      110 (Admin), which again turned  on  its  own  facts  -  AO  was  only
      subjected to a delay period of some nine months.

Best interests of children

  42. Section 55 of the 2009 Act provides:

           "(1) The Secretary of State must make arrangements for  ensuring
       that -


                 (a)        the functions mentioned in sub-section (2)  are
                       discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                       promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                       Kingdom...


           (2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


                   (a)       any function  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
                       relation to immigration, asylum or nationality;


                   (b)    any function conferred by or  by  virtue  of  the
                       Immigration Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


           (3)  A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
           exercising the function, have regard to any  guidance  given  to
           the person by the Secretary of State for  the  purpose  of  sub-
           section (1)".


  43. The genesis of section 55 is found in  a  provision  of  international
      law, Article 3(1) of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.

         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken  by  public
         or  private   social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

  44. 'Every Child Matters' is relevant guidance issued  by  the  Respondent
      under section 55(3) of the 2009 Act ('the statutory guidance').   This
      includes at 2.7: "Children should have their applications  dealt  with
      in a timely way and that  minimises  the  uncertainty  that  they  may
      experience"; and at 2.20:


           "There should also be recognition that children  cannot  put  on
           hold their growth or personal development  until  a  potentially
           lengthy application  process  is  resolved.  Every  effort  must
           therefore be made to achieve timely decisions for them."


  45.  The  approach  in  the  statutory  guidance  is  reflected   in   the
      Respondent's policy  on  children's  asylum  claims,  published  on  9
      October 2017.  This sets out  the  policy  objectives  for  processing
      asylum claims for children who submit a claim in their  own  right  as
      being to ensure that, inter alia: immigration, asylum, nationality and
      customs  functions  are  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need  to
      safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  who  are  in  the  UK,
      including  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are  a  primary
      consideration at all times, and the welfare of the child is  paramount
      at all times with the child being cared for by appropriate  adults  or
      agencies with safeguarding responsibilities being met;  protection  is
      granted swiftly to those who need it;  information  about  the  asylum
      claim is collected in an appropriate way with decisions made  promptly
      and communicated to the child in a way that  acknowledges  their  age,
      maturity and particular vulnerabilities.


  46. It must generally be  apparent  from  the  terms  of  any  immigration
      decision that the best interests of each affected child, as  assessed,
      are ranked as a primary consideration and accorded primary  importance
      - see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, at [24] to [33] especially.


  47. There is  a  wide  scale  general  recognition  that  delay  in  cases
      involving children is  invariably  inimical  to  the  welfare  of  the
      subject children. The architects of the Children Act 1989  ('the  1989
      Act') recognised this danger when, for the first time in  any  British
      statute, they imposed an obligation on the parties to avoid delay with
      the establishment of "the delay  principle"  -  delay  is  statutorily
      recognised as inimical to the welfare of the child at section 1(2)  of
      the 1989 Act.  This principle has  in  effect  been  acknowledged  and
      incorporated into the statutory guidance relevant to the  exercise  of
      immigration functions I have referred to above.


  48. The need to act without unnecessary delay and with expedition in cases
      concerning children must however be  balanced  against  the  principle
      that it is also in the best interests of children  that  their  claims
      are  assessed  within  an  orderly  process.   Although   Beatson   LJ
      acknowledged the need for expedition in the context of Dublin III in R
      (ZT (Syria) and Others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 810; [2016] 1 WLR 4894,
      he also observed at [87]:


           "An orderly process is also important in cases of  unaccompanied
           minors. The need to examine their  identity,  age,  and  claimed
           relationships remains, and there is a particular need  to  guard
           against people trafficking."

Submissions

  49. Mr Jacobs, on behalf  of  the  Applicant,  relied  upon  his  skeleton
      argument which expanded on the three amended grounds I  have  set  out
      above.  Mr Jacobs' first submission regarding ground 1 was  that  when
      all the circumstances are considered, the Respondent failed to make  a
      decision "as soon as possible" when he was in a position to conduct an
      "adequate and complete examination" from as long ago as June 2017 when
      the Applicant finalised his representations after the interview on  31
      May 2017.  Mr Jacobs acknowledged that the determination of whether  a
      decision could be made "as soon as possible" could  only  be  done  by
      assessing all the circumstances of the case and therefore ground 1 was
      clearly linked to ground 3.  He effectively  asked  me  to  find  that
      delay had become Wednesbury unreasonable and the Respondent failed  to
      comply  with  his  obligations  under  the  Procedures  Directive   to
      determine the application "as soon as possible" for the  same  reasons
      including inter alia: the length of the  delay;  the  Applicant  is  a
      minor; the explanations for the delay have been in turn erroneous  and
      then belatedly irrational.


  50. Mr Jacobs invited me to find that six months  is  a  useful  benchmark
      from which to consider whether there was a breach of Article  23.   He
      based this upon the text of Article 23  itself  and  by  reference  to
      Article 31(3) of the 2013 Directive.  When I asked if  there  was  any
      ECJU case relevant to Article 23, he indicated that he was  unable  to
      find any but relied upon [119] of Tarakhel  v  Switzerland  (App.  No.
      29217/12) to support  the  submission  that  the  specific  needs  and
      vulnerabilities of children asylum seekers must be taken into  account
      when considering the reasonableness of delay and the additional stress
      and anxiety this may cause.


  51. Mr Jacobs' additional submission was that there had  been  a  discrete
      failing to provide a timetable by which  the  Applicant's  application
      would be considered.  He acknowledged that a specific request for this
      had not been made but reminded me that this is not necessary  for  the
      purposes of the Directive and that in any event it must have been very
      clear from the Applicant's solicitors' correspondence that a  specific
      time-table was being sought.


  52. As to ground 2, Mr Jacobs  submitted  that  there  was  no  indication
      whatsoever that  the  Respondent  took  the  best  interests  of  this
      Applicant into account at any stage of the process.   He  took  me  to
      each document drafted by the Respondent in relation to this  Applicant
      and asked me to  note  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  his  best
      interests, section 55 of the  2009  Act  or  the  statutory  guidance.
      There was also no reference to these matters in the case notes.


  53. Mr Jacobs invited me to make a declaration that the Respondent's delay
      in determining this  Applicant's  asylum  claim  is  unlawful  and  in
      addition constitutes a breach of the Procedures Directive.  Mr  Jacobs
      also asked me to make a mandatory order requiring  the  Respondent  to
      make a decision on the outstanding asylum claim forthwith.


  54. Mr Chapman, on behalf of the  Respondent,  submitted  that  all  three
      grounds  are  co-extensive  and  should  be   viewed   together.    In
      particular, whether the allegations within grounds 1 and  2  are  made
      out, informs the assessment of ground 3 and the reasonableness of  the
      delay. Mr Chapman invited me to find that whether the matter is viewed
      from the  perspective  of  the  Procedures  Directive  (ground  1)  or
      domestic law (ground 3), the  delay  in  determining  the  Applicant's
      asylum claim has not exceeded what is a reasonable time.  He submitted
      that neither  the  Procedures  Directive  nor  the  Immigration  Rules
      requires a particular  timeframe  or  "indicative  timetable"  of  six
      months.  and the period of time that has elapsed of 21 months has  not
      been unreasonable.  In support of the latter submission he relied upon
      four broad matters (see paragraphs  12  and  13  of  the  Respondent's
      skeleton  argument):  (i)   "the   particular   and   highly   unusual
      circumstances of the closure of the Calais camp and transfer of  large
      numbers  of  asylum  applicants  to  the  UK";  (ii)   "the   ordinary
      complications inherent in determining the asylum claims of  those  who
      are, or claim to come from Afghanistan, Syria and other  comparatively
      unstable regions, especially  children  and  especially  unaccompanied
      children"; (iii) the Respondent "was lawfully entitled to take time to
      review his policies in light of these unprecedented circumstances" and
      to determine the asylum claims in  an  orderly  fashion,  and  ;  (iv)
      although the Applicant is a child, he has not been a UASC in  the  UK.




  55. Mr Chapman acknowledged that the Respondent has not sought to  provide
      any witness  statements  to  particularise  these  assertions  and  in
      particular, there was no evidence of the policy to place the cases  of
      the "Purnia family children" on "hold", or the timing or justification
      for the policy.  As I have set  out  above  the  copy  of  the  policy
      referred to in the case notes was submitted the day after the hearing.
       Mr Chapman also accepted that there was no evidence  to  support  the
      claim that the "Purnia family children" cases continued to be complex;
      after that process was completed and asylum claims were  made  in  the
      UK.  Mr Chapman however  asserted  that  the  cohort  as  a  whole  is
      "intrinsically complex" because of the manner in  which  the  children
      were brought to the UK, and that this has resulted in  the  Respondent
      wishing to review  how  they  are  dealt  with  and  for  that  reason
      decisions  were  placed  on  hold.   Mr  Chapman  confirmed  that   he
      understood that part of the Applicant's case was predicated  upon  the
      overarching decision to place the relevant cohort on "hold" and he was
      not prejudiced in defending the wider decision to place  the  relevant
      "Purnia family children" on "hold" at the hearing.

  56. Although Mr Chapman submitted in his skeleton argument (paragraph  24)
      that  the  Applicant's  witness  statement  was  irrelevant  to  these
      proceedings, during the course of  oral  submissions  he  acknowledged
      that although the Respondent had not had an  opportunity  to  consider
      its effect, the contents of the witness statement are unsurprising and
      typical  for  many  asylum-seeking  children,  as  recognised  in  the
      Respondent's statutory guidance.


  57. Mr Chapman submitted that the Respondent was not under any  obligation
      to provide an "indicative timeframe" where he genuinely  and  in  good
      faith was unable to provide one, and in the circumstances,  there  was
      no breach of Article 23(2)(b)  of  the  Procedures  Directive  or  the
      Immigration Rules.


  58. In relation to ground 2, Mr Chapman submitted that section 55  of  the
      2009 Act does not mandate determination of the asylum claim within any
      particular period and that it could not be said that  there  has  been
      any departure from the policy to deal with the claims of the  relevant
      children "in a timely way".   His  skeleton  argument  (paragraph  20)
      merely denied that the Respondent discharged his immigration functions
      without having regard to,  the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
      Applicant's  best  interests.   During  the   course   of   his   oral
      submissions, I invited Mr Chapman to point me to any indicator  within
      the correspondence or evidence that in making the  decision  to  place
      this Applicant's asylum claim on "hold" and  therefore  to  delay  its
      determination, the Respondent had regard to his  best  interests.   Mr
      Chapman submitted that there was no requirement  to  state  that  best
      interests were taken  into  account  and  the  burden  fell  upon  the
      Applicant to establish they were not taken into account.  He submitted
      that in any event best interests did not point in one  direction,  and
      in so far as there was any failure to take  them  into  account,  this
      could not amount to any material error.


  59. I invited Mr Chapman to indicate, if I was minded to grant a mandatory
      order, a practical timescale in which  the  Respondent  considered  he
      could make a decision on the Applicant's outstanding asylum claim.   I
      was told by way of email that if  so  ordered,  the  Respondent  would
      realistically be able to make a decision within 56 days.   No  reasons
      were provided for this timeframe.  By way of email response Mr  Jacobs
      submitted a more appropriate timescale to be 14-21 days.

Discussion

  60. I accept the submission made by both Counsel that  the  three  amended
      grounds are interlinked.  Grounds 1 and 2 inform ground  3,  which  is
      overarching.  If ground 3 is made out, then it is difficult to see why
      grounds 1 and 2 are necessary.  This  is  not  a  case  in  which  the
      Applicant has pleaded or claimed damages (a mere breach of EU  law  is
      in any event not enough as the breach would have to  be  "sufficiently
      serious"), and as such any breach of  EU  law  will  not  attract  any
      additional remedy of any substance: the  main  remedy  sought  by  the
      Applicant being a mandatory order to require the consideration of this
      Applicant's asylum claim forthwith.



Ground 3

  61. I therefore consider ground 3 first.  In my  judgment,  when  all  the
      facts of the case and the  context  in  which  the  delay  arises  are
      considered in the round, it can properly be said that there  has  been
      an unlawful  delay.   I  have  assessed  this  by  applying  the  high
      threshold required for Wednesbury unreasonableness.   I  am  satisfied
      that the  delay  in  determining  this  Applicant's  asylum  claim  is
      unlawful in the sense that when all the circumstances are  considered,
      both peculiar to this Applicant  and  the  context  within  which  the
      Respondent has been operating, the Respondent's actions  and  inaction
      can be regarded as irrational.  In other words,  the  delay  that  has
      been produced has not resulted from a rational system.


  62. In making this finding I have borne in mind the warning from Collins J
      in FH at [30] that claims such as the ones he  was  dealing  with  are
      unlikely, save in exceptional circumstances, to succeed.  However,  as
      observed by Wyn Williams J in MJ at [34], the judgment of Collins J is
      specific to the type of claims which he was  considering.   Collins  J
      made it clear in his judgment  that  a  distinction  is  to  be  drawn
      between incomplete asylum claims and initial claims. Further, none  of
      the claims before Collins J obviously involved  unaccompanied  minors.
      In any event I am satisfied that the delay is so excessive  as  to  be
      regarded as manifestly and Wednesbury unreasonable when the  following
      are considered together: (i) there has been prima facie delay that can
      properly be described as lengthy or excessive; (ii) the Applicant  has
      been as at the date of his application and continues to  be  a  minor;
      (iii) his best interests ought to  have  been  treated  as  a  primary
      consideration when making the decision to place his case on "hold" and
      the Respondent has been unable to point to any evidence that this  has
      been done at any stage; (iv) there  is  no  evidence  to  support  the
      submission that the Applicant's case gives rise to complexities and on
      the contrary it appears to me to be a  straightforward  asylum  claim;
      (v) the explanations provided by the Respondent  for  the  delay  have
      been deficient and in so far as the Respondent relies  upon  resources
      and the large number of applicants  to  consider,  he  has  failed  to
      provide any evidence to show that the manner in which he  has  decided
      to deal with the asylum claims of the "Purnia family children" i.e. by
      placing them on "hold" and the resources put into  the  exercise,  are
      reasonable; (vi) there is no evidence that the Respondent has made any
      meaningful attempt to act upon his own internal timeframes  and  /  or
      communicate a timeframe for the determination of his asylum  claim  to
      the Applicant; (vii) the impact of delay on  this  Applicant.   I  now
      turn to address each of these in more detail.

           i) Length of delay

  63. I  do  not  accept  Mr  Jacobs'  submission  that  six  months  is  an
      appropriate benchmark or provides an "indicative timescale"  in  every
      asylum case.  I do not accept that the later 2013 Directive, which the
      UK did not opt  in  to,  is  capable  of  doing  anything  other  than
      reflecting a general benchmark agreed by other States.   The  language
      of Article 23 itself does not support the submission either.  The  key
      is whether the application has been  decided  "as  soon  as  possible,
      without prejudice to an adequate and complete examination" in all  the
      circumstances. The elapsing of six months simply triggers an applicant
      being: (a) informed of the delay; or (b) being  entitled  to  receive,
      upon his request, information on the relevant  timeframe.   There  may
      well be many cases in relation to which a  period  in  excess  of  six
      months would still be considered reasonable or "as soon  as  possible"
      and conversely,  cases  in  which  there  will  be  a  breach  of  the
      requirements of the Procedures Directive, where "as soon as  possible"
      requires a decision to be made before six months.  This underlines the
      general principle that what is "reasonable" or "as soon  as  possible"
      is  fact  and  context  specific,  dependent   upon   the   particular
      circumstances of the case.  Time-limits under  domestic  law  and  the
      Procedures Directive should be seen as involving flexibility, allowing
      scope for variation dependent upon  a  variety  of  factors  including
      volume of applications,  available  resources,  particular  needs  and
      circumstances of individual and groups of asylum seekers -  see  S  at
      [51].


  64. I accept that it is not possible to say that a  particular  period  of
      time should be the limit of what is reasonable - this will  depend  on
      all  the  circumstances  and  as  submitted  by  Mr  Chapman,  is   an
      "intrinsically flexible concept" - see again S at [51].  In FH at  [8]
      Collins J did not think that 12 months should be regarded as any  sort
      of benchmark but observed "no doubt, delays of 12 months  or  more  in
      dealing with an initial claim to asylum may well need an  explanation,
      but provided the approach of the defendant was based on a policy which
      was fair and applied consistently, such delays could not  be  regarded
      as unlawful".  I note that reference has been made in other  cases  to
      the  determination  of  asylum  claims  by  minors  taking  longer  to
      determine than adults - see  AO  at  [38]  and  I  bear  in  mind  the
      particular requirements that need to be in place to fairly determine a
      child's claim may require additional time.  For example,  as  in  this
      case, the interview was deferred because an appropriate adult was  not
      available.


  65. Doing the best I can, a  reasonable  period  of  time  to  decide  the
      Applicant's outstanding asylum application would  have  been  56  days
      after June 2017.  By June 2017, the Applicant had been subjected to  a
      detailed asylum interview and his solicitors  had  submitted  all  the
      information and evidence necessary for there to be  an  "adequate  and
      complete  examination"  of  the  asylum  application.    Nothing   was
      outstanding and  as  Mr  Chapman  conceded  there  was  no  complexity
      involved in the Applicant's case other than he was  a  member  of  the
      "Purnia family children" cohort.  The Respondent has asserted that  56
      days would be a sufficient period of time  for  him  to  realistically
      make a decision on the asylum claim.  That  takes  the  chronology  to
      around September 2017, just under a year from the date of  the  asylum
      claim.  The overall delay is over 21  months.   The  delay  since  the
      Respondent appears prima facie to have been in a position to determine
      the claim i.e. September  2017  is  11  months.   That  delay  on  any
      analysis is lengthy.  However, for the reasons I have  set  out  above
      and develop below that does not in itself render the  delay  unlawful.
      It is only when it is considered alongside all  the  relevant  factors
      that it is possible to reach the conclusion that the delay has  become
      unlawful.


      (ii)  Applicant has been a minor at all material times


  66. Mr Chapman expressly accepted for the purposes  of  these  proceedings
      that the Applicant is a  national  of  Afghanistan  who  was  born  in
      January 2001 and who therefore remains a minor.  I do  not  accept  Mr
      Chapman's submission that the Applicant has  never  been  a  UASC  (as
      defined by 352ZD of the Immigration Rules) in the UK.  He was  clearly
      a UASC when he was in the Calais camp  and  treated  as  such  by  the
      Respondent under the "expedited process" and when  he  initially  made
      his claim for asylum in the UK.  I  do  however  accept  Mr  Chapman's
      alternative submission that the Applicant was united with his paternal
      uncle shortly after arriving in the UK and has continued to live  with
      and be cared for by him.  Whilst the Applicant was a UASC for a  short
      period whilst in the UK, on his case he was a UASC child from the time
      he fled Afghanistan, during the course  of  the  overland  journey  to
      France and whilst at the Calais Camp.   In  any  event,  although  the
      Applicant has benefitted from the care provided by his uncle in the UK
      and is therefore in a less vulnerable position than  a  UASC,  he  has
      remained a child throughout the process who has  been  separated  from
      both his parents.


  67. I now turn to consider how the Respondent was required to approach the
      decision-making process given that  the  Applicant  remained  a  child
      throughout.

      (iii) Best interests

  68. Mr Chapman submitted that section 55 of the 2009 Act does not  mandate
      determination of an asylum claim within any particular  period.   That
      is undoubtedly correct but fails to address  the  requirement  in  the
      cases of children asylum applicants to make  "every  effort"  to  deal
      with  their  applications  in  "a  timely  way"  that  "minimises  the
      uncertainty they may experience"- see 2.7 and 3.20  of  the  statutory
      guidance.


  69. Section 55 gives rise to a statutory duty.  It is for  the  Respondent
      to establish that he has complied with that duty.  Yet the  Respondent
      has not been able to point to any evidence or correspondence that this
      Applicant's best interests or the best interests of the "Purnia family
      children" as a group were taken into  account  at  any  stage  of  the
      respective decision-making processes.   As Mr Jacobs pointed out,  the
      Applicant's solicitors drew specific attention to the impact upon  the
      Applicant's best interests in the PAP letter but  there  has  been  no
      clear response to this.  The  case  notes  omit  any  reference  to  a
      consideration of the Applicant's best interests.  The only evidence of
      the policy  to  place  the  relevant  decisions  on  "hold"  makes  no
      reference to section 55, the statutory guidance or best interests.

  70. I am satisfied that  the  Respondent  was  obliged  to  consider  this
      Applicant's best interests and the need to safeguard and  promote  his
      welfare, when making the decision to place his asylum claim on "hold".
       There is a complete absence of any evidence or indeed  the  slightest
      indication anywhere that this was done.  I  reject  the  faintly  made
      submission that this is not a material omission.  I recognise that  it
      is in a child's best interests for the determination  of  his  or  her
      asylum application to be done  in  an  orderly  manner.   I  therefore
      accept that the  best  interests  principle  does  not  point  in  one
      direction.  However, the Respondent remained under a statutory duty to
      consider all relevant aspects of the best interests of  the  Applicant
      when making the decision to place his claim on "hold".

      (iv)  Absence of material complexities in the  Applicant's  particular
case


  71. Mr Chapman conceded that the Respondent has  not  identified  anything
      complex about this Applicant's individual asylum claim.   It  was  not
      disputed that as at June 2017 an "adequate and complete determination"
      had  been  completed,  and  the  claim  was  in  principle  ready  for
      determination by the Respondent.




      (v)   Respondent's explanations

  72. I did not understand Mr Chapman to  submit  that  there  has  been  no
      delay.  Indeed, the Respondent acknowledged there had  been  delay  in
      his letter dated 23 March 2017 and apologised for the delay in the PAP
      response dated 4 September 2017.  In my judgment the delay has  become
      prima facie excessive  given  the  Applicant's  age,  the  recognition
      within the statutory guidance that  delay  is  inimical  to  his  best
      interests and the absence of any outstanding matters  or  complexities
      peculiar to his asylum claim.  The periods of delay I have  identified
      above (paragraph 65) cried out for explanations on  the  part  of  the
      Respondent.


  73. It is clear that when the Respondent first acknowledged that there was
      delay in this case in the  25  April  2017  letter  and  then  in  his
      September 2017 PAP response, he was aware  that  the  claim  had  been
      placed on "hold" - see relevant case notes entry of 24 April 2017 read
      together with the email dated  21  April  2017.   There  has  been  no
      explanation for the failure to communicate this.  Had this been  done,
      the matter might have been subject to judicial review proceedings at a
      much earlier stage.  Mr Chapman emphasised that the Applicant was told
      that the Respondent was actively seeking to progress his case  in  the
      PAP response, but it is difficult to see how it could be properly said
      that the casework team remained "committed into making a  decision  on
      [the  Applicant's]  case  promptly"  when  as  the  email  states  all
      "Operation Purnia children" cases  had  been  placed  on  hold  "until
      further notice".   In addition, there has been no  explanation  as  to
      why, contrary to the instruction in the email dated 21 April 2017, the
      Applicant's interview proceeded on 31 May 2017.

  74. The first explanation provided for the delay did not come until  March
      2018  in  the  form  of  a  draft  consent  order  attached   to   the
      acknowledgment of service.  It was wholly  inaccurate.   I  appreciate
      that the Applicant's own solicitors were of  the  mistaken  view  that
      this was a "Dubs children" case.  However, Mr Chapman  explained  that
      notwithstanding the acknowledgment of service, the  Respondent  always
      considered this to be a "Purnia family children" case and not a  "Dubs
      children" case, and the acknowledgment of service  was  inaccurate  in
      stating otherwise.  He therefore made it clear that the Respondent was
      not asserting that delay was  justified  because  of  the  process  of
      creating a new form of leave for "Dubs children".

  75. The decision to place all "Purnia family children" cases on "hold" was
      not communicated to the Applicant or his solicitors until the detailed
      grounds of defence dated 11  July  2018,  some  11  months  after  the
      solicitors' requested detailed  reasons  for  the  delay  in  the  PAP
      letter.


  76. I can conceive of no obvious reason why  "the  particular  and  highly
      unusual circumstances of the closure of the Calais  camp"  in  October
      2016 and the fact that this Applicant was part of a  cohort  initially
      transferred under the  "expedited  process"  has  the  consequence  of
      making the determination of his substantive asylum claim complex.   As
      explained by Singh LJ at [16] and [50] of Citizens UK, the  "expedited
      process" was a one-off process based upon the principles of Dublin III
      but which operated  alongside  it.   Dublin  III  is  the  legislative
      measure allocating responsibility amongst Member States for  examining
      asylum applications.  As  the  Respondent's  Counsel  in  Citizens  UK
      submitted (see [36] of Citizens UK) Dublin III "is simply a  mechanism
      for determining where, when a person has lodged an asylum claim,  that
      claim should be examined and determined".  As observed by Arden LJ  in
      R (RSM) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 18 at [122] the requirement  in  Dublin
      III for there to be an asylum claim followed by a take charge  request
      is  consistent  with  its  aim  to  create  an  orderly  process   for
      determining which Member State should be responsible  for  the  asylum
      claim.  The orderly  process  of  determining  where  the  Applicant's
      asylum claim should be determined  was  finally  resolved  in  October
      2016.  It follows that any "unprecedented circumstances" were  limited
      to the "expedited process" itself.  Once an asylum claim  is  made  in
      the UK it falls to be determined in the usual manner  and  it  matters
      little  that  an  asylum  applicant  has  a  history  of  having  been
      transferred from another Member State to the UK,  either  pursuant  to
      Dublin III or otherwise.


  77. In addition, the Respondent  has  entirely  failed  to  explain  which
      policies he needed to review and, in any event,  why  there  has  been
      such a delay in doing so.  On the evidence available to  me  I  reject
      the submission that the Applicant's past membership of the  cohort  of
      "Purnia family children"  renders  his  case  "intrinsically  complex"
      because of the manner in which he was brought to the UK.


  78. I recognise that the Respondent has undoubtedly faced and continues to
      face  challenges  posed  by  the  large  numbers  of  children  asylum
      applicants transferred to the UK in late  2016.   There  may  well  be
      resource concerns.  However, I simply do not have any evidence  as  to
      this or how the Respondent has sought to manage the process.

      (vi)  Absence of time frame


  79. I accept that the Applicant's solicitors have not made a "specific" or
      clear written request for the Respondent to provide information on the
      timeframe within which the decision on the Applicant's application  is
      to be expected for the purposes of Immigration Rule  333A  or  Article
      23(b) of the Procedures Directive and there  was  therefore  no  clear
      breach of these provisions in this respect.  Mr Jacobs submitted  that
      although there was no specific request, in effect there was a  request
      for a stipulated timeframe to be complied with.  Irrespective  of  the
      requirements in 333A or Article  23,  it  remains  relevant  that  the
      Applicant's solicitors have made it clear that the decision should  be
      taken within a particular timeframe given the delay, and this  request
      has simply been ignored without any explanation.


  80.  I  accept  that  in  principle  there  may  be  occasions  where  the
      Respondent, even after a period of delay and in relation to  a  child,
      is not under any obligation to provide an "indicative timeframe" where
      he genuinely and in good faith  is  unable  to  provide  one.   In  my
      judgment, where as in this case, there has  already  been  significant
      delay and the Respondent is unable to give a specific timeframe, he is
      obliged to give reasons for this.  In this  case  the  Respondent  has
      referred to no correspondence and provided no evidence to explain  why
      a timeframe cannot be provided. This is  to  be  contrasted  with  the
      approach to the "Dubs children".  A clear timeframe  for  those  cases
      was  set  out  -  see  the  draft  consent  order  attached   to   the
      Acknowledgment of  Service.   That  timescale  appears  to  have  been
      followed because as Mr Chapman accepted there is no longer any  "hold"
      on asylum claims from "Dubs  children".   Mr  Chapman  confirmed  that
      their claims are determined in accordance with policy  guidance  dated
      July 2018, which was finalised in accordance with a set timescale.

  81. In addition, the Respondent has failed to comply with his own internal
      timescales.   I have not been directed to any evidence to support  the
      Applicant's case having been reviewed one month after 24  April  2017,
      in accordance with the relevant entry in the case notes.  Similarly, I
      have  not  been  directed  to  any  evidence  to   explain   why   the
      "anticipation" that the "hold" would only last for two months  in  the
      21 April  2017  email,  did  not  materialise,  in  relation  to  this
      Applicant.

      (vii) Impact of delay on this Applicant

  82. I accept, as Mr  Chapman  submitted  that  the  Respondent  cannot  be
      properly criticised for his failure to consider the witness  statement
      given the timing of its disclosure.  However, as Mr  Chapman  conceded
      the contents are not surprising in  any  way  and  "do  no  more  than
      typically represent the likely difficulties many asylum-seeking minors
      face, as acknowledged in the guidance".  Although  the  Applicant  has
      the support of an uncle, he has had to endure the limbo of uncertainty
      regarding a very significant aspect of  his  life  with  far  reaching
      consequences at a formative stage of his development (ages 15 to  17).
      As I indicated to Mr Chapman and as he fairly accepted, the  anxieties
      he has described in his statement are unsurprising.


  83. I also note that the Applicant's claimed difficulties  in  Afghanistan
      are at the more serious end of the spectrum  of  trauma  even  in  the
      context of Afghanistan, a country in which civilians have been plagued
      by atrocities for many years.  His claim is based upon the  murder  of
      his father and little sister by the Taliban within two  days  of  each
      other for no  reason  other  than  his  father  was  delivering  polio
      vaccinations with the consequence that he was  targeted  by  both  the
      Taliban and the government when he was only 14 years old.


  84. As I have already recorded above it is for this combination of reasons
      set out above at (i) to (vii) that I regard the delay in this case  as
      meeting  the   high   threshold   of   irrationality   or   Wednesbury
      unreasonableness, and I find that ground 3 is made out.


Ground 1

  85. Mr Chapman did not dispute that the Respondent  has  at  all  material
      times been under an obligation under European Union law in the form of
      the Procedures Directive, to determine the  Applicant's  asylum  claim
      "as soon  as  possible".   I  enquired  whether  there  was  any  CJEU
      determination of the meaning of  "as  soon  as  possible"  in  Article
      23(2).  Both Counsel confirmed that they were unable to find any.


  86. The position adopted by the Respondent is that it cannot be said  that
      a reasonable time has been exceeded, such as to lead to the conclusion
      that Article 23(2) had not been complied with or that the  public  law
      duty to decide the asylum application within  a  reasonable  time  was
      breached.  I have already found against the Respondent under  domestic
      law.  The position under domestic law and under Article 23 seem to  me
      to be no more than different sides  of  the  same  coin.   Mr  Chapman
      acknowledged the link between grounds 1 and 3.  I find that there  has
      been a breach of Article 23(2) of the Procedures  Directive  but  that
      breach is limited to the Respondent having failed to ensure  that  the
      procedure to examine the Applicant's asylum claim  was  concluded  "as
      soon as possible,  without  prejudice  to  an  adequate  and  complete
      examination".


  87. I do not accept that the Respondent has breached the part  of  Article
      23 that requires information on the timeframe  upon  written  request,
      for the reasons I have already set out  above.   In  addition,  it  is
      noteworthy from the text of  Article  23(2)(b)  that  any  information
      given on the timeframe "shall not constitute  an  obligation  for  the
      Member State towards the applicant concerned to take a decision within
      that timeframe".   In  other  words,  any  requirement  to  provide  a
      timeframe does not attract an obligation to meet it.  This dilutes the
      importance of giving a timeframe upon request.

Ground 2

  88. I accept that there has been a failure to take into account  the  best
      interests of this Applicant.  This is relevant in so far as it informs
      grounds 1 and 3.  Mr Jacobs has not identified any  remedy  under  the
      2009 Act itself and I am not satisfied that there is a  need  for  any
      separate remedy under this head.


Relief and other matters

  89. It follows that I grant the application for judicial review.


  90. I will hear from Counsel on the appropriate orders to make, costs  and
      any application to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  when  judgment  is
      handed down.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the applicant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer




Dated:              21 August 2018










                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





                The Queen on the application of TM (A Minor)
               By his litigation friend The Official Solicitor
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged, together with the submissions of  Mr
Jacobs, Counsel on behalf of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Chapman,  Counsel  on
behalf of the Respondent at a hearing at Field House,  London  on  8  August
2018 and a hearing after the handing down of  judgment  on  22  August  2018
with Mr Grandison appearing as Counsel in place of Mr Chapman.

                           Decision: the application for judicial review  is
granted

   1) The application for judicial review is granted.


   2) The Respondent shall issue a decision on the  Applicant's  outstanding
      asylum claim within 28 days, absent special  circumstances,  which  if
      they arise must be set out in writing  and  issued  to  the  Applicant
      within 28 days.

   3) It is declared that the delay in making a decision on the  Applicant's
      asylum claim is unlawful.


   4) The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's costs, to be assessed if  not
      agreed.

   5) There is an order for detailed assessment of the Applicant's  publicly
      funded costs.


   6) Although no application  was  made,  giving  effect  to  the  relevant
      procedural rule, I formally refuse permission to appeal to  the  Court
      of Appeal because any such application would have no arguable merit.





       Signed:
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

       Dated:     22 August 2018





