
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2016                               |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                            ssh (First appellant)
                            hr (Second appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the 1st Appellant:     Mr R Drabble QC and Ms R Pickering,
                      instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Ms L Busch QC, instructed by the Government
                     Legal Department
For the 2nd Appellant:     Mr A Mills, instructed by Christian Gottfried
                     & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Ms L Busch, QC instructed by the Government
                     Legal Department

    (a)  An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who does  not
         possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez  passer,  which
         he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof  of  identity  and
         nationality.


    (b)  An Iranian male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.   No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time  of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been  established.   In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    Both  appellants  are  nationals  of  Iran.   Their  appeals   against
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal have  been  listed  before  us  to
    enable us to give country guidance on the issue of risk  on  return  to
    Iran for a person who left that country illegally, is a  failed  asylum
    seeker and is undocumented.  As we set out below at  paragraphs  6-8  a
    person  would  not  be  returnable  unless  documented  to  the  extent
    described there, but they would not  be  documented  in  the  sense  of
    possessing a passport.


2.   The first appellant, SSH, is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claims to be  at
    risk on return on the basis that he would be seen as a member  of  PJAK
    (Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan) and  for  having  weapons  in  his
    house.  The judge concluded that his account was fabricated and it  was
    rejected in its entirety.

3.   The second appellant, HR, is also of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claimed  to
    be at risk on return on account of his support for the  Kurdish  cause,
    distributing books and leaflets to other like-minded Kurds.  He  became
    afraid for his own safety when a friend of  his  was  detained  by  the
    authorities in Iran for taking part in similar activities.   The  judge
    accepted that he  was  politically  aware  and  in  all  probability  a
    supporter of the Kurdish cause in general terms but was  not  satisfied
    that there was any evidence of him being a  member  of  any  particular
    political party.  Otherwise his claim was  found  to  lack  credibility
    including a finding that he was  most  unlikely  to  be  identified  by
    reference to his internet activity.

4.   We had an expert report and detailed oral evidence from Dr Kakhki,  who
    had given evidence previously in the country guidance case of SB  (risk
    on return -  illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053.   We  have
    summarised that evidence separately as we also have  the  detailed  and
    careful  submissions  from  the  representatives,  for  which  we   are
    grateful.  All three members of  the  panel  have  contributed  to  the
    writing of this decision.

5.   As set out above the issues in this case are risk on return on  account
    of illegal exit from Iran, being  a  failed  asylum  seeker  and  being
    undocumented.  Clearly we must assess risk in relation to these matters
    both separately and cumulatively.  In asylum appeals  the  standard  of
    proof requires the appellant to show a 'real and substantive risk' or a
    'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood'  of  persecution  for  a   Refugee
    Convention reason (R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ex
    parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958: including the need to show that  there
    is a real, as opposed to a fanciful risk of future events happening (MH
    (Iraq) [2007] EWCA Civ 852.

 Documentation

6.   The issues in respect of a  lack  of  documentation  are  not  so  much
    matters which would lead to a risk on return (other than in respect  of
    an example to which we shall come subsequently) but are  rather  to  do
    with the process through which a person who is a failed  asylum  seeker
    and/or left illegally would have to go in order to return to Iran.

7.   It is clear from  Dr  Kakhki's  evidence  that  the  situation  may  be
    different for a person who left Iran lawfully and  a  person  who  left
    unlawfully, but  in  either  case  such  a  person  who  finds  himself
    undocumented while in the United Kingdom would have to engage with  the
    same process.  At paragraph 12 of Dr Kakhki's report in HR's case it is
    said  that,  according  to  the  passport  law  and  related   official
    guidelines, in order to enter Iran a national should be  in  possession
    of a passport, travel document or a "barge obour", the latter  being  a
    temporary travel document issued by the  embassy  and  valid  only  for
    twenty days and for just a single entry.  This is in effect  a  laissez
    passer of the kind which a number of countries employ  as  a  temporary
    travel document, and we shall refer to it subsequently in this decision
    as a laissez passer.  Dr Kakhki goes on to say that in order to  obtain
    a laissez passer an application form would have  to  be  completed  and
    there would  have  to  be  submitted  original  photographic  proof  of
    identity which should be in the form of a birth  certificate  and/or  a
    national  identity  card,  submission  of  a  ticket   or   a   booking
    confirmation showing the date of intended return to Iran and  a  letter
    from the Home Office explaining the person's status within  the  United
    Kingdom.  Taken at its highest, this would entail informing the Iranian
    authorities that the person was a  failed  asylum  seeker  rather  than
    simply a person without leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  but  we
    accept that the former status would be likely to  be  revealed  by  the
    person since they cannot be expected to lie.

8.   Dr Kakhki had a conversation with an official at the Iranian  Consulate
    in January 2016 from which it is clear that the  applicant  must  first
    prove that he or she is an Iranian national and the laissez passer will
    not be issued simply on the basis of what a  person  says  about  their
    national identity and nationality.  A person in the position  of  these
    appellants who lacks a passport and can therefore not  show  that  they
    left Iran legally would be asked and would have to  say  why  they  had
    left illegally.  Whether the Iranian system would be able to verify the
    claim of a person who simply said they had lost their passport and they
    had left lawfully is not a matter on which we had evidence and we do no
    more than mention the point in passing.   The  case  proceeded  on  the
    basis that the authorities would be, or would  be  made  aware  of  the
    illegal exit from Iran by both appellants.   It  seems  also,  from  Dr
    Kakhki's evidence, that when the request for a laissez passer  is  made
    the embassy will carry out  security  checks  concerning  the  kind  of
    activities the particular person had been  involved  in  while  out  of
    Iran.  The outcome of such checks  would  not  lead  to  refusal  of  a
    laissez  passer  but  such  information  would  be  passed  on  to  the
    authorities in Iran.  It can be seen from the  Danish  Refugee  Council
    Report of 2008, at tab 10 of the Secretary of State's bundle,  at  page
    281 of the bundle, that if a person is  from  an  ethnic  or  religious
    minority  background  or  has  engaged  in  opposition   or   political
    activities the consulate or embassy might not issue them with a  travel
    document .  This contrasts with Dr Kakhki's evidence that  the  embassy
    is obliged to issue a travel  document  if  the  person  can  establish
    Iranian nationality.  This view seems preferable, but in any event  the
    issuing of a travel  document  would  not  mean  that  they  would  not
    potentially face problems with the Iranian  authorities  on  return  to
    Iran.  In the cases  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  this  country
    guidance decision, that  kind  of  background  would  be  lacking,  and
    consequently there would be no reason why a laissez passer would not be
    granted on application by an undocumented Iranian, (assuming  they  can
    prove their nationality), who had left Iran illegally and was a  failed
    asylum seeker.

Detention/Questioning

9.   Thereafter  there  are  said  to  be  two  stages  at  which  a  person
    potentially faces difficulty.  The first, which we shall consider under
    this heading, is the matter which was emphasised in  particular  by  Mr
    Drabble QC in his submissions, that being  the  risk  at  the  time  of
    questioning on return to Iran.  It is clear from Dr  Kakhki's  evidence
    that a person  who  returns  to  Iran  on  a  laissez  passer  will  be
    questioned.  We accept that  this  is  likely  to  be  the  case.   The
    authorities will have been notified of the basis upon which the  person
    has obtained the laissez passer and, it was argued by Mr  Drabble,  the
    questioning would not be cursory but would be lengthy and interrogatory
    and that interrogation would be likely to involve techniques  amounting
    to persecution and/or breach of Article 3.   Dr Kakhki  also  suggested
    that the Iranian authorities at the airport hold a 'wanted list'  which
    is checked on arrival, but he had no evidence  of  this,  and  accepted
    that the list was a confidential document, to which he has  no  access.
    We consider that the evidence does not establish that a person returned
    on a laissez-passer would be on a wanted list.

10.  The other matter, which we consider in detail below  under  a  separate
    heading, is  that  of  risk  of  prosecution,  imprisonment  and  as  a
    consequence ill-treatment as a consequence of being a person  who  left
    illegally and/or is a failed asylum seeker.

11.  On the  issue  of  risk  in  the  course  of  initial  questioning  and
    detention, Mr Drabble drew our attention to several issues addressed in
    the case law.  For example in SB at paragraph 63 there is mention of an
    indefinite period of detention while the person's case was investigated
    further.  That however has to be seen in the context of  a  person  who
    had told the military court judge that  he  had  lied  and  had  jumped
    existing bail and subsequently failed to surrender to the  authorities.
    That is a very different context  from  a  person  without  a  relevant
    history as in the cases we have to consider.  In BA  (demonstrators  in
    Iran - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC),  the  panel  noted
    that a person's  immigration  history,  including  how  they  left  the
    country, would be a factor triggering  enquiry/action  on  return,  but
    they had seen no evidence to lead to the conclusion that merely  having
    exited Iran illegally might cause  an  appellant  to  be  subjected  to
    persecution.  In AB & Others (internet activity -  state  of  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC), there is reference at  paragraph  457  to
    the act of returning someone creating a "pinch point" so that returnees
    are brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran  who  have
    both the time and inclination to interrogate them.  That however was in
    the context of people who had engaged in internet activity, and  it  is
    relevant to note also that at paragraph 470 the Tribunal  said  that  a
    person who is returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of time
    on an ordinary passport, having left illegally, would almost  certainly
    not attract any particular attention at all.  It  went  on  to  say  at
    paragraph 471 that where a person's leave to remain had lapsed and they
    might be travelling on a  special  passport  there  would  be  enhanced
    interest and the  more  active  they  had  been  the  more  likely  the
    authorities' interest could lead to persecution.  That is essentially a
    comment rather than evidence, and though it agrees with what is said by
    Dr Kakhki, it takes matters no further in our view as to  the  risk  of
    ill-treatment on return during a period of questioning.  In  particular
    as it cites no evidence to support the view expressed, and also it is a
    remark made in the context of evaluating risk on  account  of  blogging
    activities, and the reference to 'more active' would not be  applicable
    to a person with no relevant profile.

12.  As regards the background evidence to which Mr Drabble took  us,  there
    is first the Country Information and  Guidance  Report  from  the  Home
    Office entitled "Iran: Illegal Exit",  and  dated  January  2016.   The
    evidence from the International Organisation for  Migration  (IOM)  set
    out at section 4.1.1 of that report included the statement that the IOM
    were aware of nobody being arrested when travelling back to Iran  on  a
    laissez  passer  but  emphasised  that  they  were  only  dealing  with
    voluntary returns and had no knowledge of the situation  of  deportees,
    if any.  They said that so far they had not  had  any  experience  with
    people being arrested by the authorities at the airport.  That would of
    course be another issue if the person concerned had  been  involved  in
    criminal activities abroad and was  on  the  Interpol  list.   The  IOM
    considered that questioning of the person returned on a laissez  passer
    might take a few hours.  There is no reference to anything  other  than
    questioning, but this evidence  has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of
    voluntary returnees only, and it is unclear whether those  referred  to
    were voluntary returnees who left Iran legally or illegally.

13.  There is  a  section  in  that  report  which  is  concerned  with  the
    treatment  of  returnees  who  exited  illegally,  and  this   contains
    quotations from various sources.  Mr Mirfakhar, the Director General of
    Consular Affairs at Iran's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was  quoted  in
    the April 2009 Danish Immigration  Service  Report  as  saying  that  a
    person who has left Iran illegally and who was not  registered  on  the
    list of people who cannot leave Iran will not face  problems  with  the
    authorities upon return though they may be fined.   This  was  evidence
    set out in the Danish Refugee Council Landinfo and  Danish  Immigration
    Service February 2013 joint report.   The  Danish  Immigration  Service
    Report of 2009 was told by  a  "western  embassy"  that  the  embassy's
    knowledge was that people who had left Iran illegally were not detained
    upon return.  They did not know what  would  happen  if  a  person  was
    unable to pay the fine.  A different western embassy  told  the  Danish
    Immigration Service that an Iranian citizen could return even if he  or
    she had left the country illegally but the punishment would  depend  on
    the acts committed before leaving Iran and  they  might  be  fined  for
    illegal exit but they did not know the size of the  fine.   An  unnamed
    attorney at law thought that the fine would be around  US$200  to  300.
    If a person had outstanding issues  with  the  authorities  other  than
    illegal exit he or she might very likely be  punished  for  those  upon
    return.  There is then a quotation  from  a  report  of  Dr  Kakhki  (5
    December 2014) which is in the same terms as we have set out  elsewhere
    in this decision that a person who leaves illegally will  be  sentenced
    to between one  and  three  years'  imprisonment  or  receive  a  fine,
    although no examples of  imprisonment  actually  occurring  are  given.
    This is a "taaziri" punishment which is a deterrent and its severity is
    at the discretion of the judge.

14.  There is also evidence in this regard in  the  Danish  Refugee  Council
    Report of 2008 to which we have referred above.  A western embassy told
    the interviewers that a person who entered Iran  on  a  laissez  passer
    might be questioned by airport authorities on arrival and they knew  of
    two cases where the people were interviewed for three to five hours  by
    the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps.  An international  organisation
    in Tehran told the interviewers that a person  entering  on  a  laissez
    passer might be fined for illegal exit or subject to one or two  hours'
    interrogation  and  did  not  know  if  there  might  be  any   further
    consequences in relation to the interrogation.

15.  There  is  a  general  consistency  to  this  evidence  that  a  person
    returning on a laissez passer, having left  Iran  illegally,  would  be
    subjected to no more than a fine and probably a period  of  questioning
    although there is no indication in the evidence that  that  questioning
    would be of a kind or in a place where ill-treatment could be expected.
     Mr  Drabble  cites  the  USSD  Report  in  connection  with  pre-trial
    detention, which is said to be often arbitrarily lengthy, and the  Home
    Office CIG on  "Iran,  Prison  conditions",  containing  references  to
    lengthy interrogations, including, frequently, torture.  However, there
    is no evidence to show that a period of questioning in the context with
    which we are concerned can be equated to pre-trial detention; nor  does
    the evidence establish that it would take place in a prison.  The point
    that Mr Drabble makes however is that the examples given relate  purely
    to a situation where the person exited illegally and say nothing  about
    the extra risk to which they might be exposed as a consequence of being
    a person who was also a failed asylum seeker.  In this regard  he  took
    us to the Home Office Country  Origin  Information  Service  Report  of
    January 2013, at page 105 of his bundle, itself quoting from an Amnesty
    International Report of February 2012, quoting a  report  issued  by  a
    Swiss refugee agency, quoting an unnamed judge as  saying  that  asylum
    seekers are interrogated on  return  whether  or  not  they  have  been
    political activists in Iran or abroad and if they have tried to conduct
    propaganda against Iran they are culpable  and  are  detained  until  a
    judge decides the sentence.

16.  We note in passing that this appears to contrast  a  person  who  is  a
    failed asylum seeker with a person  who  tried  to  conduct  propaganda
    against Iran rather than  the  automatic  assumption  being  made  that
    because they have sought asylum they must be deemed to  have  tried  to
    conduct propaganda against Iran.  The particular offence in question is
    Article 500  of  Book  5  of  the  Islamic  Penal  Code  which  states:
    ..."anyone who undertakes any form of propaganda against  the  state...
    will be sentenced to between three months and one  year  imprisonment".
    This is quoted in an Amnesty  International  Report:  "Flawed  Reforms:
    Iran's new Code of Criminal Procedure" 11 February 2016,  where  it  is
    said that in practice Article 500 is generally  used  to  restrict  the
    peaceful exercise of the rights to freedom of  expression,  association
    and assembly, noting that  its  definition  is  entirely  left  to  the
    discretion of judges.  It is relevant in passing to observe that  being
    a failed asylum seeker is not mentioned in the report as an example  of
    the kind of person whose conduct might fall within the  ambit  of  this
    provision and in this regard it is also relevant to  note  a  statement
    within a country advice from the Australian Government  Refugee  Review
    Tribunal, quoted in  a  report  of  17  October  2014  of  the  Refugee
    Documentation Centre (Legal Aid Board, Ireland) "Iran:  Information  on
    the Treatment of Returned Asylum Seekers", that: "it is unclear  as  to
    whether any of these examples  of  ill-treatment  are  attributable  to
    political beliefs imputed by authorities  due  to  asylum  claims  made
    while abroad".  This is in the context of noting  that  at  least  some
    returnees from Australia and elsewhere had attracted varying degrees of
    interest on the part of the authorities ranging from simple  monitoring
    to ill-treatment during  detention  or  interrogation.    But,  as  the
    report makes clear,  it  is  not  known  whether  any  of  these  cases
    concerned failed asylum seekers; nor indeed  what  their  full  history
    was.

17.  As regards the Landinfo Country of Origin Information Report  on  Iran:
    Returned Asylum Seekers 19 April 2011, it is  said  there  that  little
    available information is to be found regarding the situation for asylum
    seekers who have returned to Iran.  It is said for example  that  UNHCR
    are not aware of cases where Iranian asylum seekers have been subjected
    to imprisonment or torture after returning to Iran  from  Turkey.   The
    report points to  signals  in  increased  Iranian  interest  in  asylum
    seekers, in particular quoting an article signed by  a  former  Supreme
    Court Judge, Judge Mallahzadeh, in 2011 (we take this to  be  the  same
    judge as referred to in paragraph 15 above), stating  that  people  who
    have attempted to obtain  a  grant  of  asylum  by  constructing  false
    stories  risk  prosecution  and  accusations  of  spreading  propaganda
    against the regime.  Amnesty International, when asked  to  comment  on
    this, said that it was something of a concern and they would  interpret
    the article as a sign of greater  willingness  by  the  authorities  to
    address or deal with such returnees though it  was  said  that  frankly
    Amnesty was not sure of their actual capacity to do so, both  in  terms
    of the security forces' ability to track such returnees and the court's
    ability to process such cases.  Although that report perhaps betrays  a
    slight ignorance of the procedures which  will  lead  to  a  degree  of
    knowledge as to the activities in the United Kingdom as we have set out
    above, it is relevant as it regards the speech by the judge as a  clear
    warning.  Thereafter the Landinfo Report considers various other pieces
    of evidence and concludes that the Iranian authorities in varying  ways
    have demonstrated an increased interest  in  political  activity  among
    those in opposition living abroad and considers that these signals  can
    be interpreted as a  statement  supporting  a  more  offensive  Iranian
    stance with regard to political opposition activity among  the  exiles,
    including the asylum seekers.

18.  That however in our view takes matters very little further forward.   A
    statement by a retired judge  in  2011  that  Iranians  seeking  asylum
    abroad on a false basis could be prosecuted under Article 500  is  some
    way away from establishing a real risk, particularly in the absence  of
    any examples of such cases in the  subsequent  period.   It  also  says
    nothing about the particular issue with which we are concerned in  this
    section of our judgment about risk during the time  of  questioning  on
    return.

19.  The Landinfo Report goes on  to  refer  to  recent  cases  of  returned
    asylum seekers who are said to have been arrested upon return to  Iran.
    The first of these is Rahim Rostami who was  returned  from  Norway  to
    Iran in February 2011 and it is said that he was ill-treated.  There is
    also the case of Danial Hadi Khanlo who was forcibly returned  to  Iran
    in 2006 and was said to have been imprisoned and  subjected  to  brutal
    abuse.  Another example concerns a man who was sent from Norway to Iran
    in 2008 with only an ID card which the Iranian authorities claimed  was
    false.  He was said to have been arrested upon arrival at  the  airport
    in Tehran and ill-treated and asked about whom he had been  in  contact
    with abroad.  He was in prison for two days and eventually returned  to
    Norway.  A further example is a woman who was deported in 2006 from the
    United Kingdom to Norway under the Dublin ?? Agreement  and  thereafter
    sent on to Iran and allegedly subjected to extreme violence during  her
    imprisonment.

20.  The difficulty with all these cases is that  it  is  entirely  unclear,
    due to the lack of detail, what the cases were  fully  concerned  with.
    The example from 2008 may be said  to  relate  back  to  what  we  said
    earlier about people returning as  a  consequence  of  having  obtained
    laissez passer documentation from the state  outside  Iran  from  which
    they were returned.  Return with an ID card only is a different  matter
    entirely from returning on a laissez passer where at least the person's
    identity and nationality  have  been  validated  by  the  consulate  or
    embassy and of course it would be likely to engender  problems  if  the
    card was believed to be false.  Very little detail is given  concerning
    the woman deported in 2006 and  likewise  in  relation  to  Mr  Khanlo.
    Rostami is a case on which we shall say  a  little  more  in  the  next
    section, but again the  difficulty  for  these  purposes  lies  in  the
    absence of evidence as to the full circumstances of his  case,  bearing
    in mind that we are concerned simply with risk on the basis of being  a
    failed asylum seeker and having exited illegally.

21.  It is relevant at this  point  also  to  refer  to  the  letter  of  25
    February 2016 from Mr Griffiths, the Assistant Director of  Immigration
    Enforcement concerning the numbers of failed asylum  seekers  who  have
    been returned to Iran.  He notes that since 2013, 267 people have  been
    returned of whom 39  were  enforced  returns  and  228  were  voluntary
    departures.  They would all have been in  possession  of  valid  travel
    documents or would have stated at the Iranian Embassy that they  wished
    to return.  It was known that other European  countries  were  carrying
    out voluntary and unescorted forced returns and the majority  of  these
    were voluntary, mainly because the Iranian authorities did not agree to
    issue travel  documents  for  enforced  returns.   Mr  Griffiths  asked
    various questions of the FCO Charg� d'Affaires in Tehran, and was told,
    following the matter having  been  raised  with  the  Director  of  the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs Social Department, that  Iranian  nationals
    entering Iran on a laissez passer usually face minimal  formalities  at
    the airport.  They were required to fill in a form  which  took  around
    ten minutes and were then free to  go.   He  said  they  would  not  be
    questioned unless they had been involved in or suspected of having been
    involved in a crime when overseas.  He did not respond specifically  to
    such questions as whether there is a special court at Tehran Airport to
    deal  with  undocumented  returnees  and  whether  there  are   lengthy
    investigations into returnees which would involve them being bailed  or
    imprisoned while investigation takes place.  It may be that the  latter
    can be seen to have been dealt with implicitly in the response.

22.  Mr Drabble argued that  this  was  an  inadequate  exchange  given  the
    failure to respond in detail to the questions and was simply  wrong  in
    what it said about the absence of questioning at the airport.   We  see
    force in what Mr Drabble says in this  regard.   The  evidence  overall
    does suggest that people are likely to be questioned rather than  there
    being an entire absence of questioning.  In  this  regard  among  other
    things  Mr  Drabble  pointed  to  the  Austrian  Red  Cross  Iran   COI
    compilation of September 2013 and in particular at pages 141 to 142  of
    the bundle  prepared  in  support  of  HR's  case  which  contains  the
    reference from the Swiss Refugee Council  to  which  we  have  referred
    above the (retired Supreme Court) judge stating that  returning  asylum
    seekers are placed in detention for several days until the  police  had
    verified they had not engaged in any political activities, after  which
    they are released.

23.  This has to be seen, as with all  these  pieces  of  evidence,  in  the
    context of the evidence overall.  In our view  the  evidence  does  not
    establish that a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally would
    be subjected on return to a period of  detention  or  questioning  such
    that there is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.  The evidence  in
    our view shows no more than that they will be questioned, and  that  if
    there  are  any  particular  concerns  arising  from   their   previous
    activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom or whichever country
    they are  returned  from,  then  there  would  be  a  risk  of  further
    questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment.  In this regard  it
    is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in  re-examination  where
    he said that the treatment they would receive  would  depend  on  their
    individual case.  If they  co-operated  and  accepted  that  they  left
    illegally and claimed asylum abroad then there would be no  reason  for
    ill-treatment, and questioning would be  for  a  fairly  brief  period.
    That seems to us to sum up the position well, and as a  consequence  we
    conclude that a person with no history  other  than  that  of  being  a
    failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who could be expected
    to tell the truth when questioned would not face a real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment during the period of questioning at the airport.   We  should
    add that we see no reason to doubt Dr Kakhki's evidence that there is a
    special court at or near the  airport  which  considers  the  cases  of
    returnees but the evidence does not show a real risk  of  ill-treatment
    in breach of Article 3 amounting to persecution  as  a  consequence  of
    attending at the court.

Prison/Fine/ill-treatment  for Illegal Exit/Asylum Claim

24.  The next issue that we have to consider is what would happen after  the
    facts had been established.  When Dr Kakhki gave the evidence to  which
    we have referred immediately above, he went on to say, consistent  with
    his evidence earlier, that  such  a  person  would  face  a  period  of
    imprisonment for having committed propaganda against the  state.   This
    is the Article 500 offence.  Therefore on his evidence, even if such  a
    person was not at real risk of facing ill-treatment during the time  of
    questioning, as a consequence of the sentence they  would  receive  for
    being guilty of propaganda against the state, they would face a serious
    risk of ill-treatment when in prison.

25.  We should say at this point that we  have  no  hesitation  in  agreeing
    with the submissions of Mr Mills that the evidence shows a real risk of
    persecution/ill-treatment in breach of Article 3 for a  person  who  is
    imprisoned in  Iran.   This  appears  to  be  common  ground.   In  his
    skeleton, Mr Mills quotes from paragraph 3.17.13  of  the  respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note: "As  conditions  in  prisons  and  detention
    facilities are harsh and potentially life-threatening in Iran, they are
    likely to reach the Article 3 threshold".

26.  We need to consider the various examples given by Dr  Kakhki  which  he
    says point to a real risk on account of being a  failed  asylum  seeker
    who exited Iran  illegally.   Dr  Kakhki  accepted  that  there  was  a
    difference between people who were activists or protestors on  the  one
    hand and people on the other hand such  as  these  appellants  with  no
    history.  He considered that nevertheless the  examples  he  had  given
    were helpful because they showed that there was separate punishment for
    illegal exit.  He placed some weight on the example of  Mr  Rostami  to
    which we have referred above.  He made the point that Mr Rostami  would
    only have been 16 when he went to Norway and therefore it was  unlikely
    that he would have been an activist whether student or otherwise  while
    in Iran.

27.  Ms Busch QC suggested that the evidence showed that Mr Rostami  was  an
    activist of some sort and referred to an item posted by an organisation
    called ULIMUC on 27 January 2013, quoting the Iran human rights website
    posting on 23 March 2011 which among other things referred to the  fact
    that according to a Norwegian NGO People Peace, Mr Rostami appeared  in
    a documentary on Norwegian television.  She suggested that  this  might
    have been an aggravating factor.   That  detail  does  not  appear  for
    example in the report from Amnesty International which is quoted in the
    Austrian Red Cross COI  compilation  of  September  2013,  nor  in  the
    Landinfo document.  There is little information in any of these reports
    about Mr Rostami and in our view it remains unclear  whether  his  case
    can be regarded as one of a person who was no more than a failed asylum
    seeker who exited illegally or whether there  were  any  other  factors
    which might have caused the authorities to react more adversely than if
    he had been a person exhibiting only those two characteristics.

28.  At page 6 of his report in SH's case, Dr Kakhki stated his belief  that
    there is a  correlation  between  leaving  the  country  illegally  and
    seeking asylum abroad, in that being accused of both  would  exacerbate
    the severity of the punishment an individual might face  on  return  to
    Iran.  The former would involve  a  violation  of  the  country's  exit
    regulations, the latter would  risk  a  charge  under  Article  500  of
    spreading propaganda against the state.  To  support  his  argument  Dr
    Kakhki referred  at  page  7  of  the  report  to  remarks  by  Amnesty
    International about provisions such as Article 500 and their  vagueness
    and expressed his view that given that the key  terms  of  "propaganda"
    and "security" remain undefined, they are capable of being attached  to
    a vast range of conduct.  He considered that the mere  allegation  that
    the appellant had been prosecuted and at risk  of  persecution  at  the
    hands of the Iranian authorities would amount to propaganda against the
    state and expose him to punishment as mentioned by the  former  Supreme
    Court Judge.

29.  The problem with this argument, and it is equally the case too  in  the
    context of the four cases to which we have referred above of people who
    are said to have been detained and ill-treated on return to Iran,  that
    there is on the one hand an absence of sufficient information about the
    individual case and on the other hand a significant  lack  of  examples
    subsequent to that.  One might expect that if the retired Supreme Court
    Judge was making an expression of something akin to policy  that  would
    be applied in future to people who had been deemed to have insulted the
    state by claiming to have been ill-treated when they had not been, then
    there would have been express examples of this as a way of showing that
    the authorities meant what they said.  We  note  what  Dr  Kakhki  said
    about the ways in which he obtains information about the  situation  in
    Iran, which include him being in regular contact with Iranian  lawyers,
    and it seems to us highly unlikely that if  there  had  been  cases  of
    people being prosecuted under Article 500 on the basis  that  they  had
    made false asylum claims abroad that there would not have been  mention
    of such cases in the media and/or within the legal  profession.   Again
    in this regard we note what is quoted at page 9 of  the  report,  being
    remarks made by Iran's Prosecutor General in  2011  that  Iranians  who
    have committed a crime outside the country while abroad and take action
    against their national security could be prosecuted.   We  accept  that
    there is little  tolerance  of  persons  perceived  as  acting  against
    national security,  and  that  national  security  is  broadly  defined
    (Operational Guidance Note para 3.12.7).  But if it were the case  that
    the notion of a person acting against national security included people
    who had made false asylum claims abroad,  it  could  be  expected  that
    details of such prosecutions would have emerged, bearing  in  mind  the
    numbers of people returned from the  United  Kingdom  alone  in  recent
    years and the lack of any evidence to show that there is such a  degree
    of state control over the Iranian media and/or legal profession  as  to
    prevent such information emerging.  Indeed, one might expect  that  the
    Iranian authorities would wish there to be publicity about  such  cases
    in order to deter others from acting in this way.

30.  The context for the Prosecutor General's remarks would seem  rather  to
    be as he says people who are  now  working  with  America  and  Britain
    against their own people rather than  a  person  who  has  invented  an
    asylum claim in order to obtain leave to remain in another country.  We
    can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian  authorities  may  have
    towards perceived slights against  their  own  state  in  the  form  of
    untruthful allegations about the conduct of the state, but equally  one
    can expect a degree of reality on their part in relation to people  who
    in the interests of advancing their economic circumstances  would  make
    up a story in order  to  secure  economic  betterment  in  a  wealthier
    country.  We consider that the suggestion by Dr Kakhki that the use  of
    the term "national security" extends as broadly as to encompass  people
    who have made failed asylum claims abroad  is  excessively  speculative
    and has no evidential foundation to it.

31.  Elsewhere in Dr Kakhki's report there are a number  of  examples  given
    of people who were prosecuted for other offences and also  for  illegal
    departure.  It seems to us that these cases establish no more than that
    people may be prosecuted and indeed imprisoned, as some of these  cases
    show, for the separate offence of illegal exit, but they are clearly to
    be distinguished from cases where there is no  history  and  where  the
    person is  no  more  than  a  failed  asylum  seeker  who  exited  Iran
    illegally.  Cases such as Mr Jazari who was a corrupt  businessman,  Ms
    Bayazidi who was convicted of an offence of  disinformation  and  other
    examples of people who were clearly political dissidents  or  at  least
    perceived as being political dissidents, are different  again.   We  do
    not consider it to have been shown that somebody who has made a  failed
    asylum claim would simply as a consequence of that  be  regarded  as  a
    political dissident.  These cases where  people  were  imprisoned  show
    much more by way of specific activity than a  simple  imputation.   The
    description of the case of Mr Hadi Keikhosravi, referred to at page  13
    of the report, which refers to a conviction of six months' imprisonment
    for illegal departure, says nothing about the surrounding circumstances
    and as such cannot be an example  of  any  materiality.   The  examples
    given show that people found guilty of another offence may in  addition
    receive a prison sentence for illegal exit, but they do not  show  that
    people are sentenced to imprisonment for illegal exit per se.   Indeed,
    the evidence suggests that  there  is  no  appetite  to  prosecute  for
    illegal exit alone, but if there is another offence, illegal exit  will
    be added on.

32.  Dr Kakhki placed some weight on what he said were material  differences
    since SB, being in particular the statement of the Supreme Court  Judge
    and the example of Mr Rostami.  These seem to us however to  fall  well
    short of showing a change of any significance since the  evidence  that
    was assessed in SB.  If the logic behind  the  cases  set  out  in  the
    Landinfo Report is as is argued, the heart of the argument, we consider
    that it falls significantly short  of  showing  a  real  risk  for  the
    reasons given.  In sum, we conclude that it has  not  been  shown  that
    there is a real risk that a person who has no history other than  being
    a failed asylum seeker who exited Iran illegally would face a real risk
    of persecution.  There are minimal examples of cases  which  even  were
    they to be taken at their highest could be said to  be  cases  of  ill-
    treatment on that basis and cannot be said, given the numbers returned,
    to give rise to a real risk.  In any event as we have stated above,  so
    little information is given that it is impossible to conclude  that  it
    was the fact of illegal exit or having  made  a  failed  asylum  claim,
    taken either alone or together,  that  triggered  adverse  interest  on
    return to say with any confidence what the full circumstances in any of
    those cases were.

33.  We summarise our conclusions on the country guidance  issues  in  these
    appeals as follows:

    (a)  An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who does  not
         possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez  passer,  which
         he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof  of  identity  and
         nationality.

    (b)  An Iranian male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of  persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.   No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time  of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been  established.   In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.

34.  It was not suggested to us that an individual faces risk on  return  on
    the sole basis of being Kurdish.  It  was  however  agreed  that  being
    Kurdish was relevant  to  how  a  returnee  would  be  treated  by  the
    authorities.  For example, the  Operational  Guidance  Note  refers  at
    3.12.14 to the government disproportionally targeting minority  groups,
    including Kurds, for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention and physical
    abuse.  No examples however have  been  provided  of  ill-treatment  of
    returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors  other  than  their
    Kurdish ethnicity, and we conclude that the evidence does not show risk
    of ill-treatment to such returnees, though we accept that it  might  be
    an  exacerbating  factor  for  a  returnee   otherwise   of   interest.
    Accordingly we conclude that it has not been shown that a person in the
    position of these appellants faces a real risk on return to Iran either
    on the basis of what would  happen  to  them  when  questioned  at  the
    airport or subsequently if they were convicted of an offence of illegal
    exit.  With regard to  HR  specifically,  it  does  not  appear  to  be
    disputed that he is Kurdish and that he is undocumented: hence  we  see
    no reason for remittal.  Prosecution for illegal exit is an outcome not
    generally experienced by such returnees, and where it does  occur,  the
    most likely sentence in relation to the illegal exit charge would be  a
    fine. It has not been  shown  that  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
    prosecution under Article 500 for propaganda against the state  on  the
    basis of having made an asylum claim  which  was  found  to  be  false.
    Accordingly these appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

34.  The appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



                                 APPENDIX 1


HR AND SSH v SSHD

Expert Evidence

Expert's experience and expertise

 1. Written and oral expert  evidence  was  given  in  these  cases  by  Dr
    Mohammad Kakhki.  Dr Kakhki  also  gave  written  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in SB (risk on return - illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00053 ("SB").  His relevant experience and expertise are dealt with  at
    [11] of the decision in that case.

 2. Dr Kakhki practised as an Attorney-at-law in Iran from 1997 until  2002
    when he came to the UK.  Since 2003, he has worked closely  on  Iranian
    issues, particularly those relating to the legal system as part of  the
    Research Centre for Iranian Studies at Durham University where he  also
    serves as a Committee Member.  He carries out research on this topic on
    a daily basis. His research is not confined to  immigration  cases  but
    covers other legal and social issues.  He is also the co-founder of the
    Islam, Law and Modernity research centre in Birmingham which focuses on
    Islamic countries including Iran and looks at mainly legal and judicial
    issues.  He is the Associate Director of that  centre  and  is  also  a
    special adviser involved in Iranian affairs. He has  not  visited  Iran
    since 2011 but as a result of his research, he keeps up  to  date  with
    Iranian judicial  affairs.   He  also  maintains  contact  with  fellow
    lawyers in Iran with whom he qualified.

 3. In 2008, Dr Kakhki was appointed as a member of the Centre for  Iranian
    Studies to produce a commentary on the Iranian Country  of  Information
    Report ("COIR").  He was again approached by the advisory panel  on  an
    individual basis in 2011 and 2013 to provide evidence to the panel.  He
    was selected from among other experts in this field.

 4. Dr Kakhki produced a report in relation  to  both  of  the  Appellants.
    Both are in broadly similar form, certainly in relation to the  general
    issues on which country guidance is to be given.  The  Respondent  also
    put a number of questions to Dr Kakhki in  written  form  to  which  Dr
    Kakhki provided written answers.  Again, those are in substantially the
    same form in both cases.  Dr Kakhki  gave  his  oral  evidence  on  the
    general issues as they relate to both cases.

Returning to Iran following illegal exit

 5. As Dr Kakhki identifies in his report, the issue of illegal  exit  from
    Iran as a relevant risk factor was dealt with as one  of  a  number  of
    factors in SB.  Dr Kakhki identifies the decision in  SB  as  a  useful
    starting point.  As is set out at [21] of that decision,  leaving  Iran
    without a valid passport or similar  travel  documents  is  illegal  by
    virtue of Article 34 of the Iranian Passport  Law.   His  evidence  was
    that that offence attracts a "Taaziri" punishment of  between  one  and
    three years' imprisonment or a fine of between 500,000  and  3  million
    Tomans.

 6. Although Dr Kakhki accepted that SB remains  a  useful  foundation,  he
    says that the decision in that case must be read against the background
    of Iran's changing political environment and the risk which he says  is
    faced by asylum seekers returned to Iran.  In  oral  evidence  he  said
    that although the election of  President  Rouhani  and  restoration  of
    diplomatic links between the UK and Iran  might  suggest  an  improving
    position, there remains  a  conflict  between  the  hardliners  of  the
    judiciary and Supreme Leaders on the one hand and the executive on  the
    other.

 7. Dr Kakhki refers to there being a special court at the airport  (branch
    number 1610) and it is his evidence that anyone  who  arrives  in  Iran
    without documentation which would demonstrate unlawful exit  from  Iran
    would be arrested and  taken  before  this  court.   Depending  on  the
    outcome of the court's investigation  and  in  the  discretion  of  the
    Judge, the individual would be punished within the parameters above.

 8. If an individual does not have a valid passport or travel document,  he
    is required to obtain  a  "Barge  Obour"  (also  known  as  a  "laissez
    passer") which is a temporary travel document  issued  by  the  Iranian
    Embassy in the country of departure and valid only for twenty days  and
    for a single entry.  Dr Kakhki produced a template of  the  application
    form for a Barge Obour but admitted in oral evidence that  he  had  not
    seen a copy of the Barge Obour  which  results.   It  was  however  his
    evidence that, either as a result of a note on the Barge  Obour  itself
    or by virtue of an internal communication between  the  Embassy  abroad
    and the Iranian authorities at the airport,  those  latter  authorities
    would be alerted to the fact that the person travelling on  that  Barge
    Obour has exited illegally.   This  is  because  the  form  contains  a
    section requiring completion and giving  details  of  the  passport  on
    which the person left Iran.

 9. A Barge Obour is issued also to a person who has lost his  passport  or
    had it stolen.  However, a person who has left Iran illegally would  be
    unable to provide details of the passport on which he  left  and  would
    not be able to state truthfully that he had  lost  his  passport.  This
    would lead to the inevitable conclusion by the Embassy that the  person
    left Iran illegally.  It is Dr Kakhki's evidence that this  would  then
    be communicated to the authorities at the airport.  HR  and  SSH  would
    therefore come to the attention of the authorities at  the  airport  on
    their return.  They would be questioned about their illegal  departure.



10. Dr Kakhki confirmed that a security check would be carried out  by  the
    Embassy when an application is made for a Barge Obour.   There  may  be
    some investigation of the activities of  the  individual  outside  Iran
    particularly those of  interest  to  officials.   Dr  Kakhki  gave  the
    example of a person accepting bribes which would be of  interest  since
    Iranian officials are sensitive about economic matters.

11. In relation to  HR  and  SSH,  Dr  Kakhki  said  that  their  political
    activities were likely to be of interest -  whether  they  supported  a
    political  party,  their  family  associations,  their  opinions  about
    Kurdish  organisations.   Embassy  officials  may  also  have  obtained
    information from informants or other intelligence.  He gave the example
    of a person arrested by the UK authorities and the  fact  that  Iranian
    Embassy officials would be told  about  this.   Those  officials  would
    visit the individual to obtain information about the crime  and  decide
    whether the police in Iran should be informed.  Dr Kakhki's information
    in this regard is based on research.  He was aware for example  of  the
    cultural section of the Iranian Embassy having links with the  security
    service in Iran and of Iranians being invited to  conferences  arranged
    by that section to  find  out  how  individuals  intended  to  vote  at
    elections.

12. Dr Kakhki confirmed though that the Embassy would not  refuse  a  Barge
    Obour if  there  were  security  concerns  about  an  individual.   The
    obligation on the  Embassy  is  to  issue  a  travel  document  if  the
    individual can establish  Iranian  nationality.   In  relation  to  the
    investigation of security concerns, the Embassy acts as an arm  of  the
    Iranian authorities to gather basic information which would  be  passed
    on for further investigation in Iran.

13. Dr Kakhki also gave  evidence  that  the  Iranian  authorities  at  the
    airport hold a "wanted list" which is checked on arrival.  His evidence
    is that the names of those who are required to  obtain  a  Barge  Obour
    would appear on that list.  Dr Kakhki  accepted  however  under  cross-
    examination that he could not point to evidence of this.  The list is a
    confidential document belonging to the Iranian authorities.  He pointed
    however to the evidence on which he relies of those detained on return.
     He also accepted however that, since he has no access to the list,  he
    could not say with any certainty that names of  failed  asylum  seekers
    would appear on this list.  He could not say either that they did not.

14. Dr Kakhki gave several examples of individuals who had been detained at
    the airport on arrival.  He accepted under cross-examination  that  the
    circumstances of individuals on whose cases he relies are different  to
    those of the Appellants; nonetheless he relies on those as showing  the
    high level of scrutiny of arrivals by the authorities at the airport.

15. Dr Kakhki also pointed to evidence that  the  Iranian  authorities  are
    able to impose travel bans on individuals by virtue of  article  19  of
    the Iranian  penal  code.   He  accepted  that  the  extract  from  the
    International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran report of January  2014
    cited in his report does not refer to a  travel  ban  for  offences  of
    illegal exit but he relied on this as evidence that the authorities can
    impose a travel ban on those who are of security concern.  He says that
    the case of an asylum seeker falls within the category of  those  whose
    "travel abroad has been classed as  against  the  Islamic  Republic  of
    Iran's best interest by the judiciary".  This was therefore relevant to
    whether an individual would be at risk by reason of his  failed  asylum
    claim.

Treatment of returned failed asylum seekers in Iran

16. Dr Kakhki's evidence in this regard  relates  to  Article  500  of  the
    Islamic Penal Code. Article 500 states that "Anyone who undertakes  any
    form of propaganda against the state ...will be  sentenced  to  between
    three months and one year in prison".  His evidence is that  the  terms
    "propaganda" and "security" are undefined and are capable of  including
    the situation where a person has claimed a risk of persecution  by  the
    Iranian regime, whether or not that has been found  to  be  genuine  or
    false.  The mere allegation would  amount  to  propaganda  against  the
    state and expose him to punishment.

17. Dr Kakhki relies in this regard firstly  on  background  evidence.   He
    points to the views expressed by Amnesty International relating to  the
    vague wording of various provisions including Article 500  and  concern
    that in practice this and other articles of the  penal  code  are  used
    against journalists, intellectuals and other  social  commentators  for
    expressing their views in writing or public statements.

18. Dr Kakhki also relies on  extracts  from  the  COI  compilation  report
    prepared by the Austrian  Centre  for  Country  of  Origin  and  Asylum
    Research and Documentation which  contains  the  following  potentially
    relevant material:-


           . An article by the International Campaign for Human  Rights  in
             Iran dated April 2010 quoting the  Iranian  Justice  Minister,
             Morteza Bakhtiari  as  saying  that  the  authorities'  policy
             towards those who had  no  political  cases  within  Iran  and
             "merely  introduced  themselves  as  political  activists   to
             foreign countries in order  to  receive  residency"  would  be
             reviewed.  Bakhtiari indicated that the basis  of  the  policy
             was to provide  a  basis  for  return  of  Iranians  to  Iran.
             However, the COI report points out that the purpose of this is
             not stated nor is it said how their cases would be reviewed or
             what guarantees would be provided for their security;
           . A quotation from a report by  the  Norway-based  human  rights
             organisation Iran Human Rights of 23 March 2011 to the  effect
             that Iranian authorities have signalled that Iranians who have
             applied for asylum abroad should be charged for  dissemination
             of false propaganda;
           .  A  report  of  February  2011  by  the   state   broadcasting
             corporation Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting  citing  the
             Iran prosecutor general  as  saying  that  Iranians  who  have
             committed crimes outside  Iran  or  who  take  action  against
             Iranian national security could  be  prosecuted.   This  would
             include those working with America  and  Britain  against  the
             Iranian people.



19. In addition, Dr Kakhki relies also on a report of Amnesty International
    dated May 2011 which refers to an article written by a  former  Supreme
    Court judge in a daily newspaper published by the  Iranian  government.
    In that article, the judge is said to have commented that failed asylum
    seekers  could  be  prosecuted  for  making  up  accounts  of   alleged
    persecution. It is  reported  that  this  view  was  expressed  in  the
    context of comment on the  laws  allowing  Iran's  judiciary  to  bring
    charges for violations of Iranian law committed by  individuals  whilst
    they are outside Iran. Dr Kakhki confirms in his written answers to the
    Respondent's questions that he is not aware  of  the  identity  of  the
    judge and was unable to locate the article  in  question.  However  the
    article is referred to by a number of sources so that its  veracity  is
    not in doubt.

20. Dr Kakhki also refers to a number of  examples  of  those  whose  cases
    show, he says, that the Iranian authorities will investigate those  who
    return having exited illegally and will prosecute  for  other  offences
    including illegal exit.

21. Dr Kakhki accepted under cross-examination that, in the cases to  which
    he refers, there were factors  in  addition  to  the  illegal  exit  or
    previous asylum claim which might explain the interest by  the  Iranian
    authorities in those persons on return.  For example, in  the  case  of
    Arash Fakhravan who was reported to have been arrested in May  2011  on
    return from France where he had claimed asylum, he faced arrest for his
    participation in the December 2009 protests.

22. Although Dr Kakhki did not accept that his examples are of no relevance
    to the Appellants' cases, he accepted that they  are  of  more  limited
    assistance.  His evidence was however that the profile of an individual
    who is prosecuted may be relevant to the punishment meted  out  by  the
    Judge when sentencing. Absence of such a profile does not mean  that  a
    person would not be punished at all. He also did not  accept  that  the
    examples are of no relevance as he  said  that  he  did  not  know  the
    precise nature of the other factors asserted and  why  the  individuals
    were convicted as he has no access to the court records.  His  evidence
    is, however, that illegal exit is a  basis  for  prosecution.   Whether
    there would be  a  prosecution  for  such  offences  would  be  in  the
    discretion of the Judge.

23. In support of his evidence that Article 500 (or other articles  of  the
    penal code relating to  national  security)  is  used  by  the  Iranian
    authorities to prosecute failed asylum seekers  on  return,  Dr  Kakhki
    relied on the following examples.

24. The first example is that of Rahim Rostami, who was  returned  to  Iran
    from Norway.  He arrived in Norway  as  an  unaccompanied  minor,  aged
    about fifteen or sixteen years.  As Dr Kakhki pointed out under  cross-
    examination, therefore, he could  not  have  been  a  student  activist
    before he left Iran as he would have been too young.

25. Dr Kakhki was asked about the report of Mr Rostami  being  "extradited"
    to Iran and reference to him being  accompanied  by  two  policemen  on
    return.  He was asked whether  this  might  indicate  that  there  were
    additional factors  in  Mr  Rostami's  case  which  would  explain  the
    interest of the authorities.  Dr Kakhki did not accept this.  The  word
    "extradited" has specific connotations denoting a removal in accordance
    with international treaties or a request from Interpol.  He  considered
    that the word used in this context was meant to refer to "deportation".
     He accepted however that  the  report  dated  27  January  2013  which
    reported on the treatment of Arash Fakhravan and Mr Rostami showed that
    Mr Rostami had appeared in a documentary on  Norwegian  television.  He
    pointed out however that the nature of the television appearance is not
    clear from the report. However, he also accepted that he does not  have
    details of Mr Rostami's conviction.

26. In addition to the case of Mr Rahim  Rostami,  Dr  Kakhki  referred  to
    three other cases in  the  course  of  his  evidence  as  showing  that
    individuals face possible detention and  interrogation  on  account  of
    their asylum claim.  Those are contained in a section of the  Norwegian
    LandInfo report dated 19 April 2011 under  a  heading  "The  Return  of
    Asylum Seekers from Norway to Iran".  That report  records  the  return
    from Norway of an asylum seeker, Danial Hadi Khanlo  who  was  forcibly
    returned in 2006 and who was said to have been imprisoned and subjected
    to brutal abuse.  The second example is of a man sent back in 2008 with
    an ID card which the Iranians claimed was false.   He  is  reported  to
    have been mistreated by the authorities at the airport before being put
    on an Austrian flight out of Iran from where  he  returned  to  Norway.
    The final example is of a woman returned in 2006  who  was  alleged  to
    have been imprisoned and subjected to extreme violence.

27. Dr Kakhki accepted under cross-examination that he had  no  details  of
    those three cases and could not provide  further  detail.   He  assumed
    that all were failed asylum seekers.  Two cases are also cited  in  his
    report in the extract from the Austrian COI report  of  September  2013
    although it is not clear if those are the same as those referred to  in
    the LandInfo report.

28. Dr Kakhki accepted that media attention is likely to  be  drawn  to  an
    individual by their profile.  A "simple failed asylum seeker" would  be
    unlikely to be the subject of media reporting.  He also  accepted  that
    the authorities would be less concerned about a person who has not been
    the subject  of  media  attention  but  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    authorities would have no concern in such individuals.

29. Dr Kakhki reiterated in his oral evidence the point  that  "propaganda"
    and "national security" are vague  and  general  terms.   A  claim  for
    asylum is propaganda against  the  state  and  therefore  a  matter  of
    national security and a crime.  Such a claim amounts to a  condemnation
    of Iran's human rights record and an assertion that the Iranian  regime
    persecutes its people.  That may lead to a resolution against Iran  by,
    for example, the UN Special Rapporteur.  In Dr Kakhki's opinion, it  is
    not possible to differentiate between those who form groups  in  London
    opposed  to  the  regime  and  other  crimes  which  could  amount   to
    propaganda.


Prosecution for illegal exit/failed asylum claim

30. Dr Kakhki's evidence does not go so  far  as  to  indicate  that  every
    failed asylum seeker who exited Iran illegally would be prosecuted  and
    detained for an offence of illegal exit and under Article 500.

31. Dr Kakhki pointed out that an offence of illegal exit could be punished
    by a term of imprisonment rather than a fine  and  that  the  level  of
    punishment lies in the discretion of the judge.   He  accepted  that  a
    number of the examples on which he relied included other  offences  for
    which a further sentence was passed. He also accepted that the  offence
    of illegal exit itself may be different in nature.  For example, in one
    of the examples, the individual  left  Iran  illegally  having  escaped
    detention for another offence.  Dr Kakhki's evidence  though  was  that
    the  different  nature  of  the  offence  would  be  reflected  in  the
    punishment rather than whether a prosecution would follow. He relies on
    the examples which he gives to show that the offence  of  illegal  exit
    may act as a trigger  for  prosecutions  for  other  offences  and  may
    aggravate the other  offence  and  therefore  lead  to  a  more  severe
    sentence.

32. Dr Kakhki pointed to  the  example  of  Mr  Hadi  Keikhosravi  who  was
    convicted to six months'  imprisonment  for  illegal  departure,  which
    conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court on appeal.  There is nothing
    in the report of Mr Keikhosravi's case which suggests that there was  a
    conviction for any other offence.  There was  some  elaboration  of  Dr
    Kakhki's evidence in relation to this example in re-examination  by  Mr
    Mills.  This was based on the source document on which Dr Kakhki relies
    for information about this case.  It was suggested that Mr  Keikhosravi
    may be the same person as is referred to, earlier  in  the  report,  as
    having been convicted of working with a Kurd party.  However, Dr Kakhki
    clarified that these were two different individuals and that the  first
    names were in fact different in the Farsi version (although  apparently
    inaccurately translated).

33. In any event, Dr Kakhki's evidence was that the failed claim for asylum
    would aggravate the offence of illegal exit (or vice versa) so that  it
    is more likely that  the  resulting  punishment  would  be  a  term  of
    imprisonment and not simply a fine.  Dr Kakhki accepted that because he
    did not have access to court records in relation to the convictions  on
    which he relied he is unable to show that having made a  failed  asylum
    claim  would  aggravate  the  punishment.   He  said  that  it   should
    nonetheless be considered as a factor by the Tribunal.  As  an  expert,
    he sees his role as providing information; it is for  the  Tribunal  to
    decide whether this amounts to a risk factor.


Detention pending investigation

34. Dr Kakhki also pointed out in  his  evidence  that  the  risk  of  ill-
    treatment  to  those  who  have  left  Iran  illegally  and   made   an
    unsuccessful claim for asylum arises not only from detention  following
    conviction but also detention during the investigation stage.  He  also
    points to the possibility of imprisonment if an individual is unable to
    pay a fine imposed for illegal exit.

35. Dr Kakhki's evidence is that the Appellants would face questioning  not
    simply about the manner of their illegal exit from Iran but also  about
    their failed asylum claim.  Indeed, his evidence  is  also  that,  even
    without illegal exit, a person who has made a failed asylum claim would
    face questioning if they are returned on a Barge Obour.

36. Dr Kakhki asserts  that  in  the  context  of  that  investigation,  an
    individual would either be released on bail or remanded in custody at a
    detention centre.  He asserts that in circumstances where an individual
    has illegally left the country, it is more likely, applying Article 132
    of the Iranian Penal Procedure  Code,  that  the  individual  would  be
    detained in custody whilst the investigation continues.

37. Ms Busch QC pointed Dr Kakhki to the  report  of  the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board Canada dated 10 March 2015.  That  in  turn  reports  the
    International Organization for Migration  as  stating  that  those  who
    returned on a laissez-passer (Barge Obour) would only be questioned and
    that no-one had been arrested when returned  in  that  manner.   As  Dr
    Kakhki pointed out, though, that related to  those  who  had  left  the
    country on  their  passports  and  were  returned  on  a  Barge  Obour.
    Although a Barge Obour was issued in the case of those who did not have
    a passport as well as those who left Iran  illegally,  Dr  Kakhki  said
    that the two cases would be treated differently.  It would only be  the
    latter who would be investigated.

38. In relation to the treatment of an  individual  detained  in  Iran,  Dr
    Kakhki  deals  in  his  report  with   the   techniques   used   during
    investigations, some of which amount  to  torture,  and  to  the  harsh
    prison conditions.  That part of his report was not explored in  cross-
    examination as it is the Respondent's case that  the  Appellants  would
    not face imprisonment.

39. Dr Kakhki did deal briefly with this aspect of his evidence however  in
    oral examination by Mr Drabble QC on the basis of Dr  Kakhki's  opinion
    that  the  Appellants  would  be  detained  in  the   course   of   the
    investigation.

40. The extent to which the Appellants may face mistreatment depended in Dr
    Kakhki's view on the individual  and  the  level  of  cooperation.   An
    investigation would usually begin  with  a  "soft  interview".   If  an
    individual responded to questions honestly  and  was  perceived  to  be
    cooperating, the file would be completed and passed to the  court.   He
    pointed out that the police must carry out their initial  investigation
    within 24 hours following arrest and send the file to the judiciary for
    authorisation to continue with the investigation.

41. If an  individual  does  not  cooperate  or  is  perceived  not  to  be
    cooperating, in Dr Kakhki's opinion, the individual would then  face  a
    harsher form  of  interrogation.   Techniques  would  then  range  from
    beating to worse torture and might include  psychological  torture  and
    threats to the individual's family.  The courts and  judiciary  turn  a
    blind eye to such mistreatment.  He indicated however that  it  is  not
    the case that every person facing  a  criminal  accusation  would  face
    torture in the initial stages.

42. Dr Kakhki also pointed out  that  it  is  the  court  which  leads  the
    investigation and  not  the  police.   The  question  of  how  long  an
    investigation might take would vary according to the case.  He appeared
    to accept that if an  individual  admitted  that  they  had  left  Iran
    illegally and that they  had  made  a  claim  for  asylum  and  if  the
    authorities  believed  that  the  individual   was   cooperating,   the
    investigation may come to an end quite  quickly  (although  it  is  his
    evidence that this would then result in a sentence of a  few  years  in
    prison).

43. Dr Kakhki said that  an  individual's  age,  circumstances  and  family
    background would be considered.  The police would  also  check  whether
    there was any previous conviction.  Depending  on  the  nature  of  the
    case, the investigation might be taken away from the police and  passed
    to the security forces which are part of the Ministry of Information.

44. Dr Kakhki also pointed out that an investigation would be required even
    if the only offence was one of illegal exit.  The issue of  bail  would
    not arise until the middle of the investigation and for the reasons  he
    gives in his report, it is his view that the Appellants  would  not  be
    bailed because of their illegal exit.


Treatment of Kurds

45. Section three of Dr Kakhki's report deals with the general human rights
    of Kurds within Iran.  This was not the subject of  any  oral  evidence
    before the Tribunal and the position of the Appellants as ethnic  Kurds
    is not the central focus of the Appellants' case.  They rely on  it  as
    an additional risk factor.

46. In summary of Dr Kakhki's evidence on this aspect,  he  points  to  the
    societal  disadvantage  of  the  Kurdish  community  in  Iran  and  the
    discriminatory treatment of them  by  the  authorities.   That  is  not
    challenged by the Respondent whose position is however that  this  does
    not amount to persecution.

47.  The  examples  contained  in  Dr  Kakhki's  report  in   relation   to
    imprisonment, torture and  execution  relate  to  individuals  who  are
    reported to be political or civil activists or who have been  convicted
    of other offences including national security offences.  The  inference
    which Dr Kakhki seeks to draw from those is that being a Kurd does  not
    in itself result in prosecution but when combined with  other  criminal
    suspicions, persecution "is likely to surface".


                                 APPENDIX 2

                       SUMMARY OF CLOSING SUBMISSIONS

LISA BUSCH QC

 1. It is the Respondent's case that the position has not  moved  on  since
    SB.  The main document on which the Appellants  rely  which  post-dates
    that case  is  the  Norwegian  LandInfo  report  dated  19  April  2011
    [HR/EEB/13].  That refers to the comments of former Supreme Court Judge
    Mallahzadeh.  It is a single  document  which  does  not  give  notable
    examples of persons who have fallen victim to increased interest of the
    authorities on account of their claims for asylum.

 2. Dr Kakhki  accepted  in  evidence  that  he  relies  on  four  specific
    examples.  In the case of Rahim Rostami, Dr Kakhki accepted that he was
    not aware of the details of that case.  The report of Mr Rostami's case
    refers to  him  appearing  on  Norwegian  television.   The  Respondent
    invites what she says is the reasonable inference from the report  that
    Mr Rostami falls into the same category  as  Arash  Fakhravan.   It  is
    evident from the report that Mr Rostami attracted attention and that is
    highly pertinent to risk.  Dr Kakhki accepted that those who  have  not
    attracted media attention would be of less interest.

 3. The second example is that of Danial Khanlo who was  forcibly  returned
    to Iran in 2006. The Respondent points to the lack of detail about  his
    case.  It is  not  possible  to  draw  any  inference  from  the  scant
    information in the report.  The case also pre-dates SB.

 4. There is minimal information about the individual who was  returned  to
    Iran from Norway in 2008.  The Respondent points out  that  the  report
    does not even show whether he had claimed asylum.  It is possible  that
    he did.  There is no information about his political activities and  it
    is clear from the report that he lacked the necessary documentation  to
    gain entry to Iran.

 5. The same is true of the female who was returned from  Norway  in  2006.
    There is minimal information about her case.

 6. The Respondent says therefore that there is  insufficient  evidence  to
    show a general risk.  There is an absence of evidence as to the general
    experience of failed asylum seekers.  The Appellants rely on four cases
    of which, in at least one there is reason to infer that the  individual
    was politically active.

 7. The evidence on which the Appellants rely is otherwise speculation.  In
    relation to the examples given by Dr  Kakhki,  the  Respondent  submits
    that the Tribunal cannot  draw  any  conclusions  from  those  who  are
    politically  active  and/or  who  have  attracted  media  attention  to
    themselves.  These Appellants do not fall into those categories.  These
    Appellants have no profile and the risk  to  them  is  said  to  be  on
    account of their illegal exit and their asylum claim which they  assert
    would be seen as propaganda.  The only basis for that assertion is  the
    comment of the Supreme Court Judge writing  in  a  newspaper  and  that
    article is not in evidence.

 8. The Respondent's case is therefore that there is  no  support  for  the
    proposition that failed asylum seekers as a category are at  risk.   In
    relation to the procedures which would be followed at  the  airport  on
    return, the evidence is that there would be an initial enquiry  by  the
    police and a referral to the Court (although presumably only  if  there
    was a need for further investigation).  It is not Dr Kakhki's  evidence
    that the individual would  only  be  detained  and  mistreated  if  the
    individual did not cooperate.  However, the  Respondent's  position  is
    that the individual would not be at risk provided he  was  candid.   At
    best, Dr Kakhki's evidence is that the risk should be  addressed  on  a
    case by case basis.

 9. On the assumption that the Tribunal accepts as the starting  point  the
    case of SB, Ms Busch addressed her  submissions  to  what  has  changed
    since that case by reference to the headnote.  SB was heard against the
    backdrop of the period after the  2009  elections  and  the  Government
    crackdown on those opposed to the regime.  Things have  moved  on.   Dr
    Kakhki's evidence  refers  to  increased  tension  leading  up  to  the
    February 2016 elections but even  that  would  by  now  have  diffused.
    There is no upcoming event such as  elections  in  play.   The  general
    political situation has improved as demonstrated by the  resumption  of
    diplomatic relations between the UK and Iran.  At the time of  SB,  the
    UK was perceived as a threat by Iran and so it  was  unsurprising  that
    association with the protests against the  election  results  would  at
    that time have created a risk.

10. The lack of general risk to those facing enforced  return  remains  the
    same.  Dr Kakhki agreed that an offence of illegal  exit  when  coupled
    with an evasion of arrest at the time of exit  or  another  substantive
    crime is different from an offence of illegal exit alone.  The examples
    show that illegal exit is treated  seriously  where  an  individual  is
    evading the law but it cannot be inferred from those examples that mere
    illegal exit leads to a risk.


11. The court at the airport existed at the time of SB and  the  Tribunal's
    observations at [48-49] of that decision holds good.   There  is  scant
    information about any risk arising from that.  If asylum  seekers  were
    at risk or had been ill treated at the airport that would have come  to
    the attention of the fact finding missions.    The  comment  about  the
    consequences of being taken before that court as referred to at [50] of
    SB remains unchanged by Dr Kakhki's evidence in  these  cases.   It  is
    plain that failed asylum seekers in 2009 and now are not at risk  as  a
    category.  There is a paucity of evidence in that regard.  Dr  Kakhki's
    evidence is consonant with the evidence in SB and the findings in  that
    decision hold good.

12. Ms Busch referred to a number of documents in the  background  material
    as follows:-

      1. IRB Canada report 10 March 2015 [HR/OB/8]: those who  return  on  a
         laissez-passer have not been  arrested.   It  was  accepted  by  Dr
         Kakhki that those travelling on a laissez-passer could be doing  so
         because they had lost  their  passport  or  because  they  have  no
         passport.  Dr Kakhki refers to a watchlist but he has not seen this
         evidence and he does not know if a person travelling on a  laissez-
         passer would be on that list or not.  It is the  Respondent's  case
         that unless an individual attracted media attention, he  would  not
         come to the attention of the authorities  and  it  is  Dr  Kakhki's
         evidence that the  individual  would  not  be  of  interest  if  he
         cooperated. The examples show that illegal exit and a failed asylum
         claim would be insufficient to give rise to risk - a  high  profile
         is relevant.  In the examples where the profile of  the  individual
         case relied upon is not clear, it would be unsafe  to  assume  that
         they were merely failed asylum seekers.  Dr Kakhki could  not  give
         evidence about the detail of the cases relied upon.   The  bulk  of
         the evidence is directed at the coupling of illegal exit  and  some
         form of political activity.
      2.   Refugee   Documentation   Centre,   Ireland   17   October   2014
         [SSH/OB/P168]: the  passage  relied  upon  is  consistent  with  Dr
         Kakhki's evidence about those who have attracted  media  attention.
         The extract does  not  say  that  the  Iranian  authorities  impute
         political opinion based merely on an asylum claim.
      3.  Evidence cited at [38] of the Respondent's skeleton bears out  the
         summary in the COI report dated January 2016 [summary cited at [37]
         of the skeleton].

13. Ms Busch also pointed to the letter dated 25 February  2016  containing
    information received from the FCO [RB/14].  According to  that  letter,
    there have been 39 enforced returns and  228  voluntary  departures  to
    Iran from the UK since 2013.  The summary from FCO which in turn relies
    on information received from the Iranian government is consistent  with
    the background evidence.

14. Dr Kakhki acknowledges that the LandInfo report is the  high  point  of
    the Appellants' case and his position reflects the observations in that
    report.  Even in that document, however, there are only  four  examples
    given, two of which date from 2006.  No other document comes  close  to
    showing the risk relied on.  The report includes a  general  expression
    of concern by Dr Kakhki but there is no  evidence  to  support  it.  If
    failed  asylum  seekers  were  mistreated  on  return,   human   rights
    organisations would find out about it.  There is no basis for  treating
    failed asylum seekers per se as at risk.  Any risk would depend on  the
    individual case.

RICHARD DRABBLE QC

15. The Appellants' case is not whether a failed asylum  seeker  or  person
    who has  exited  illegally  would  face  a  prison  sentence  following
    conviction but that there is a pinchpoint where the  risk  would  arise
    (see AB).

16. The Appellants say that the risk arises from a combination of  factors.
    Hard information from monitoring shows that there would be a period  of
    detention whilst the authorities investigate.  The techniques  used  by
    the authorities and prison conditions would then combine to  give  rise
    to a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3.  The critical  issue
    is not the length of detention (beyond a  minimal  period)  or  whether
    there would be a prosecution.

17. The factors on which the Appellant rely are:-

      1. Return on a Barge Obour/laissez passer where the  fact  of  illegal
         exit will be revealed.  That is accepted.
      2. The surfacing of the fact that the individual is  a  failed  asylum
         seeker.
      3. The possibility of a prison sentence for illegal exit under Article
         34
      4. The need to investigate to determine  the  appropriate  sentence  -
         whether illegal exit is an aggravating factor
      5. The wide terms in Article 500 and the discretion given to the Judge
         to decide whether an offence has been committed which would involve
         consideration whether an offence has been committed  under  Article
         500.

18. It is accepted that illegal exit amounts to an  offence  under  Article
    34.  The issue whether a person would be sentenced to a prison term for
    that offence depends on the Judge's view of the role  of  Article  500.
    In any event, the background material suggests that in some  cases  the
    illegal exit would involve days of investigations which would lead to a
    breach of Article 3 ([39] and [59] of skeleton).

19. In the examples relied upon where the detail of the case is unclear but
    there have been adverse consequences for  failed  asylum  seekers,  the
    lack of detail does not mean there is no risk.  If a prison sentence is
    imposed there is clearly a risk. The Respondent seeks to show that  the
    risk of that occurring depends on  the  high  political  profile.   The
    issue is however whether  an  individual  would  be  subject  to  harsh
    treatment or conditions during interrogation.  If there is a risk  this
    would occur, there is a real risk.

20. Mr Drabble QC sought to distinguish the case  of  SB  on  a  number  of
    grounds:-

      1. SB does not deal with failed asylum seekers.
      2. As a result it does  not  deal  with  the  risk  arising  from  the
         combination of illegal exit and failed asylum claim
      3. Although Dr Kakhki did give evidence about Article 500 in SB he did
         not do so in relation  to  the  risk  that  the  authorities  would
         perceive a  false  asylum  claim  as  propaganda.   SB  deals  only
         therefore with a mere returnee who has left Iran illegally
      4. SB also  does  not  deal  with  the  investigation  phase.   If  an
         individual is not seen as having a political  profile,  he  may  be
         released but the authorities have  to  investigate  to  reach  that
         stage. The thought process underlying the situation at [63]  of  SB
         is therefore the same for an individual  who  has  made  an  asylum
         claim.

21. In relation to the case of BA the  same  point  arises.   The  Tribunal
    needs to consider the factors triggering inquiry as set out at [4(iii)]
    of the headnote in that case.  However,  the  findings  in  BA  do  not
    consider the trigger factors relied upon by these Appellants.

22. The decided cases do therefore show  that  mere  illegal  exit  is  not
    sufficient by itself as a risk factor and that more is  needed  but  do
    not deal with Article 500 and a failed asylum claim in that context.

23. Mr Drabble QC sought to rely on AB.  He accepted that this  was  not  a
    country  guidance  case.    He  submitted  that  it   was   nonetheless
    instructive as there is no country guidance on the issue on  which  the
    Appellants rely.  He pointed to the Respondent's argument in that  case
    that the background material did not show evidence of  arrests  when  a
    person is returned on a laissez-passer.  However, the  IOM  information
    relied upon arose in the case of legal exit  and  does  not  deal  with
    illegal exit. Relying upon [457] of  the  decision  in  that  case,  Mr
    Drabble submitted that a returnee who has left Iran illegally and is  a
    failed asylum seeker will be interrogated about their departure and the
    nature of their claim in the same way as a blogger.  The point made  at
    [470-471] about a pinchpoint arising applies equally in these cases.

24. Mr Drabble QC referred to the background material as follows:-

     1. COI report January 2016 [RB/1]: The passage at  p7  does  not  deal
        with departures.  At 5.1.1-5.1.3 the  report  does  not  cover  the
        combination of illegal exit and a failed asylum claim.
     2. IRB Canada 21 October 2013 [RB/6]: the reference to a watchlist  is
        a red herring; the authorities will  know  the  returnee  to  be  a
        failed asylum  seeker  anyway.   The  reference  to  sentences  for
        charges including illegal exit (p190) does  not  take  matters  any
        further.
     3. Danish Refugee Council fact finding mission report 24  August  -  2
        September 2008: The passage relating to illegal exit (7.4) does not
        deal with the combination of  illegal  exit  and  a  failed  asylum
        claim.  The passage at (7.7) does not answer the  question  whether
        there is a period  of  exposure  and  detention  consequent  on  an
        individual being a failed asylum seeker and travelling on a laissez-
        passer.  That passage showed that there might be a  period  of  1-2
        days to check background.  That might include investigation of  the
        asylum claim.
     4.  AI  report  Feb  2012  (as  reported  in  COI  16   January   2013
        [SSH/OB/p105]:  the  passage  relied  upon  (Judges'  comments)  is
        consistent with the risk asserted by the Appellants (p169 quotation
        relied upon is the same).  Passage relied upon is as follows:-


           "[32.27] AI's report, "We are ordered to  crush  you"  Expanding
           repression of dissent in Iran, published February 2012 reported:


               'Failed asylum seekers ...risk  arrest  if  they  return  to
               Iran, particularly if forcibly returned, where their  asylum
               application is known to the authorities.  A report issued by
               a Swiss refugee agency quotes an unnamed judge as saying:


           "Asylum seekers are interrogated on return, whether or not  they
           have been political activists in Iran or abroad.  If  they  have
           tried to conduct propaganda against Iran, then they are culpable
           and are detained until a judge decides the sentence.  In  recent
           years many people have tried to destroy the reputation  of  Iran
           and this must be  stopped.   Such  people  help  the  opposition
           groups and their culpability is plain.  Returnees will therefore
           be held for a few days until it is clear  to  the  police,  that
           they have not been  involved  in  political  activity.   If  the
           police can prove that the person was not active and has not done
           or said anything that could damage the reputation of the Islamic
           Republic, then they are released.   If  the  person  was  either
           politically active in Iran before leaving, or  has  been  active
           abroad, they must be tried and receive a punishment  appropriate
           to their activities."


           "This report followed an article written  by  a  former  Supreme
           Court judge which appeared in  Iran  newspaper,  a  daily  paper
           published by  the  Iranian  government,  on  17  February  2011.
           Referring to existing laws that enable Iran's judiciary to bring
           charges against Iranians for alleged violations of  Iranian  law
           committed while outside Iran, the  article  stated  that  failed
           asylum-seekers could be prosecuted for  making  up  accounts  of
           alleged persecution.  On 26 April 2011, Kayhan newspaper,  which
           is controlled by the Office of  Supreme  Leader,  also  reported
           that Iranians are seeking asylum "on the pretext  of  supporting
           the opposition." [9x] (p56)".

      5. AI report 11 February 2016 [SSH/OB/p196]: comments on vagueness  of
         Article 500 and similar provisions of the penal code.

      6. COI on prison conditions February 2016: there is no  monitoring  of
         prison conditions.

      7. LandInfo report [HR/EEB/13].

      8. AI report March 2013  [SSH/OB/P115]:  heightened  risk  for  kurds.
         Passage includes examples of those with no history of  activism  or
         dissent.

      9. AI report March 2013 [SSH/OB/P122] - can't rely on  the  answer  in
         Respondent's letter at  [RB/14]  in  relation  to  third  question.
         There is no reference to investigation in  relation  to  an  asylum
         claim.

25. The Appellants accept that they are not at risk per se because they are
    Kurdish but rely on it as extra factor.

ALASTAIR MILLS

26. Mr Mills submits that the risk to the Appellants is a dual one - during
    the investigation and as a result of  conviction.   The  focus  of  the
    Appellants' cases is on the first.   The  risk  arises  of  questioning
    involving persecutory methods and imprisonment.

27. If an individual confesses all, the risk of prosecution  under  Article
    500 may increase and/or a conviction  under  Article  34  may  lead  to
    imprisonment. As a person who has illegally exited Iran and is a failed
    asylum seeker, the individual will be questioned  on  return.   If  the
    individual does not confess or is perceived  as  not  having  confessed
    this might lead to persecutory  treatment.   The  individual  concerned
    would in either event be in prison in Iran and face persecutory methods
    of investigation.

28. Mr Mills put forward four propositions:-

     1. The threshold for treatment as a dissenter is not high
     2. Dissenters and prisoners are subject to torture
     3. There is impunity and corruption in the Iranian system
     4. Prison conditions are appalling.

     1. Mr Mills placed reliance on OGN October 2012 [3.12.7] and  [22]  of
        Dr Kakhki's report in HR that an asylum claim can fall  within  the
        ambit of national security.
     2. Mr Mills relied on section 2 of Dr Kakhki's report and the AI  2012
        report  [RB/2 - p28]
     3. Mr Mills relied on USDS report 2014 [HR/OB/6 - p71]  and  COI  2015
        [HR/OB/21 - p306]
     4. Mr Mills relied on Freedom From Torture report March 2013  [SSH/OB/
        - P129(f)].  He relied also on USDS  2014  [RB/5/p147]  as  showing
        that 25%  of  the  prison  population  is  comprised  of  pre-trial
        detainees.

29. Mr Mills also pointed out that in HR's  case  the  First-tier  decision
    lacks findings which may be relevant to certain important points and he
    invites remittal of that appeal.


