
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on  the  application  of  Zonzi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department FCJR [2013] UKUT 00308 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2013                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF
                                WILFRED ZONZI

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A. Jafar, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whale, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor





                                  JUDGMENT

(1)  Introduction

1.   The applicant is a citizen of  Congo  (Brazzaville)  who  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2008 and claimed asylum. He said that in 2007 he  had
    been  persuaded  to  transport  to  Brazzaville  a  group  of  fighters
    associated with a rebel leader named Pastor N'tumi. As  a  result,  the
    applicant had been detained by the authorities and would be of  serious
    adverse interest to them,  if  returned.  The  respondent  refused  the
    asylum claim and decided  to  remove  the  applicant  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions.   The  applicant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed in October 2008 by Immigration  Judge  Cruthers,
    following a hearing in Manchester, at which the applicant  appeared  in
    person.  Following an unsuccessful application for permission to appeal
    the determination of the Immigration Judge, the applicant became appeal
    rights exhausted in March 2009.

2.   Beginning on 6 March 2009,  the  applicant  has,  through  his  present
    solicitors Lawrence Lupin, made a number of submissions, accompanied by
    relevant documentary material, which he has requested the respondent to
    treat as fresh claims to be in need of international protection.   They
    are as follows:-

    (a)  By letter of 6 March 2009 the applicant submitted copies of a writ
         of summons, with translation; a search warrant,  with  translation;
         and an arrest warrant, with translation.  The respondent  responded
         to these submissions by letter dated 12 March 2009.


    (b)  By letter dated 23 October 2009 the  applicant  submitted  an  EMS
         post express envelope received from the DRC, sent to the applicant;
         what were said to be the originals of an  arrest  warrant  dated  1
         October 2008 (with English translation); a search warrant dated  10
         December 2008 (with English translation); an arrest  warrant  dated
         22 December 2008 (with English translation); a search warrant dated
         31 March 2009 (with English translation); a summons dated  3  March
         2009 (with English translation); an arrest warrant  dated  2  April
         2009 (with English translation); and a manuscript letter  dated  17
         April 2009, said to be from the applicant's  sister  (with  English
         translation).  These submissions were addressed by  the  respondent
         in a letter of 5 March 2010.


    (c)  By letter dated 31 March 2010 Lawrence Lupin Solicitors  provided,
         on instruction,  information  from  the  applicant  concerning  the
         arrest warrant of 1 October 2008, the search warrant of 10 December
         2008 and the arrest warrant of 22  December  2008.   The  applicant
         said that these were brought by hand from Congo  by  an  individual
         who had travelled to Paris and then posted them to a friend of  the
         applicant.  The applicant further stated that a government official
         had served the warrants at the home  occupied  by  the  applicant's
         parents.  The summons of 3 March 2009, search warrant of  31  March
         2009, arrest warrant of 2 April 2009 and letter of  17  April  2009
         were said to have been  sent  by  the  applicant's  cousin/extended
         family member to the applicant's friend in the United Kingdom.


    (d)  By  letter  dated  17  February  2012  Lawrence  Lupin  Solicitors
         enclosed a statement of evidence signed by the applicant and  dated
         17 February 2012; letters of 16 January 2012 and  22  January  2012
         from  David  Diangouaye,   written   from   Paris   (with   English
         translations); a letter dated 25 November 2011 from the applicant's
         sister (with English translation); a  death  certificate  dated  25
         October 2011 relating  to  the  applicant's  father  (with  English
         translation); and a further letter  from  Mr  Diangouaye  dated  26
         October 2009 (with English translation), together with  a  copy  of
         his  passport  and  his  mother's  status  in  France  (with   copy
         envelope).  His last letter is, in fact, described  as  an  "honour
         certificate".  These materials were considered by the respondent in
         a letter dated 13 April 2012.


    (e)  On 23 May 2012  the  applicant  submitted  a  "report  of  special
         illness or condition" compiled in Morton Hall  IRC,  in  accordance
         with rule 35 of the Detention Centre Rules 2001  in  which  it  was
         recorded that the applicant had told a member of staff that he  had
         been tortured in 1998 and again in 2007.  The report  recorded  the
         applicant as having "faded scars to foot and back".  The respondent
         considered this report in a letter of 24 May 2011.


3.   Judicial review proceedings were brought by  the  applicant  against  a
    decision of the respondent taken in respect of the applicant  in  March
    2009.  Following the grant of permission, a  substantive  hearing  took
    before His Honour Judge Alan Gore QC, sitting as a  Deputy  High  Court
    Judge, on 22 March 2012.  On that day, the respondent accepted  not  to
    detain or remove the applicant until seven days after  she  had  served
    him with "a further  decision  letter  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    [applicant]  has  a  fresh  claim  for  asylum  in   respect   of   the
    [applicant's] representations dated 17 February 2012".  On that  basis,
    the applicant was given leave to withdraw the claim.  I shall have more
    to say about those proceedings in due course, since they feature as one
    of the grounds accompanying the present application (see paragraphs  51
    to 53 below).

4.    The  present  application   originally   sought   to   challenge   the
    respondent's decisions of 5 March 2010, 20 December 2010,  20  February
    2012, 13 April 2012 and 25 May  2012.   Permission  to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings was granted by an Upper Tribunal  judge  on  31  May
    2012.  Her grant of permission  did  not  address  the  fact  that  the
    challenge to the two decisions of 2010 and that  of  20  February  2012
    were brought outside the three month time limit prescribed both by  the
    CPR and  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   By
    consent, the hearing before me proceeded on the basis that the only two
    decisions directly challenged were those of 13 April 2012  and  25  May
    2012; but there  was  also  common  ground  that,  in  determining  the
    legality or otherwise of those decisions, regard needed to  be  had  to
    earlier decisions of  the  respondent,  including  those  I  have  just
    mentioned.

(2)  Legal principles

5.   The correct test to be applied in considering whether the  respondent's
    decisions are unlawful is perhaps best  set  out  in  the  judgment  of
    Buxton LJ in WM (DRC) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1495:-

         "First, has the  Secretary  of  State  asked  himself  the  correct
         question? The question  is  not  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
         himself thinks that the new claim is a good one or should  succeed,
         but whether there  is  a  realistic  prospect  of  an  adjudicator,
         applying the rule of anxious scrutiny, thinking that the  applicant
         will  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on   return:
         ............ The Secretary of State of course  can,  and  no  doubt
         logically should, treat his own view of the merits as  a  starting-
         point for that enquiry; but it is  only  a  starting-point  in  the
         consideration of a question that is distinctly different  from  the
         exercise of the Secretary of State making up his own mind.  Second,
         in addressing that question, both in respect of the  evaluation  of
         the facts and in respect of the legal conclusions to be drawn  from
         those facts, has the Secretary of State satisfied  the  requirement
         of anxious scrutiny? If the court  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
         answer to both of those questions is in  the  affirmative  it  will
         have to grant an application for review of the Secretary of State's
         decision." [11]

6.   It  is  at  this  point  convenient  to  deal  with  ground  2  of  the
    applicant's grounds of challenge in the  present  case.   This  asserts
    that the  respondent  adopted  a  legally  erroneous  approach  to  the
    documentation submitted by the applicant and said to emanate from Congo
    (Brazzaville),  comprising  such  things  as  the  summons  and  arrest
    warrant.

7.   In this regard, reliance is placed upon the judgment of  Collins  J  in
    Rahimi v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWHC  2838
    (Admin). In that case, an appellant, who had lost an appeal  before  an
    adjudicator (who did not find him credible) subsequently submitted what
    was said to be the original of a  newspaper  report  from  Afghanistan,
    together with the opinion of an expert, Dr Giustozzi, who said that the
    newspaper "could well be genuine" [6].

8.   Having cited what were then considered to be  the  leading  authorities
    on the issue of fresh claims, Collins J considered the submission  that
    the issue in a fresh claim case under paragraph 353 of the  Immigration
    Rules "is whether the material creates a realistic prospect of  success
    and that being so, it must be for the Secretary of  State  properly  to
    decide whether the evidence is, in his view, evidence which  should  be
    believed.  It is only if his view is an irrational view  that  a  fresh
    claim can be entertained" [17].

9.   At [18] Collins J considered that this  submission  "put  it  too  high
    against an applicant":

         "18.     ... I think it would be difficult to justify  an  approach
             which enabled the Secretary of State to find a matter of  fact
             against a new claim which otherwise would succeed because  the
             material had not already been considered; and there  was  good
             reason, as it happens in this case, for that, because  it  did
             not  exist  until  after  the   relevant   decision   of   the
             adjudicator.


         19.  Of course, if it is intrinsically incredible, or if  when  one
             looks at the whole of the case, it is possible to say that  no
             person could reasonably believe this evidence,  it  should  be
             rejected.  If it is, on the  face  of  it,  credible  and  if,
             despite the feeling that it might be disbelieved,  it  is  not
             possible to say that it  could  not  reasonably  be  believed,
             then, as it seems to me, the decision ought to be  based  upon
             that state of affairs.  The Secretary of State would be  wrong
             to say 'I don't believe it and therefore I  am  not  going  to
             regard this as a fresh claim'.
         20.  In those circumstances, as it  seems  to  me,  this  claim  is
             entitled to succeed.  That means, of course, no more than that
             the claimant will be given a fresh  right  of  appeal,  if  he
             wishes to exercise it, and it may well  be  that  that  appeal
             will not succeed.  But further enquiries can no doubt then  be
             made on both sides into the  authenticity  of  this  newspaper
             report.  The Secretary of State after all is just as  capable,
             one would have thought, of finding out from the publishers  of
             this document whether it is indeed  genuine,  and  equally  no
             doubt the claimant, for his part, will be able to make further
             enquiries."

10.  As Mr Jafar points out,  the  judgment  of  Collins  J  in  Rahimi  was
    specifically upheld by the Court of  Appeal  in  WM  (DRC)  (it  was  a
    conjoined appeal with that of  WM).   I  consider,  however,  that  the
    applicant in the present case is wrongly seeking to extract from Rahimi
    a legal proposition which, particularly in the light of  the  judgments
    in WM (DRC), does not in reality exist.  It is plain from [17] to  [19]
    of the judgment of Collins J that he  was,  in  effect,  rejecting  the
    proposition  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  own   view   of   fresh
    documentation  submitted  on  behalf  of   an   applicant   should   be
    determinative of the issue of a fresh claim.  In the light of WM  (DRC)
    such a proposition is plainly incorrect.

11.   However, it seems to me to be equally plain that Rahimi is not  to  be
    regarded as authority for the  proposition  that,  where  an  applicant
    submits documentation which he or she says comes  from  a  third  party
    source (such as the government of another  State),  that  documentation
    must (unless "intrinsically incredible") give rise to  a  fresh  claim,
    unless no reasonable judicial fact-finder could believe this  evidence,
    or, to put it another way, treat it as reliable.

12.   Such an approach would run counter to the holistic exercise  described
    in WM (DRC).  It would also, in effect,  involve  re-writing  paragraph
    353, in cases of this kind, by ignoring the  word  "realistic"  in  the
    phrase "realistic prospect of success".  What  I  consider  to  be  the
    correct position is articulated in the judgement  of  John  Howell  QC,
    sitting as a Deputy Judge of the  High  Court,  in  Muhammed  Yameen  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 2250 (Admin):


          "40.  ... In my judgment it is not necessary for the Secretary  of
              State to  be  able  to  conclude  that  something  is  itself
              incredible or incapable of belief for her to be  entitled  to
              conclude that there is no realistic prospect that a  Tribunal
              would  treat  it  as  reliable.  Whether  a  Tribunal   could
              reasonably treat something as reliable is to be  answered  in
              the context of the evidence as a whole and in that connection
              it may be important to consider what evidence there is  which
              explains  how  any  document  came  into  existence  or   any
              statement  came  to  be   made   and   which   supports   its
              reliability...


          41.    Even if new representations are based wholly or in part  on
              material that is reliable or, at  least,  on  that  which  an
              Immigration Judge  might  realistically  treat  as  reliable,
              however, that does not necessarily mean that they will amount
              to a fresh claim. The Secretary of State still has to make  a
              judgment about whether there is a  realistic  prospect  of  a
              successful outcome in the Tribunal proceedings based on  such
              material giving it anxious scrutiny ..."

13.  What the respondent has to do in cases of this kind is to consider  the
    fresh material, against the background of the earlier judicial findings
    in respect of  the  applicant,  in  order  to  determine,  in  all  the
    circumstances, whether  the  applicant  has  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success  before  a  future  hypothetical  judge.   The  fact  that  the
    applicant may have been disbelieved already in a  judicial  context  is
    not determinative; nor is the Secretary of State's own view of the  new
    material and  the  present  credibility  of  the  applicant.   I  shall
    consider the detailed  criticisms  levelled  against  the  respondent's
    approach in the present case in due course.  For the present,  however,
    I find that the respondent did not err in law in refusing to treat  the
    applicant's submissions as a fresh claim merely because, although there
    was not a realistic prospect of success, a judicial  fact-finder  might
    rationally have regarded the material as reliable and have allowed  the
    appeal on that basis.

(3)  The applicant's specific challenges: by issue

14.  It is convenient to consider the applicant's  remaining  grounds  under
    the following generic headings.

(a)  Failing to appreciate that the Immigration Judge had accepted  part  of
    the applicant's account of his experiences in Congo (Brazzaville)

15.   Ground  3  asserts  that  the   Immigration   Judge,   in   his   2008
    determination, found

        "that as a result of [the applicant's]  political  activities  [he]
        had been detained as claimed, the only aspect of his claim that was
        rejected was that he was tortured and that he had to  escape.   The
        IJ found that [the applicant] was officially released."

16.  It is plain from a reading of the judge's determination that  ground  3
    is misconceived.  It completely ignores this vital paragraph:-

         "34. On the evidence overall I do not believe  that  the  appellant
             was caught up at all in the events of 10 September  2007.   It
             is much more likely in my  judgment  that  the  appellant  has
             fabricated an account around an event that is  well  known  in
             Congo (Brazzaville).  My reasons for that conclusion  are  set
             out in the paragraphs below."

17.  I agree with the respondent that [34] of  the  determination  makes  it
    manifest that the Immigration Judge did not believe any aspect  of  the
    applicant's account.  That includes his  being  detained  as  a  direct
    result of participation in the events of 10 September 2007, when Pastor
    N'Tumi attempted to return to Brazzaville.  If any support were  needed
    for this, it is to be found at [35], where the judge said this:-

         "35.     I am not  prepared,  even  on  the  reasonable  likelihood
             standard, to accept the core of the  appellant's  evidence  at
             face value because I find that evidence to be very unreliable.
              Specifically, I do not accept the appellant's claim  that  on
             or  around  10  September  2007  he  was  required   by   some
             rebels/Pastor N'Tumi  supporters  to  transport  them  on  his
             lorry.  I do not believe that the appellant was in consequence
             arrested and detained as he claims ..."

18.  The applicant places reliance on [36] of the determination,  where  the
    Immigration Judge,  in  considering  the  applicant's  account  of  his
    alleged leaving detention, said that there was "nothing particularly to
    indicate that this was not an official release  of  the  appellant.   I
    consider it extremely unlikely on the appellant's description that this
    was any sort  of  escape,  with  the  assistance  of  someone  who  the
    appellant knew nothing about ..."

19.  Mr Jafar submits that this amounted to a  finding  that  the  applicant
    had been detained.  I agree with the respondent that it is  nothing  of
    the sort.  It is merely one of a number of reasons why the  Immigration
    Judge came to the conclusion that the core account was fabricated.  The
    other reasons for that conclusion are dealt with by the judge  at  [37]
    to [44] of the determination.  In particular, it is noteworthy that  at
    [43] the judge stated  that  "the  evidential  difficulties  summarised
    above make it far more likely that the appellant was a  witness  trying
    to remember a fabricated story, rather than being  a  witness  who  was
    trying to recall events that had really happened".

20.  Finally, the heading to [45] to [51], "Assessment of risk on  return  -
    if the appellant's core account is true", would make no  sense  if,  as
    contended, the judge had, in fact, accepted that the applicant had been
    detained by the Congo (Brazzaville) authorities.

21.  For these reasons I find that  ground  3  is  based  on  a  fundamental
    misconception, which underlies much of the substance of the applicant's
    challenge of the respondent's decisions.

(b)  Failure to treat the Immigration  Judge's  determination  merely  as  a
    "starting point"

22.   Ground  1  asserts  that  the  respondent's  decisions  amount  to  an
    assumption on her part that "because the Immigration Judge has  decided
    a factual point it cannot be re-opened" and  that  the  decisions  were
    "premised  on  the  proposition  that  because  [the   applicant]   was
    previously found to be incredible anything he produces will be seen  in
    that light".

23.  In his oral submissions, not only did Mr Jafar  fail  to  identify  any
    specific passages of the decision letters that disclose such errors  on
    the part of the respondent; much of his detailed  criticisms  of  those
    letters runs counter to the complaint set out in  ground  1.   I  shall
    come to those detailed criticisms  in  due  course.   It  is,  however,
    apparent that they include disagreements with observations made in  the
    letters regarding the  provenance  of  the  summonses/arrest  warrants,
    alleged discrepancies in those documents and  the  absence  of  certain
    originals.  All of this sits uneasily with the proposition in ground 1,
    that the respondent has, in effect,  shut  her  mind  to  the  possible
    significance of this material by  concluding  that  because  the  judge
    found the applicant to be  incredible,  the  materials  must  for  that
    reason be regarded as worthless.

24.  In any event, an examination of the letters in question makes it  plain
    that the respondent has not fallen into any such alleged error.   Thus,
    for example, in the letter of 13 April 2012,  at  bundle  p  54,  which
    dealt with two letters in translation from Chrysogone D, said to  be  a
    friend from Congo, the respondent specifically considered the materials
    "in line with the case law of Tanveer Ahmed".  On the same page we find
    that the respondent "considered the new evidence does not undermine the
    credibility findings of the IJ, which therefore remain valid".  Such an
    approach is, of course, inconsistent  with  the  applicant's  assertion
    that the respondent in effect treated those credibility findings as the
    "be all and end all" of the matter.

25.  Similar points can be made of the  respondent's  consideration  of  the
    other materials described  at  bundle  pp.54-55,  including  the  death
    certificate of the applicant's father and the "honour certificate".

26.  By the same token, the  letter  of  12  March  2009  dealing  with  the
    summons/arrest warrant shows specific engagement with the text of those
    documents, as well as containing specific reference to  Tanveer  Ahmed,
    leading to this conclusion:-

         "In view of the above and having regard to the Immigration  Judge's
         findings of adverse credibility, it is concluded that the documents
         on which he would seek to rely are  entirely  self-serving  and  no
         more than an attempt to frustrate your client's removal."


27.  Similar points can be made in respect of the letter  of  5  March  2010
    (pp.116-117 of the bundle).  In particular, at p.117 we find this:-

         "Therefore in relation to the Case Law Tanveer Ahmed and looking at
         all the evidence in the round, including [my emphasis] the  adverse
         credibility findings of the Immigration  Judge,  it  is  considered
         that no reliance can be placed on these  documents  in  support  of
         your client's claim.


         For the reasons provided above  it  is  not  considered  that  your
         client's submissions would have a  realistic  prospect  of  success
         before an Immigration Judge."

(c)  Alleged errors regarding fresh evidence, said to amount  to  a  failure
    on the part of the respondent to apply requisite anxious scrutiny

(i)   The  spelling  mistake/address  inconsistency  in  the  summons/search
    warrant/arrest warrant

28.  The respondent's decision of 12 March 2009  considered  (bundle  p.137)
    that   the   documentation   submitted   by   the   applicant    showed
    "inconsistencies in your client's home address in  Congo  (Brazzaville)
    and contains spelling  mistakes".   The  applicant  contends  that  the
    inconsistency in the  address  of  the  applicant,  being  "173"  of  a
    particular street in the English translation and "172" in the  original
    French version (172 also being the number mentioned in the summons) was
    clearly a mistake on the part of the translator of the search  warrant.
    Likewise, the spelling mistake  in  the  translation  of  that  warrant
    ("scilled with our stamp") has no counterpart  in  the  French  version
    (bundle p.148), where the French word "scell�" (="sealed") is used.

29.  The errors noted by the respondent in 2010  undoubtedly  demonstrate  a
    lack of care in respect  of  translating  the  documents  in  question.
    Nevertheless, Mr Jafar still has a point, in that the errors  were  not
    ones which infected the French versions.

30.  In considering this issue, the following passage from the  judgment  in
    Muhammad Yameen is, I consider, helpful:-

         "44.     ... it is right  to  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State
             accepts that on occasion errors were made in letters  sent  on
             her behalf in this case. For example  it  was  stated  in  one
             letter that the Claimant had contended that he  had  tied  the
             hands of the terrorist together in the mosque. Throughout  his
             claim has in fact been  that  he  tied  the  terrorist's  feet
             together. That mistake, as the Secretary of State subsequently
             and correctly pointed out, of itself made no  real  difference
             to her reasoning on the particular point in  issue.  This  and
             other errors made may raise doubts about the care  with  which
             the extensive further representations made were considered  on
             occasion. It is self-evident that those  charged  with  making
             decisions on behalf of the Secretary of State in cases such as
             this have to work under considerable pressure and they may  be
             faced  (as  in  this  case)  with  voluminous,  and  sometimes
             repetitive,   further   representations.   Mistakes   may   be
             understandable. But, given the consequences which mistakes may
             have in this type of case, they cannot be  assumed,  and  they
             should not readily be judged, to be immaterial."

31.  Standing back and looking at this matter in the light of the  extensive
    cumulative decision-making in the  present  case,  culminating  in  the
    decision letters of 2012, I do not consider it can  be  said  that  the
    Secretary of State's failure in 2009 to appreciate the lack  of  errors
    in the French versions of the documents in question has  in  any  sense
    made a "real difference to her  reasoning".   The  2009  letter  itself
    makes  it  plain  that  there  were  other   problems   regarding   the
    documentation.  Indeed, what the respondent regarded  as  "significant"
    was that "these documents have only been submitted  after  your  client
    was notified of his imminent removal".  It is also  plain,  as  I  have
    already observed that, at bundle p.137, where the passages in  question
    occur, the respondent also applied  the  approach  drawn  from  Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439  and  had  regard  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    "findings of adverse credibility" in concluding that the  documents  in
    question were insufficiently probative to give rise to a fresh claim.

32.  In finding that  this  issue  is,  in  all  the  circumstances,  of  no
    materiality, I also accept Mr  Whale's  submission  that  the  decision
    letter of 5 March 2010, in which there is a consideration  of  all  the
    materials by then submitted on  behalf  of  the  applicant,  placed  no
    reliance   upon   alleged   spelling    mistakes    or    typographical
    inconsistencies.  Nor, for that matter, is there any  inkling  of  this
    issue being material in either of the decision letters of 2012.

(ii) Absence of original documents

33.  The applicant submits that the respondent has failed to have regard  to
    the fact that the originals  of  certain  documents  submitted  by  the
    applicant, following the dismissal by  the  Immigration  Judge  of  his
    appeal, were held by his previous solicitors, Fadiga & Co.   I  do  not
    consider that there is any merit in this complaint.

34.  The materials in question were the copy arrest warrant, search  warrant
    and summons, sent under cover of the letter from Lawrence  Lupin  of  6
    March 2009.  The respondent's letter of 12 March 2009, however, did not
    take the absence of originals as a point of materiality,  in  rejecting
    the submissions.  By 23 October 2009, the originals  of  the  documents
    just mentioned had, in fact, been sent by Lawrence Lupin, with a letter
    of that date, together with originals of further warrants etc  said  to
    emanate from Congo (Brazzaville).  Although various issues relating  to
    these documents were raised by the respondent in the letter of 5  March
    2010, the absence of originals is not amongst them.  By  contrast,  the
    letter of 13 April 2012 notes that certain  further  documents,  namely
    the letter from Chrysogone D, the letter from Gig Sisiter  Sylivie  and
    the father's death certificate, were not submitted.  As  far  as  I  am
    aware, it is not the applicant's  case  that  the  originals  of  these
    documents were ever with Fadiga & Co.

(iii)    Provenance of documents

35.  The applicant submits  that  the  respondent  has  not  had  regard  to
    explanations provided as to the provenance of various documents said to
    emanate from Congo (Brazzaville).  In their letter of  31  March  2010,
    Lawrence Lupin stated, on instruction, how  the  arrest  warrant  of  1
    October 2008, the search warrant of 10 December  2008  and  the  arrest
    warrant of 22 December 2008 reached the  applicant;  namely  that  they
    were brought by hand to Paris and then sent by post to a friend of  the
    applicant.   There  then  followed  a   passage,   again   written   on
    instruction, as to how the  documents  had  been  procured  from  Congo
    (Brazzaville).  So far as concerns the summons of  3  March  2009,  the
    search warrant of 31 March 2009, the arrest warrant of 2 April 2009 and
    the letter of 17 April 2009, these were said to  have  been  sent  from
    Congo (Brazzaville) to the applicant's friend.

36.  There is no merit in the complaint regarding the respondent's  approach
    to these explanations.  At paragraph  24  to  32  of  the  respondent's
    decision letter of 20 February 2012, the alleged  means  by  which  the
    applicant came into possession of the documents  concerned  were  fully
    considered  by  the  respondent.   The  following  paragraphs  are   of
    particular significance:-

         "27.      However,   this   explanation   does   not   sufficiently
             demonstrate that the arrest warrants can be relied  upon.   So
             while this story may well  reflect  the  journey  of  how  the
             enclosures travelled from Congo (Brazzaville)  to  France  and
             then on to the United Kingdom, it is not considered that  this
             satisfactorily demonstrates their authenticity with regards to
             whether the  authorities  had  issued  the  documents  out  of
             adverse interest in your client.


         28.   A  recent  Country  of  Origin  Information  Service  request
             confirms that the Congolese government is highly  corrupt,  so
             this evidence, taken together with the adverse findings of the
             appeal Tribunal (sic) and timing of the documents, entitles us
             to treat the documents with suspicion.


         ...


         31.  The explanation for how the  documents  came  to  be  in  your
             client's possession has been carefully considered.  While  the
             explanation,  superficially  at  least,   explains   how   the
             documents purporting to be original arrest warrants  for  your
             client, came to be in your client's possession,  they  do  not
             satisfactorily demonstrate their legitimacy or reliability."

(iv) Applicant's witness statement

37.  Amongst the difficulties with the applicant's  account,  identified  by
    the Immigration  Judge,  were  the  discrepancies  regarding  what  had
    supposedly  happened  to  him  whilst  in  detention,  and  immediately
    thereafter.  At [37] of the determination, the judge noted that at  the
    hearing the applicant said he had been beaten so  much  that  he  could
    "hardly walk"; whereas at his asylum interview, the applicant had "said
    nothing about having been badly beaten" or, for that matter, having had
    to get into the boot of a car.  At [38] the judge found it difficult to
    reconcile the applicant's claims "about having been very  badly  beaten
    in detention with his statement at the screening interview that when he
    was arrested he 'received a shoulder blow'".  After the  applicant  had
    been supposedly dropped off from the car "he walked for about two hours
    to the house of his uncle ... however,  if  on  leaving  detention  the
    appellant was so badly injured that he could hardly walk to the car, it
    is difficult to understand  how,  shortly  afterwards,  he  could  have
    walked for two hours to his uncle's house". [39]

38.  Under cover of a letter of 17 February 2012,  Lawrence  Lupin  sent  to
    the respondent (amongst other  things)  the  applicant's  statement  of
    evidence dated 17 February 2012.   Having  reiterated  his  account  of
    being caught up in the events of September 2007, arrested and detained,
    the applicant attempted to deal with various matters of concern to  the
    Immigration Judge.  These included the assertion (at [10]) that, having
    been dropped off, he

          "walked for around 2 hours to my uncle's house  where  I  remained
          until I left the country.  I wish to confirm that I was in a  very
          bad physical condition and this journey took me 2  hours  when  it
          usually takes 30 minutes.  I walked very slowly and I had to  stop
          from time to time to avoid other people to see me waking (sic)  in
          my condition".

39.  The applicant contends that the respondent has failed to  consider  his
    explanation of how he could walk if, as he had alleged at  the  hearing
    before the Immigration Judge, he had been badly beaten in detention.  I
    find that the applicant has  not  made  out  this  head  of  challenge.
    Although there is no express reference in the  decision  letter  of  20
    February 2012 to the applicant's witness  statement,  it  is  expressly
    dealt with in the decision letter of 13 April 2012 (bundle p.53), where
    it is stated:-

         "Your witness statement is essentially a reiteration of your asylum
         claim.  You have sought to clarify several of  the  inconsistencies
         that were identified during your appeal hearing.  Your explanations
         have been considered against the findings  of  the  IJ  ...  it  is
         considered your witness statement would  not  present  a  realistic
         prospect of success if placed before an IJ."

(v)  Letter from sister etc.

40.  The applicant submits that no anxious scrutiny has been  given  to  the
    other materials sent together with the applicant's  witness  statement,
    including a letter from  his  sister,  a  friend,  his  father's  death
    certificate and an "honour  certificate".   I  reject  this  submission
    also.  The decision letter of 13 April 2012 addresses  these  documents
    specifically at bundle pp.54-55.  Amongst the points there made is that
    the honour certificate refers to  the  applicant  having  fled  to  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo, when the applicant "made  no  mention  of
    ever having been to the DRC in your asylum  interview  or  your  appeal
    hearing".  So far as the father's death certificate is  concerned,  the
    respondent observed that it had not been explained  how  this  document
    was relevant to the applicant's claim to be in  need  of  international
    protection.

(vi) General observations

41.  Upon analysis,  many  of  the  criticisms  advanced  by  the  applicant
    involve allegations of failures by the respondent to refer specifically
    to particular matters, contained  in  the  documentation  submitted  in
    connection with the paragraph 353 submissions.  For  example,  although
    the applicant's witness statement is, as  we  have  seen,  referred  to
    specifically, Mr Jafar nevertheless submits that the Secretary of State
    should, on the face of the decision letters, have dealt expressly  with
    the applicant's explanation that it  took  him  two  hours  to  walk  a
    distance that he would normally have traversed in only 30  minutes,  by
    reason (so it is said) of the injuries sustained whilst  the  applicant
    was in detention.  I consider that  these  submissions  overstate  what
    "anxious scrutiny" in this context requires.  I respectfully agree with
    what the Deputy High Court judge said at [35] of Muhammad Yameen:-

         "To amount to a fresh claim,  any  representations  must  first  be
         significantly different from the content of the material previously
         considered. Ms Phelan submitted that it was not sufficient  to  say
         that any representations fail to pass this threshold merely because
         the material they contain has previously has  been  submitted;  its
         content must have been considered. That I accept. If the  Secretary
         of State or a Tribunal had refused to consider the content of  some
         document  for  some  reason,  then  that  might  enable  the  first
         threshold to be passed. But the mere fact  that  a  decision  maker
         does not refer to something which has been submitted  does  not  of
         itself necessarily mean that it has not been considered."

42.  In the present case, the respondent has, in  fact,  plainly  considered
    the contents of the documents in  question.   What  is  complained  of,
    rather, is she has not given more by way  of  an  explanation  for  her
    conclusions that, taken in the round, those  documents,  together  with
    the findings of the  Immigration  Judge,  would  not  give  rise  to  a
    realistic prospect of success before a hypothetical future  judge.   In
    the circumstances, however, this criticism amounts to a requirement  to
    give reasons for reasons.  It is, in essence, a "merits" as opposed  to
    a Wednesbury challenge.

43.  The second general point is  that  the  respondent's  decision  letters
    make  repeated  express  reference  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    materials would give rise to a realistic prospect of success  before  a
    judge.  Thus, for example, at bundle p.68 we find this in the letter of
    20 February 2012:-

         "48. While each individual  item  has  been  carefully  considered,
             taken together and cumulatively it is not considered that that
             (sic) the  arrest  warrants/summons  etc  create  a  realistic
             prospect of success.  An IJ would note  the  vague  assertions
             and blatant credibility issues, the guidance set out in the CG
             case of LM, together with the timing  and  submission  of  the
             documents.  An Immigration Judge,  guided  by  the  principles
             laid out in Tanveer Ahmed would not attach any weight  to  the
             documents purporting to be arrest/search warrants."

(d)  Medical issues / scars

44.  As has already been seen, the "rule 35" evidence is somewhat  exiguous.
     It describes an assertion made by the applicant that he was beaten  in
    both 1998 and 2007.  Since both events, the applicant  "has  stated  he
    suffers back pain".  So far as "visible scars/injuries" are  concerned,
    there is recorded: "Faded scars to foot and back".

45.  I do not find that the respondent's letter of 24 May 2012  demonstrates
    any failure of anxious scrutiny and/or to consider properly what  might
    be the outcome before the  hypothetical  judge.   At  bundle  p.41  the
    respondent correctly noted that the applicant had

        "not submitted any medical evidence to  support  your  claims  that
        these scars are the result of torture.  The mere existence of scars
        does not, in itself, indicate that the injuries were  sustained  in
        the manner you have described or that there is a risk  [on]  return
        to your home country".


        The letter went on to record that the evidence in  the  report  "has
    been given anxious scrutiny" but that it was not thought "to  create  a
    realistic prospect of success in front of an Immigration Judge".

46.   In his oral submissions, Mr  Jafar  contended  that  the  respondent's
    consideration of the rule 35 report  was  insufficiently  holistic,  in
    that it did not encompass the other materials that had been put forward
    since the dismissal of the applicant's appeal.  I do not consider  that
    this submission has force.  On the contrary,  the  respondent's  letter
    states in terms that "your asylum and/or human rights  claim  has  been
    reconsidered on all  the  evidence  available,  including  the  further
    submissions".  In the next paragraph we find it stated  that  "the  new
    submissions taken together with the previously considered  material  do
    not create a realistic prospect of success, namely that an  Immigration
    Judge applying anxious scrutiny would decide that the claimant ought to
    be granted asylum, humanitarian protection or discretionary leave".

47.  I also accept Mr Whale's submission, that the assertion  the  applicant
    was beaten in 1998 sits poorly with the claim put to and considered  by
    the Immigration Judge.  At [8] of the determination, the judge noted

        "some vague claims as to having been arrested in 1997 [my emphasis]
        at the time of the coup of President Sassou.  He said that  he  was
        then held for five days without any charges.  These claims seem  to
        form no part of the  appellant's  current  claims  as  to  risk  on
        return".

(e)  Claimed membership of MCDDI

48.  Although not specifically relied upon by Mr Jafar in oral  submissions,
    the written grounds seek to make something of the  applicant's  claimed
    membership of  the  Mouvement  Congolaise  pour  la  Democratie  et  le
    Developpement Integral (MCDDI) party in Congo (Brazzaville).   At  [15]
    of his determination, the Immigration  Judge  noted  "some  very  vague
    claims" in the asylum interview as to the applicant being a  member  of
    MCDDI but that

        "he has completely failed to give any  further  information  as  to
        that claimed involvement ... (despite having been  asked  questions
        about that at his interview) so it is  not  a  claim  which  I  can
        address any further in this determination".

49.  The issue of alleged MCDDI membership is dealt with in  detail  by  the
    respondent in her letter of 20 February 2012,  beginning  at  paragraph
    33.  In particular, at paragraph 37, the respondent said this:-

         "You submit that  the  judge  neither  accepted  nor  rejected  the
         account of his MCDDI involvement, but it is clear from his findings
         that he did not accept it, as he claimed that it was vague.  In any
         event, the judge considered your client's account in the context of
         LM (risks on  return)  Republic  of  Congo  (Congo-Brazzaville)  CG
         [2008] UKAIT (CG case) where he considered  that  low  level  MCDDI
         members would not be of interest to  the  authorities.   You  state
         that your client would be questioned on return.  However, the judge
         made a finding of fact that your client had taken NO  part  in  the
         coup of 10 September 2007 and therefore that he was not arrested or
         detained.  It is therefore not considered that there is any  reason
         to believe that your client would not be able to pass through  once
         he had confirmed his identity."

50.  That engagement with the issue of MCDDI membership fully satisfies  the
    requirement  of  anxious  scrutiny.   The  challenge  under  this  head
    accordingly fails.

(f)  Alleged failure to comply with an undertaking given to the High Court

51.  At the hearing on 2 May 2013, there was some discussion as  to  whether
    the respondent had given any kind of undertaking at  or  in  connection
    with the hearing before HH Judge Gore QC,  sitting  as  a  Deputy  High
    Court judge, on 22  March  2012  in  respect  of  the  judicial  review
    proceedings brought by the applicant in relation  to  the  respondent's
    decision letter of 5 March 2009 (see paragraph  3  above).   I  do  not
    consider that the respondent has failed to comply with  what  she  told
    the Deputy High Court judge she would do, which,  as  recorded  in  the
    sealed order of 26 March 2012, was:-

         "not to detain or remove the above-named claimant from the UK until
         seven days after  she  has  served  the  claimant  with  a  further
         decision letter on the issue of whether the claimant  has  a  fresh
         claim for asylum in respect of the claimant's representations dated
         17 February 2012."

52.  As we have already seen, that is precisely what the respondent  did  in
    the decision letter of 13 April 2012.  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    respondent undertook to do anything different, over and above  what  is
    recorded in the order of the court.

53.   Ground 4 contends that at the hearing on 22 March 2012 the  respondent



        "misled the claimant in court into believing that she would  indeed
        reconsider all the material afresh, otherwise there would have been
        no reason whatsoever for the court and the claimant to accept  that
        there was an appropriate remedy available in the form  of  a  fresh
        decision".

          I do not find that there have been any  misleading  statements  or
    other indications by the  respondent.   It  is  quite  clear  that  the
    letters of 13 April 2012 and 24 May 2012  are  the  last  steps  in  an
    iterative process of engagement with the various  materials  which  the
    applicant has put forward since March 2009.  The fact that it  was  the
    applicant's representations in a letter of 17 February 2012  (enclosing
    the applicant's witness statement, two letters from  a  friend,  letter
    for  his  sister,  father's   death   certificate   and   the   "honour
    certificate") that caused the application before the Deputy High  Court
    judge to be withdrawn is made plain, not only by the terms of the order
    I have just cited, but also by these concluding remarks  of  the  judge
    (taken from the transcript), when dealing with the issue of costs:-

         "Thank you, Mr Jafar, no, I do not agree with  you.   Whatever  the
         rights and wrongs of this may be as a matter of procedural history,
         although on the one hand you were right to say that proceedings had
         to be instituted in order to achieve the prevention of the  removal
         of your client from the  jurisdiction  while  the  judicial  review
         action proceeded, on the other hand, by reason of your drip feeding
         of further representations, culminating in the  latest  substantial
         new body of material moving the  goalposts,  this  application  has
         become academic.


         Therefore, on terms that I will recite into an order in  a  moment,
         it is going to be withdrawn and to that extent you have failed."

(4)  Conclusion

54.  For the above reasons, the application for judicial review is  refused.
     Any representations the parties wish to make on the issue of the costs
    of these proceedings must be received by the Tribunal not later than 14
    days from the date this judgment is sent.






                               Signed   [pic]




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

