
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Shabani (EEA - jobseekers; nursery education) [2013] UKUT 00315 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 December 2012                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARD

                                   Between

                             JOHN MUNDU SHABANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Jegede, Solicitor, OJN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


1.   Although the question whether  Article  7(3)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC
    deals exhaustively with the circumstances  in  which  a  jobseeker  can
    retain the status of a worker in EU law has been held  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Saint Prix v Secretary of State for Work and  Pensions  [2012]
    UKSC 49 to require a reference to the Court of Justice, a woman who has
    left the labour market in order to look after children does not  retain
    her status as a worker in EU law:  Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and
    Pensions v Dias [2009] EWCA Civ 807 applied.

2.   The effect of the concession made by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    course of the present case (after consultation with the Department  for
    Work and Pensions and HM Revenue and Customs) is that a person who  has
    been employed but after falling unemployed seeks employment again (i.e.
     a "second-time" jobseeker) can potentially fall within regulation 6(4)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  applying
    the twofold test set out in  Antonissen C-393/96 P(R) [1997] ECR 1-441.

3.   A further concession made by the Secretary of State in  the  course  of
    the present case is that for the purposes of new regulation 15A of  the
    same Regulations  (if  not  also  as  a  matter  of  Court  of  Justice
    jurisprudence) the primary carer of the child of an EEA  national/Union
    citizen who has been employed in the host Member State is entitled to a
    derivative  right  of  residence  once  that  child  has  entered  into
    reception class education. The Secretary of State  has  indicated  that
    the definition of "education" is to be reviewed.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  We apologise for the time it has taken to  promulgate this decision;  as
will become clear  there  were  two  matters  of  law  on  which  we  sought
clarification from the Secretary of State  as  to  her  position  and  which
required her to undertake  interdepartmental  consultation.  That  does  not
account for all of the delay but does for much of it.

2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC).
On 23 December 2010, whilst in the UK on a  visit  visa  due  to  expire  in
February 2011, he applied for a residence card as the  spouse  of  a  French
national exercising EEA national Treaty rights.  He submitted,  inter  alia,
a certificate of marriage with Jolie Mantezolo dated 19 November 2010.   (He
had divorced his previous wife in April 2010).  Ms Mantezolo had arrived  in
the UK in 2004 to seek work.  She had worked  for  a  period  of  two  years
commencing on 23 October 2006 as a shop  assistant  with  a  company  called
Peacocks.  She had taken maternity leave in May 2008; it  ended  on  1  June
2009.  She did not return to work after the birth of her first child, K,  on
30 July 2008 and, after the birth of her second  child,  G,  on  7  December
2010, she decided to look after her two children rather than  work  in  paid
employment. She and her children being French nationals they  are  also,  of
course Union citizens/EEA nationals.

3. On 1 April 2011 the respondent made a decision refusing his  application.
 The refusal letter noted that the appellant had submitted evidence to  show
that his EEA sponsor wife was in receipt of income  support  and  child  tax
credits, which are public funds.  He had  therefore  failed  to  demonstrate
that his EEA sponsor, a qualified person, was working  or  able  to  support
herself and the appellant without becoming a burden on  public  funds.   The
respondent was also satisfied the decision did not violate  the  appellant's
Article 8 rights.

4. The appellant's appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
Black.  In a determination sent on 4 June 2011  Judge  Black  dismissed  his
appeal.  The judge's principal findings included that the appellant had  not
shown his wife  was a qualified person either by virtue of  being  a  worker
under  regulation  6(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 No.1003 (as amended) ("the 2006 EEA Regulations") or  under
regulation 6(1)(a) as a jobseeker.  The judge accepted that the sponsor  had
made an application for  jobseeker's  allowance  ("JSA")  and  had  been  in
receipt of this  benefit  from  15  April  2011,  but  considered  this  was
immaterial because she had made this application "merely going  through  the
motions in order to bolster the  appellant's  prospects  of  success".   The
judge also decided to dismiss the appellant's Article 8  ground  of  appeal.
At [24] she found that the  appellant  could  move  back  to  France  or  to
Belgium  where  he  had  worked  previously  and  that  it  would   not   be
unreasonable for his wife and children to go with him.

5. The legal provisions relevant to this case are to be found  in  Directive
2004/38/EC  (the  Citizenship  Directive),  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  and
Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 (now Regulation  492/2011).  We  set  these
out in Appendix A but would  flag  in  advance,  as  regards  the  2006  EEA
Regulations, that these were amended with effect from 16 July  2012  by  the
Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Amendment  Regulations  2012  SI  No.
1547. The amending regulations add a  new  regulation  15A,  part  of  whose
purpose was to give effect to the recognition by the Court of Justice  of  a
derived right of residence for primary carers of children  in  education  by
virtue of Article 12, Regulation 1612/68.


6. On 2 April 2012 Upper Tribunal Judge (UTJ)  Storey  found  that  the  FtT
judge had erred in  law  in  her  approach  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
appellant was a qualified person by virtue of his wife's recent  application
for and receipt of JSA.  The judge had discounted this  application  because
she considered  his  wife  had  made  it  solely  in  order  to  assist  the
appellant's appeal.  It was observed that the fact that this was her  motive
did not necessarily mean she  did  not  intend  to  work.   It  was  equally
consistent with her resolving that she had to work  in  order  to  help  her
husband's efforts to stay in the UK.  In EU law the focus has to be  not  on
a person's reasons for seeking work but whether  they  genuinely  intend  to
work (and have a genuine chance of working): see C-53/81  Levin  [1982]  ECR
1035.  Furthermore, it did not appear  that  the  FtT  judge,  in  assessing
whether the appellant's wife was genuinely intending to work, treated  as  a
relevant consideration the fact that she had previously  been  engaged  with
the labour market, having worked for two years and had then  not  gone  back
so that she could look after her children who were very  young.  UTJ  Storey
also  found  that  the  judge's  credibility   findings   were   flawed   by
inconsistent  findings  on  the  status  of  the  appellant's  relationship.
Despite appearing to accept that the  appellant  and  his  wife  were  in  a
genuine marriage (i.e. not a marriage of convenience) and had  two  children
together, the judge appeared to discount the  family  relationship  for  the
purposes of establishing that she was the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  by
reference to her view that "the marriage may be for the purpose of  enabling
the appellant to acquire the  right  to  reside  in  the  UK".  In  EU  free
movement law, once it is accepted a marriage is not one of convenience,  the
fact that one of its purposes may have been to assist one of the parties  to
acquire EU rights of residence is not relevant.  All that  matters  is  that
the relationship is a genuine  one  and  that  the  marriage  has  not  been
terminated: see Diatta v Land Berlin [1985] ECR 567.

7. Having set aside the judge's determination, UTJ  Storey  gave  directions
to the effect that the parties  address  their  minds  to  the  question  of
whether the appellant qualified as the family  member  of  an  EEA  national
exercising  Treaty  rights  by  virtue  of  his  wife's  current  situation.
Submissions were directed on whether she qualified  either  as  a  jobseeker
under regulation 6(1)(a) or a worker under regulation 6(1)(b).  In  relation
to regulation 6(1)(b) it was observed that jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of
Justice had made clear that  in  certain  circumstances  a  jobseeker  could
qualify as a worker: see Antonissen C-393/96 P(R) [1997] ECR 1-441.  It  was
noted that the re-making hearing would be before a  senior  panel  including
an Upper Tribunal Judge of the Administrative Appeals Chamber (AAC).

8. A hearing fixed for 19  June  2012  was  adjourned  because  contrary  to
directions no skeleton arguments had  been  produced  by  either  side,  and
because the appellant's solicitor, Mr Obi Nwokeji, had  been  taken  ill  at
short notice and was unable  to  attend  and  the  Tribunal  considered  the
appellant would  benefit  from  legal  representation.   On  the  same  date
directions were sent relating  to  skeleton  arguments,  relevant  case  law
(including previous decisions of the AAC) and a witness statement  from  the
appellant's wife.

9. A hearing fixed for 12 July 2012 was  also  adjourned  in  light  of  the
information that due to an intervening holiday  period  UKBA  had  not  been
able to complete consultations on the policy issues raised by the case  with
HM Revenue and Customs and the Department for Work  and  Pensions.   As  the
skeleton argument  produced  by  the  appellant's  representatives  did  not
properly address the legal issues identified in previous  directions,  fresh
directions were made requiring, inter alia, both parties to submit  skeleton
arguments specifically addressing the issues identified in the error of  law
decision of 2 April 2012.  In  order  to  ensure  that  the  respondent  was
making the promised progress in preparation of submissions, it was  directed
that there would be a further Case  Management  Review  ("CMR")  which  both
parties were expected to attend.   This  took  place  on  24  October  2012.
Despite notice  being  sent  to  both  parties,  no  one  appeared  for  the
appellant.

10. At this CMR hearing Mr Deller produced  a  skeleton  argument  which  he
confirmed   reflected   the   Secretary   of    State's    position    after
interdepartmental consultation.  At [7]-[8] this stated:

         "7.  Having reconsidered the position in light of the issues raised
             in this case, the  respondent  can  confirm  that  she  agrees
             that...it is accepted that someone who has come to the UK as a
             jobseeker, has obtained work,  becomes  unemployed,  and  then
             sought work again is a jobseeker within  the  meaning  of  the
             Directive and Article [sic] 6(1)(a) of the EEA Regulations.


         8.   On this interpretation Ms Mantezolo is potentially someone who
             is capable of being regarded as a jobseeker and the  appellant
             as her family member".


11. The skeleton argument went on to  state  that  the  respondent  did  not
accept, however, that the appellant's wife should have been  regarded  as  a
worker under regulation 6(1)(b), although adding that this  submission  "may
be somewhat academic in this  particular  case  given  that  the  respondent
accepts the possibility that Ms Mantezolo is a jobseeker".

12. Several days  prior  to  the  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives
requested an adjournment as Counsel who had had prior conduct  of  the  case
and was doing it on a pro bono basis (Ms Nmani) was unable to attend due  to
holiday commitments.  That  application  was  refused  by  UTJ  Gill  on  19
December 2012.  At the hearing Mr Jegede  renewed  the  application  for  an
adjournment  on  the  basis  that  it  had  not  proved  possible  to   find
alternative Counsel willing to do the case on the same pro  bono  basis  and
the solicitor who had conduct of  the  appellant's  case  (Mr  Nwokeji)  had
injured his ankle two days ago.  Mr Jegede said he was not in a position  to
deal  with  the  legal  issues  identified  by  the  Tribunal  in   previous
directions.  Discussion  then  took  place  with  the  parties  designed  to
clarify to  what  extent  the  appellant's  representatives  had  previously
complied with directions.  Several documents  were  produced  by  Mr  Jegede
including a "second witness statement" from Ms Mantezolo dated 5  July  2012
exhibiting copies of her JSA records detailing her  attempts  to  find  work
between 17 May 2012 and 4 July 2012; a "third witness  statement"  from  her
dated 20 December 2012 exhibiting further JSA records covering the period  2
July to 23 November 2012; and an e-mail from a restaurant inviting  her  for
an interview on 20 December 2012.

13. Despite notice of the  hearing  being  sent  on  30  November  2012,  no
request for  an  adjournment  was  made  until  18  December  2012.   Having
considered the matter we decided  to  refuse  the  renewed  request  for  an
adjournment.  This is  a  case  which  had  already  been  adjourned  twice.
Whilst on  the  second  occasion  the  reason  was  in  order  to  give  the
respondent more time to complete interdepartmental policy consultations,  on
the first occasion the appellant's  representatives  (like  the  respondent)
had failed to submit a skeleton argument as directed and it was only  learnt
that the appellant's solicitor would not be  attending  (because  of  sudden
illness) as a result of an inquiry from  Tribunal  Administration.  Although
the appellant's  representatives  had  complied  with  an  initial  Tribunal
direction to furnish a skeleton argument,  they  had  not  complied  with  a
further direction for a more specific skeleton.

14. When the case had been set down for  a  hearing  on  19  June  2012  the
appellant attended and was ready to proceed.  Even  giving  the  appellant's
representatives the benefit of the doubt in  relation  to  their  claims  to
have sent certain documents to the Tribunal in compliance  with  directions,
it was clear that there had not been full  compliance  with  directions  and
that two previous applications for an adjournment had been  made  very  late
in the day.

15. We also considered it necessary to take stock of the fact that,  at  all
events, we  did  now  have  two  skeleton  arguments  from  the  appellant's
representatives and that in addition, a central  legal  issue  on  which  we
sought submissions, concerning the meaning of regulation 6 of the  2006  EEA
Regulations,  has  been  the  subject  of  a  specific  concession  by   the
respondent.

16. A further factor of relevance was that although submitted very  late  in
the day we now had very full documentary evidence  from  the  appellant  and
his wife relating to her work, maternity and jobseeking  history.   Although
insistent that he could not assist with any  legal  submissions,  Mr  Jegede
confirmed he was able and ready to assist with examination-in-chief and  any
necessary re-examination of the  only  witness  it  was  proposed  to  call,
namely Ms Mantezolo.

17. We then heard from Ms  Mantezolo  who  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  her
witness statements of 5 July and 20 December 2012.  She  confirmed  she  was
looking for full-time work.  She confirmed she was still receiving  JSA  and
that it had been paid to her continuously since April 2012.   She  confirmed
that her JSA records logging her efforts to find  work  were  genuine.   She
had taken the advice of her Job Centre and applied for a wide range of  jobs
not just in retail; she was willing to work in a warehouse.  She  said  that
she had had her interview for a job at  a  restaurant  the  day  before  the
hearing and had been told she would hear whether she  had  got  the  job  in
several days. (Subsequently we received confirmation that she had  not  been
contacted  within  that  time  and  emails  she  had  sent  to  HR  and  the
recruitment  consultant  who  had  arranged  the  interview  had  not   been
responded to).  Prior to that she had only been asked to go  for  one  other
job interview, in September 2012. That was for a job at  Tesco.   She  could
not say what view her interviewers on either occasion  had  of  her  written
application.  At her previous employers (Peacocks) she had  worked  both  in
the stockroom and  in  the  shop.   She  had  never  asked  Peacocks  for  a
reference.  In order to  increase  her  suitability  to  employers  she  had
started an ESOL Entry 2 course at Trinity College  in  September  2011,  but
she did not complete this as she had to stop when she had her second  child.
 She had applied to resume it in September 2012 but they never got  back  to
her.  She did not follow the matter up because she did not think that  would
help.  She believed she had sufficient command  of  English  to  communicate
well enough to do the jobs she had applied for.

18. We then heard submissions.  As forewarned, Mr  Jegede  confined  himself
to the state of the evidence.  He asked the  Tribunal  to  accept  that  the
appellant's wife had demonstrated that she had been  genuinely  looking  for
work since April 2012.  As regards whether  she  had  a  genuine  chance  of
finding work, he asked us to consider that a combination of  her  time  away
from the labour market (four years) and the  difficult  economic  conditions
had hampered efforts to find work.  The fact that she had been  invited  for
two interviews in the past three months showed that she  continued  to  have
realistic prospects.  Although she had not completed the  ESOL  course,  she
had obtained one level of it and in any event  it  was  not  her  fault  the
organisers had not got back  to  her.   As  regards  the  legal  issues,  he
referred us to the two skeleton arguments previously submitted.

19. In those skeleton arguments, dated 27 and 28 June respectively,  counsel
for the appellant submitted that his appeal stood to be allowed because  his
wife qualified both as a jobseeker under regulation 6(1)(a) of the 2006  EEA
Regulations and also as a worker under regulation 6(1)(b) on  the  authority
of Antonissen and also of AG  &  Others  (EEA  -  jobseeker  self-sufficient
person proof) Germany [2007] UKAIT 00075.  It  was  also  submitted  in  the
second skeleton that the appellant's wife should be regarded as someone  who
had acquired the status of worker in 2008 and had not lost  it  because  she
had decided to look after her  new-born  children.   A  woman  on  maternity
leave is still an employee and  retains  that  status  as  long  as  she  is
temporarily involuntarily unable to  work.   To  decide  otherwise,  it  was
submitted, would be to discriminate against female  workers.   The  decision
of the Social Security Commissioner in  CIS/519/2007 was  cited  in  support
as was the Court of Justice case of Hoekstra (nee Unger) Case  76/63  [1964]
ECR 177, which held that EU law protected not only the "present worker"  but
also "one who having left his job, is capable of  taking  another".  It  was
submitted that the appellant's case was distinguishable from JS v  Secretary
of State for Work and Pensions [2012] EWCA Civ 806, as the claimant in  that
case was an agency worker who did  not  have  a  specific  employer-employee
relationship and had not been looking for work from the  date  of  her  last
agency assignment until the claim for income support was made. It  was  also
submitted that notwithstanding the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
error of law decision (that the FtT judge  had  not  erred  in  law  in  her
assessment that the appellant could not succeed on Article 8  grounds),  the
appellant stood to succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds, particularly in  light
of the UK's obligations under  s.55  of  the  UK  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Nationality Act 2009 as interpreted by the Supreme Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
[2011] UKSC 4.

20. In submissions on behalf of the  respondent  Mr  Deller  said  that  the
respondent accepted that  the  FtT  had  materially  erred  in  law  in  its
approach to the motives of the appellant in marrying and  pursuing  his  EEA
application.  The respondent now accepted that the appellant  and  his  wife
were in a subsisting relationship and had two children.

21. Mr Deller also pointed to the terms of the concession as set out in  the
respondent's skeleton argument prepared for the 24 October  CMR  (see  above
[10]). This, he said, had narrowed the legal  issues  originally  identified
as being raised by the appellant's  case.   The  respondent  maintained  her
position  that  the  appellant's  wife  could  not  be  considered  to  have
continued to be a "worker", notwithstanding that  her  purpose  in  stopping
work was to look after children.  As regards whether she was a  "jobseeker",
however, it was now accepted  that  she  was  not  precluded  as  such  from
qualifying under regulation 6(1)(a)  by  virtue  of  being  a  "second-time"
jobseeker.  The  only  issue,  so  far  as  the  respondent  was  concerned,
therefore, was whether the  appellant's  wife  actually  (rather  than  just
potentially) met the requirements set out in the jurisprudence of the  Court
of  Justice  relating  to  jobseekers.   By  virtue  of   s.85(4)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  to
decide the appellant's wife's position at the date of hearing.  In  essence,
the case of Antonissen had  established  a  two-fold  test  which  had  been
incorporated into regulation 6(1)(a).  A person had to show  (1)  that  they
were genuinely seeking work; and (2) that they had (or continued to have)  a
genuine chance of obtaining employment.  Antonissen  also  made  clear  that
application of this test had to take account of all the circumstances.  Even
though six months was a rough indicator of  the  period  during  which  work
should have been found, there was no hard and fast rule.  On  the  basis  of
the evidence now to hand, the respondent was prepared  to  accept  that  the
appellant had shown she met (1) - because since April 2012 she had been  and
continued to be genuinely seeking work.  However,  the  respondent  did  not
consider she continued to meet (2), given that after a  lengthy  period  out
of the labour market she had now been  looking  for  work  for  nearly  nine
months, she had never requested her former employer to furnish  her  with  a
reference and she accepted  that  she  had  made  only  limited  efforts  to
improve her English language skills so as to make her more employable.

22. As regards  the  potential  application  of  Article  12  of  Regulation
1612/68,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant's  wife  had  been
employed in the UK (between 2006 and 2008/9, completing maternity  leave  in
June 2009), that he was a joint primary carer of their children and that  it
did not matter that her eldest child had begun the  education  on  which  it
was sought to rely  at  a  time  when  she  was  no  longer  in  employment.
However, she considered that the matter of  whether  the  eldest  child,  by
virtue of (as had become apparent in  evidence)  now  being  enrolled  in  a
reception class at a maintained primary school in a London Borough, met  the
requirements of either the revised 2006 EEA Regulation (at  regulation  15A)
or the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice dealing  with  Article  12  was
for the Tribunal to decide.

23. At the end of the hearing we gave directions permitting the  appellant's
representatives further time in which to inform us of  the  outcome  of  the
appellant's wife's job interview (see [17]).

24. Subsequent to the hearing we decided it was necessary  to  give  further
directions which we did on 8  February  2013.  In  these  we  expressed  our
provisional view that the appellant's wife could not show she has a  genuine
chance of being employed and  so  his  appeal  would  fail  unless  we  were
satisfied that she - and the appellant through her -  had  a  derived  right
resulting from the enrolment of their eldest son in the reception class.  We
informed the parties that in seeking to address the  latter  issue,  we  had
undertaken some research and it was thus necessary to  apprise  the  parties
of that; to convey the views we presently held on this issue  in  the  light
of that research; and to afford the parties an  opportunity  to  respond  to
this research and our provisional views. In summary we set out  that in  our
 view the appellant could not bring  himself within regulation  15A  because
his eldest son's reception class enrolment was  "nursery  education"  within
the meaning of regulation 15A(6)(a), which was  a  specified  exclusion.  We
asked the parties whether they agreed or disagreed with that view.  We  also
stated that, assuming we  remained  unpersuaded  that  the  appellant  could
succeed under regulation 15A, we wished to know the view of the  parties  on
whether we should consider making an order for reference  to  the  Court  of
Justice of the European Union on the basis that regulation 15A  may  not  be
consistent with what Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 requires.

25. The appellant's response  stated that the circumstances of a child in  a
reception class of  a  primary  school  receiving  structured  education  is
obviously  different  from  a  child  who  is  not  receiving  a  structured
education and is not being taught in line with the  Early  Years  Foundation
Stage.  As  regards  the  jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of   Justice,   the
appellant's representatives considered  (like  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  its
stated provisional view) that the Court, having already  rejected  an  upper
age limit in Gaal Case C-7/94 [1996] ECR, was unlikely  to  impose  a  lower
age  limit.  It  was  also  considered  that,  in  light  of   the   Court's
observations in Echternach and Moritz Cases 389  &  390/87  [1989]  ECR  723
[1990] 2 CMLR 305, the Court would conclude  that  all  forms  of  education
with no lower age limit, particularly in the case of a child in a  reception
class receiving  structured  education,  would  be  within  the  purview  of
Article 12. At [10] it was stated:

    "10. It is submitted that the restrictions imposed  by  Regulation  15A
    are inconsistent with and at odds with the purpose, context  and  broad
    approach of Article 12  and  therefore  the  Appellant  should  have  a
    derivative right to reside".

26. It was added that if the Upper Tribunal was unpersuaded by the  approach
of the Court of Justice in previous cases on broadly the  same  issue,  then
it may be appropriate for it to refer the questions posed to the  Luxembourg
Court.

27. In her further response,  the  respondent  stated  that  Article  12  of
Regulation 1612/68 exists to ensure  that  a  child  of  a  worker  has  the
possibility of going to school but it was consistent with the  jurisprudence
on this provision to include reception class education as schooling. It  was
stated that:

    "In this case the Secretary of State accepts that the appellant's child
    has been admitted to one of the  state's  general  educational  courses
    within the meaning of Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68."

28. As to the implications of this reading of Article 12 for  interpretation
of regulation 15A, the respondent's response stated that the  obligation  to
interpret the Regulations in accordance with EU law  and  the  operation  of
direct  effect  meant  that  "nursery  education"  should  not  be  read  as
including reception class enrolment. At [11] it was stated that:

    "...it was never the intention of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    definition of education at regulation 15A  ...should  exclude  children
    attending the reception class of a primary school prior  to  compulsory
    school age who will be  following  an  identical  curriculum  to  their
    classmates who have already attained school age. "

29. And at [17]:

    "...
    The definition of education  in  the  regulations  can  and  should  be
    interpreted in accordance with  EU  law  to  include  attendance  in  a
    reception class prior to compulsory school age as a matter of fact  and
    that, even if that is not accepted, given that the rights  in  question
    are directly effective as a matter of EU law they [can]  be  relied  on
    whether or not the regulations technically make adequate  provision  in
    that regard."

30. Accordingly:

    "The Respondent considers that a reference is not necessary,  as  there
    is no dispute that the reference to education in  the  regulations  dos
    not and should not exclude the appellant's son  based  on  the  correct
    application of Article 12..."

Our Assessment

The issue of whether the appellant's wife continued to  be  a  worker  after
ceasing work in order to look after children

31. In consequence of the error of law decision one of the issues  on  which
submissions  were  invited  was  whether  the  appellant's  wife  could   be
considered to have continued  to  hold  the  status  of  worker  in  EU  law
notwithstanding that she had  given  up  work  in  order  to  care  for  her
children.  Having reviewed the respective  arguments,  we  consider  we  are
bound by higher court authority to find that the appellant's wife  lost  the
status of worker  she  had  acquired  in  2006  around  the  time  when  her
maternity leave ended on 1 June 2009.  It was around that date that she  and
her husband decided she would not return to work because she wanted to  look
after her children.  That caring for her children was  the  reason  for  not
returning to work in 2010 was expressly confirmed by  the  appellant's  wife
in her witness statement dated 17 June 2011.


32. The question of whether a woman who leaves the  labour  market  to  look
after children remains a worker was addressed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions v Dias [2009]  EWCA  Civ  807.   If
any doubt as to the binding effect of the Court's  judgment  on  this  issue
was thought to have been created by the fact that the Court of  Appeal  made
an  order  for  reference  (albeit  on  a  different   matter),   this   was
comprehensively dispelled by its subsequent decision in JS  v  Secretary  of
State for Work and Pensions  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  806.  At  [13]-[14]  Stanley
Burnton LJ said this:-


         "13.     In my judgment, the propositions set out in  paragraph  21
             of the judgment in Dias are the ratio of the decision, and are
             binding on us. In any event, I agree with them. It is implicit
             in Article 7.3 that a person who ceases to  work  for  reasons
             other than those set out in its sub-paragraphs ceases to be  a
             worker. It would be inconsistent with the  provisions  of  the
             Directive to hold that a woman who ceases work because she  is
             pregnant retains the status of a worker,  since  pregnancy  is
             not an illness, and it is common ground  that  the  disability
             that results from pregnancy does not result from  an  accident
             within the meaning of Article 7.3. Illness during pregnancy is
             of course different. To hold that  the  status  of  worker  is
             retained  during  pregnancy  would  be  illegitimate  judicial
             legislation,  amending  Article  7.3(a)   by   inserting   "or
             pregnancy". Moreover, the effect of  the  insertion  would  be
             uncertain: for how long before and after the expected date  of
             delivery would the status of worker be retained?


         14.  My view of the correctness of the judgment of  this  Court  in
             Dias on the interpretation of  the  Citizenship  Directive  is
             supported by the comment of Advocate General Trstenjak in  her
             opinion on the reference made by this Court on other issues in
             that case. She said:


                  '68.     Ms Dias' period of residence in period 3 would be
                      legal residence within the meaning of  Article  16(1)
                      of Directive 2004/38 if she had also been a worker in
                      that period. The referring court held that not to  be
                      the case and in that regard did not refer a  question
                      for a preliminary ruling.


                  69.      The referring court's conclusion that Ms Dias was
                      not a worker in period 3 appears to be in  conformity
                      with the case-law of the  Court.  According  to  that
                      case-law, once the employment relationship has ended,
                      the status of worker is as a rule lost. (Case C-43/99
                      Leclere [2001]  ECR  I-4265,  paragraph  55.)  It  is
                      apparent from the order for reference that  Ms  Dias'
                      employment relationship ended when  period  3  began,
                      that is when she decided following  the  end  of  her
                      maternity leave to continue to care for her  son  and
                      not  to  go  back  to  her  job.  Ms   Dias   thereby
                      voluntarily lost her status of worker as such.


                  70.      ...


                  71.      Ms Dias can also not base her status of worker on
                      provisions of secondary law. Admittedly, Article 7(1)
                      of Directive  68/360  (See  now  Article  7(3)(b)  of
                      Directive 2004/38/EC) provides that persons  who  are
                      not workers within the meaning of that  term  are  in
                      certain circumstances to be assimilated to  them.  It
                      makes such provision however  only  for  persons  who
                      became unemployed involuntarily and not, on the other
                      hand, for those in voluntary unemployment.'"


33. We are aware that when JS  went  on  further  appeal  as  Saint  Prix  v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, [2012] UKSC 49, the Supreme  Court
made an order for reference, stating at [21] that:

         "21. The Supreme Court is not persuaded that  the  case  of  either
             side is acte clair.  We believe it likely that the Council and
             Parliament did think, when enacting the Citizenship Directive,
             that the Directive was codifying the law  as  it  then  stood.
             But we are not persuaded that in doing so  it  was  precluding
             further  elaboration  of  the  concept  of  'worker'  to   fit
             situations as yet not envisaged.  The Court has developed  the
             concept of EU citizenship  in  a  number  of  ways:  see,  for
             example, Collins v Secretary of State for  Work  and  Pensions
             [2004] ECR 1-2703.  We are further  conscious  that  pregnancy
             and the immediate aftermath of childbirth are a special  case.
             Equal treatment of men and women is one  of  the  foundational
             principles of EU law.  Only women can become pregnant and bear
             children.  Thus in this respect they  cannot  be  compared  to
             men.   Pregnancy  is  not  to  be  equated  with  illness   or
             disability.  But unless special account is taken of  pregnancy
             and childbirth, women will suffer comparative disadvantage  in
             the workplace.  There are also  good  reasons  in  health  and
             social policy for allowing women to take a  reasonable  period
             of maternity leave without losing the advantages  attached  to
             their status as workers.  This is different from  leaving  the
             workforce in order to look after children.  Both men and women
             may do this and there is no  sex  discrimination  involved  in
             denying them both the status of worker for the time being.  We
             do not see the sex  discrimination  argument  as  invalidating
             Article 7, but as indicating that it would be consistent  with
             the fundamental general principles of EU law for the Court  to
             develop the  concept  of  'worker'  to  meet  this  particular
             situation.


         22.  Hence we refer the following questions to the CJEU:


             1.   Is the right of residence conferred upon  a  'worker'  in
                  Article 7 of the Citizenship Directive to  be  interpreted
                  as applying only to those (i) in  an  existing  employment
                  relationship,  (ii)  (at  least  in  some   circumstances)
                  seeking work,  or  (iii)  covered  by  the  extensions  in
                  article 7(3), or is the Article to be interpreted  as  not
                  precluding the recognition of further persons  who  remain
                  'workers' for this purpose?


             2. (i)   If  the  latter,  does  it  extend  to  a  woman  who
                   reasonably gives up work, or seeking work, because of the
                   physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy (and
                   the aftermath of childbirth)?


               (ii)    If so, is she entitled to the benefit of the national
                   law's definition of when it is reasonable for her  to  do
                   so?"


34. We do not consider that the terms of this  reference  afford  any  basis
for doubting the authority of the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Dias  in
regard to the issue of whether giving up work to look after children  brings
the status of worker in EU law to an end.  In [22] the Supreme  Court  makes
very clear that its questions  about  retention  of  worker  status  do  not
extend to the "different" issue of "leaving the workforce in order  to  look
after children". The only  maternity-related  question  it  poses  (question
2(i)) is confined to the situation of a woman who reasonably gives up  work,
or seeking work, "because of the physical constraints of the late stages  of
pregnancy (and the aftermath of childbirth)".



The issue of the meaning of "jobseeker" within regulation 6 of the 2006  EEA
    Regulations.

35. The issue identified as being central  to  the  Tribunal's  continuation
hearing  concerned  whether  the  appellant's  wife   was   precluded   from
qualifying as a jobseeker by the terms of regulation 6(4) which state that:

         "(4)     For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker"  means  a
             person  who  enters  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  seek
             employment  and  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
             employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged."


36.  The  question  the  Tribunal  posed  in  directions  was  whether  this
definition precluded a person who was a "second-time" jobseeker such as  the
appellant's wife.

37. That question was posed against the backdrop  of  somewhat  inconclusive
case law dealing with this issue. It may  assist  to  differentiate  between
three different dimensions to the case law:  A.  The  jurisprudence  of  the
Court of Justice prior  to  enactment  of  the  "Citizenship  Directive;  B.
Relevant provisions of this Directive; and C. subsequent  Court  of  Justice
and related case law. (Where relevant we shall  include  domestic  case  law
seeking to apply the  relevant  principles  set  out  in  Court  of  Justice
cases.)

    A.   Prior Court of Justice case law


38. Confining ourselves to Court of Justice jurisprudence dealing with
workers and job seekers, it is clear that:

          i) Under Article 45 (ex Article 39) the term 'worker' covers,  to
             a greater or lesser extent, not only actual workers but (those
             whom  we  shall  refer  to  as)   "first-time"   job   seekers
             (Antonissen) as well as those who have had a job and are again
             seeking work, i.e. (those whom we shall refer to as)  "second-
             time job seekers (Case 75/63 Hoekstra (nee Unger)  [1964]  ECR
             177,  Case  66/85  Lawrie-Blum  [1986]  ECR  2121,  Bernini  v
             Minister van Onderwijs en  Wetenschappen  [1992]  ECR  I-1071,
             Case C-85/96 Martinez Sala v Freistaat Bayern  [1998]  ECR  I-
             2691); vocational or occupational  trainees  (Lair  v  Hanover
             University [1988]  ECR  3161,  [1989]  3  CMLR  545,  Brown  v
             Secretary of State for Scotland [1988] ECR 3205 [1988] 3  CMLR
             403);  the involuntarily unemployed  and sick (Lair,  Case  C-
             302/90 Caisse Auxiliare d'Assurance Maladie-Invalidite v  Faux
             [1991] ECR I-4875); as well as injured and retired workers.


         ii) As regards jobseekers, the amount of time  given  to  them  to
             find work is not fixed although Member States may require them
             to leave their territory after a reasonable period unless  the
             person concerned produces evidence  (1)  that  he  or  she  is
             continuing to seek employment; and (2) has genuine chances  of
             being employed (Antonissen; EC Commission v  Belgium  Case  C-
             344/95 [1997] 2 CMLR 187).




39. So far as  jobseekers  are  concerned,  it  would  also  seem  at  least
arguable that  the  Antonissen  principles  cover  any  kind  of  jobseeker,
including (i)  the  "first-time  jobseeker"  as  just  described;  (ii)  the
"second-time jobseeker" as identified  in  Hoekstra  and  other  cases;  and
(iii) a person who did not enter the host Member  State  in  order  to  seek
employment but who after having been  admitted  seeks  employment.  We  base
this view on [13] and [16] of the Court of Justice judgment  in  Antonissen,
where the Court stated that freedom of  movement  for  workers  entails  the
right for nationals of Member States to move freely within the territory  of
other  Member  States  and  to  stay  there  for  the  purposes  of  seeking
employment. At [16] the Court added that "[t]he effectiveness of Article  48
is secured in so far as  Community  legislation  or,  in  its  absence,  the
legislation of a Member State gives persons concerned a reasonable  time  in
which  to  apprise  themselves,  in  the  territory  of  the  Member   State
concerned, of offers  of  employment  corresponding  to  their  occupational
qualifications and to take, where appropriate, the necessary steps in  order
to be engaged." Although Antonissen himself was  a  "first-time"  jobseeker,
in neither of these paragraphs did the Court  restrict  its  enunciation  of
principles to first-time jobseekers.

40. The view we express here is consistent  with  that  expressed  by  Upper
Tribunal Judge Jacobs in the Administrative Appeals Chamber in  [2009]  UKUT
35 (AAC) [21] and by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  in
RP (EEA Regs - worker - cessation) Italy  [2006]  UKAIT  00025  and  AG  and
others (EEA-jobseeker-self-sufficient  person-proof)  Germany  [2007]  UKAIT
00075.

    B. Directive.

41. The next dimension concerns the scope  of  the  Citizenship  Directive's
codification of measures recognising the situation of workers  who  are  not
in work.

42. Article 7(3) identifies four sets of circumstances  in  which  a  person
who has been a worker (or self-employed person) retains that status:


         "For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who is no
         longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the status of
         worker or self-employed person in the following circumstances:


         (a)  he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of an
             illness or accident;


         (b)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
             having been employed for more than one year and has registered
             as a job-seeker with the relevant employment office;


         (c)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
             completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than a
             year or after having become involuntarily unemployed during
             the first twelve months and has registered as a job-seeker
             with the relevant employment office. In this case the status
             of worker shall be retained for no less than six months;


         (d)  he/she embarks on vocational training. Unless he/she is
             involuntarily unemployed, the retention of the status of
             worker shall require the training to be related to the
             previous employment."
Article 7(3)(a)
43.As regards the meaning of Article 7(3)(a) and the corresponding  domestic
provision, regulation 6(2)(a), the Court  of  Appeal  in  Samin  v  City  of
Westminster [2012] EWCA Civ 1468 (per Hughes  LJ)  reviewed  both  Court  of
Justice  case  law  (the  case  of  C-482/01  Orfanopolous  v  Land   Baden-
Wurttemberg [2005] 1 CMLR 18 in particular) and domestic case  law  (SSHD  v
FMB [2010] UKUT 447,  De Brito v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  709  and  Konodyba  v
Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea [2012] EWCA Civ 982) and  concluded,
inter alia, at [30] that the Luxembourg jurisprudence was:
     "entirely consistent with the approach [in the English  cases],  which
    is that it is normally sensible to ask whether  there  is  a  realistic
    prospect of the individual returning to work. Although Mr Carter  would
    have us substitute the question whether there is "any  chance"  of  his
    doing so, he did  not  contend  that  any  chance,  however  remote  or
    improbable, would suffice, nor that a worker remains temporarily unable
    to work until all possibility of a return to work has been eliminated".

Article 7(3)(b) and (c)

44. We are not aware of  any  higher  court  authority  on  the  meaning  of
Article 7(3)(b) and (c) in particular (save for Secretary of State for  Work
and Pensions v Elmi [2011] EWCA Civ 1403, which deals with  the  meaning  of
"...registered with the relevant employment office" within  the  meaning  of
Article 7(3)(c)),  but in our view they seek to identify when worker  status
can be retained in the circumstances  of  involuntary  unemployment  on  the
part of someone who is a "jobseeker". To fall  within  Article  7(3)(b)  one
must be someone who is unemployed having previously been employed and it  is
necessary also to have been employed for more than one year.  This  reflects
the approach of the Court of Justice that prior connection with  the  labour
market should make it more difficult to  lose  the  status  of  worker  upon
unemployment. Article 7(3) (c) is  restricted  to  "second-time"  jobseekers
with less than 12 months. It guarantees retention  for  "no  less  than  six
months".

45. It would appear from the above that  Article  7(3)(b)  and  (c)  of  the
Directive do not fully incorporate the principles laid down  in  Antonissen.
They do not deal with the situation of the  "first-time"  jobseeker  despite
Antonissen's case clearly falling within  that  category.  The  approach  to
time limits is also different. Whereas the Court  in  Antonissen  left  open
the possibility of retention of worker status beyond six months and  refused
to fix a time limit, Article 7(3)(b) and (c) both fix time limits. As  noted
by the Upper Tribunal AAC in IA v SSWP [2009] UKUT 35(AAC) at [23]:

    "The six months' limit  in  Article  7(3)(c)  and  the  prohibition  on
    expulsion in Article 14(4)(b) reflect the [Luxembourg]  Court's  answer
    in Antonissen,  but  the  Directive  does  not  translate  the  Court's
    reasoning in that case into a right to reside for those [who]  are  not
    in the labour market".

46. Further, although the scope of Article 7(3)(b) and (c)  is  confined  to
subcategories  of  "second-time"  jobseekers,  elsewhere  in  the  Directive
itself, at Article 14(4) second  indent,  albeit  only  in  the  context  of
protection against expulsion, the wording clearly has in  mind  "first-time"
jobseekers (at least in the historic sense): "[those who have]  entered  the
territory of the host Member State in order to seek  employment".   We  have
already noted the seeming  intent  in  recital  (9)  to  preserve  the  more
favourable treatment applicable to jobseekers as recognised by the case  law
of the Court of Justice".


47. Turning  to  the  wording  of  regulation  6(1)(a),  with  reference  to
regulation 6(4) in particular, one finds a  contrasting  state  of  affairs.
Whereas Article 7(3)(b) and (c) are confined to  subcategories  of  "second-
time" jobseekers, regulation 6(1)(a) read together with regulation  6(4)  is
confined to "first-time" jobseekers. Just as it is exceedingly difficult  to
construe Article 7(3)(b) and (c) to encompass  "first-time"  jobseekers,  so
it is just as difficult to construe regulation 6(1)(a)/6(4) as  encompassing
"second-time" jobseekers. Both sets of provisions appear not to reflect  the
Antonissen line of jurisprudence which  encompasses  both  "first-time"  and
"second-time" jobseekers  without  specifying  fixed  time  restrictions  on
either.

48. Further, Article 7(3)(b) does not appear  on  its  face  to  contain  an
Antonissen test. It simply requires that, for a person to retain the  status
of worker that: "he/she is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment  after
having been employed for  more  than  one  year  and  has  registered  as  a
jobseeker with the relevant employment office".

    C. Subsequent case law

49. As noted earlier, in JS v Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions
[2011] EWCA Civ 806 Stanley Burnton LJ was emphatic that  Article  7(3)  was
to be read as an exhaustive codification of the jurisprudence of  the  Court
of Justice dealing with those who can retain the status of worker even  when
not working: see [13]-[16]. Subsequently, however, on appeal in  Saint  Prix
v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions  [2012]  UKSC  49,   the  Supreme
Court was faced with  a  submission  by  the  Secretary  of  State  -   that
'worker' in Article 7(1) should be taken to have the  meaning  that  it  had
acquired in 2004 and  that Article 7(3) is an exhaustive list of the  people
who then fell outside that meaning but were nevertheless to  be  treated  as
if they were workers ([15]) -  and a submission from the claimant  with  the
support of the AIRE Centre to the  contrary.  In  face  of  these  competing
submissions, the Supreme Court decided at [21] that the matter was not  acte
clair and its first  question in its order for reference  to  the  Court  of
Justice at [22] directly poses this question: :


         "1.  Is the right of residence conferred upon a 'worker' in Article
             7 of the Citizenship Directive to be interpreted  as  applying
             only to those (i) in an existing employment relationship, (ii)
             (at least  in  some  circumstances)  seeking  work,  or  (iii)
             covered by the extensions in article 7(3), or is  the  Article
             to be interpreted as not precluding the recognition of further
             persons who remain 'workers' for this purpose?"

50. We consider ourselves bound by the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  to
regard the issue as not, at least in some respects, acte clair and, were  it
not for two matters to which we shall turn next which  render  it  academic,
we might have adjourned our case to  await  the  outcome  of  the  Court  of
Justice deliberations.

The  concession  regarding  regulation  6(1)(a)/6(4)   of   the   2006   EEA
Regulations

51. The first matter in point is this.  In  the  course  of  this  case  the
respondent had made a concession in very clear terms: see  above  [10].   It
is stated with reference to regulation 6(1)(a) of the 2006  EEA  Regulations
that the fact that a person has previously been a  jobseeker  and  then  got
employment will not disqualify him or her from being a "jobseeker" if he  or
she ceases their employment and  becomes  a  jobseeker  again.  It  is  also
stated that the respondent  accepts that it  follows  that  the  appellant's
wife  can potentially meet the requirements of regulation 6(4) and all  that
is in issue is whether the facts of his case enable  her  actually  to  meet
them. The respondent has not set out  her  reasons  for  arriving  at  these
conclusions  although  Mr  Deller  has  confirmed  it  was  the  result   of
interdepartmental agreement. Article 37  of  the  Directive  permits  Member
States to make more generous  provisions  in  their  relevant  national  law
whether in the form of "laws,  regulations  or  administrative  provisions".
So, even if the respondent's  interpretation  were  considered  to  be  more
generous than that correctly to be given as a matter of law to regulation  6
or Article 7(3), we are entitled to treat this concession as  acceptance  by
the respondent of her policy to regard  regulation  6(1)(a)  as  capable  of
being satisfied by persons who are second-time jobseekers without regard  to
any specific time limit.

52.  Accordingly,  we  must  approach  this  case  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant's wife's previous experience as a jobseeker being  brought  to  an
end when she became employed does not preclude her from  being  accepted  by
the Secretary of State as potentially qualifying  under  regulation  6(1)(a)
of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

53. This brings us to the second matter. Even though  the  appellant's  wife
being a "second-time" jobseeker does not  preclude  her  in  this  way  from
being accepted by the respondent as coming  within  the  personal  scope  of
regulation 6(1)(a), it remains to consider  whether  she  met  the  material
criteria as set out in regulation 6(4). It is common ground that  regulation
6(4) essentially  reflects  the  two-pronged  Antonissen  criteria  outlined
earlier.

54. In submissions Mr Deller has accepted that since April  2012,  when  the
appellant's wife  applied  for  and  was  granted  JSA,  she  has  been  and
continues to be genuinely seeking work and so meets the first  limb  of  the
regulation 6(4)/Antonissen test.  In our view that was a sensible   response
to the detailed evidence  of  the  JSA  record  of  the  appellant's  wife's
searches for employment  which  showed  her  making  regular   and  frequent
attempts to find a job.

55. We are not persuaded, however, that the appellant's wife can be said  to
meet the second limb of regulation 6(4)/the Antonissen test, which  requires
an applicant to still have a genuine chance of finding  employment.   Whilst
we recognise that prior to giving birth to her first and  second  child  the
appellant's wife had been employed for over two years  continuously  and  so
had established a connection with the labour market, the fact  remains  that
she has stayed out of the labour market for nearly four years (between  June
2009 and the present), that she has never sought to  approach  her  previous
employers for a job reference (even though  saying  she  had  no  reason  to
think  they  would  not  give  her  a  good  reference)  and  that,  despite
recognising that  completing  and  obtaining  an  ESOL  qualification  would
increase her suitability for employment, she had  not  taken  any  steps  to
follow up the ESOL course organisers' lack  of  response.   The  appellant's
wife  has  not  suggested  there  have  been  or  are   any   health-related
difficulties  impeding  her  search  for  work.   Whilst  we  recognise  the
difficult economic climate, we are not aware that over the past nine  months
employers in Greater London, where the appellant and  his  wife  live,  have
not  been  recruiting  for  the  sorts  of  jobs  for  which  she  would  be
employable.  Yet she has only been asked to attend a job  interview  on  two
occasions, neither of which  proved  successful.  We  take  no  pleasure  in
pointing out the appellant's wife's lack of success but we have to  evaluate
it as part of the factual inquiry we are obliged to make.  In our  view  the
evidence in the round does not show that as at the  date  of  hearing  there
was any longer a genuine chance of her being employed.

56. The conclusion we draw is that the appellant's wife  does  not  meet  an
essential requirements of regulation 6(1)(a) and 6(4). Nor, on the basis  of
our finding that as at the date of hearing  she  no  longer  had  a  genuine
chance of being employed, does she meet the requirements of  either  Article
7(3))(b) or the jurisprudence of the Court  of  Justice  in  Antonissen  and
related cases.

Zambrano

57. In submissions  made  at  the  error  of  law  hearing  the  appellant's
representatives sought to rely on Case C-34/09 Zambrano [2011] All  ER  (EC)
491.  In his decision of April 2012 UTJ Storey held that no basis  had  been
shown for considering that the decision to refuse the appellant a  residence
permit in the UK would prevent  his  children  exercising  their  rights  as
Union citizens in France, the country of which they and  their  mothers  are
nationals.  In the  light  of  Court  of  Justice  case  law  subsequent  to
Zambrano  -  Dereci [2011] All ER (EC) 373, McCarthy v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2011] All ER (EC) 729, Case C-40/11  Lida  v  Stadt
Ulm [2012] ECR 1-0000 and  Cases  C-356/11  and  C-357/11  O,  S  and  L,  6
December 2012 - we consider that  it  is  now  even  clearer  that  Zambrano
principles only assist in exceptional circumstances and  require  it  to  be
shown that the refusal decision would effectively cause  the  third  country
national carer of Union citizen children to leave not just the  host  Member
State but the territory of the Union and  thereby  deny  the  Union  citizen
child  the  effective  enjoyment  of  their  substantive  rights  as   Union
citizens.  The evidence in this case falls well short of  demonstrating  any
such thing.

Regulation  15A  and  Article  12,  Regulation  1612/68  (now  Article   10,
    Regulation 492/2011)

58.  We  deal  first  with  the  question  of  whether  this  new   domestic
regulation, regulation 15A of the  2006  EEA  Regulations,  can  assist  the
appellant.

Regulation 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations

59. As already noted,  in  further  directions  we  asked  the  parties  two
questions: (a) whether the expression "nursery education" in regulation  15A
of the 2006 EEA Regulations applies to a child in the reception class  of  a
state primary school; and (b) whether or not it  would  be  appropriate  for
the Upper Tribunal to make a reference  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
European Union in order to resolve the point identified at [24] above.

60. The thrust of the appellant's further submissions (see [25]-[26]  above)
is  that  we  should  find  that  the  wording  of  regulation  15A  is  too
restrictive and fails to reflect Court of Justice jurisprudence  on  Article
12.

61. In his most recent submissions, Mr Deller sets out that the position  of
the Secretary of State  is  that  (we  paraphrase),   applying  a  purposive
approach, regulation 15A(6) is to be construed so  that  the  exclusion  for
those in "nursery education" does not apply  to  those  in  reception  class
education within a primary school setting. The Secretary of State  considers
that this approach amounts to a proper reflection of Court of  Justice  case
law on Article 12 which in the respondent's view broadly confined its  scope
to those in full-time compulsory education from 5 upwards but  would  extend
to cover those in reception class education within a primary school.

62.  However,  a  concession  as  to  the  law  cannot  bind  the  Tribunal.
Notwithstanding the  respondent's  concession,  our  duty  is  to  interpret
regulation 15A(6)(a) for ourselves and in that context  that  concession  is
at best a submission that we have to take into account.

63. We are not persuaded the  appellant's  wife  can  bring  herself  within
these  Regulations.  Regulation  15A(6)(a)  stipulates   that   ""education"
excludes nursery education". Notwithstanding that the respondent (and to  an
extent the appellant) seeks to argue  that  "nursery  education"  should  be
taken as including reception class education, we do not consider that  is  a
correct interpretation even applying a teleological approach.

64. Education is a devolved matter in the United Kingdom  and,  as  will  be
seen, the statutory basis for  it  differs  as  between  England,  Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. However, the 2006 EEA Regulations, as a  measure
concerned with implementing European free  movement  law  which  is  equally
applicable  to  all  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  should  be  construed
uniformly if it is possible to do so. For  that  reason,  we  need  to  have
regard to the position in Wales and in Scotland  and  Northern  Ireland,  as
well as in England.

65. In England, the expression "nursery education" is  not  in  general  use
since the implementation of the Childcare Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act"),  having
been generally replaced
by "early years provision". It appears that what  has  become  "early  years
provision" in England remains nursery education in Wales, see  for  instance
section 123(4) of the School Standards and Framework Act  ("the  1998  Act")
which has the two provisions in parallel and the  current  form  of  section
509A of the Education Act 1996 ("the 1996 Act",  and  further  the  raft  of
consequential amendments in Sch 2 of the  2006  Act.  However,  whether  one
starts from surviving references to "nursery education" in England  or  from
the substituted concept of "early  years  provision",  the  outcome  is  the
same.


66. There is still a definition of "nursery  education"  in  the  1998  Act,
section 117, but that is expressed to be for the part of that Act  in  which
all operative provisions in which the term  is  used  now  apply  solely  in
Wales. Likewise, although there is a definition  in  the  Nursery  Education
and Early Years Development (England)  Regulations  1999  SI  No.1329  ("the
1999 Regulations") which appears to survive in England,  it  is  purely  for
the purpose of a duty under section 117 of the 1998  Act,  a  section  which
now applies only in Wales, so this  appears  to  be  a  historical  anomaly.
The section 117 definition is:

    "In  this  Part  "nursery  education"  means  full-time  or   part-time
    education suitable for
    children who have not attained compulsory school age (whether  provided
    at schools
    or elsewhere)."

67. The definition in the 1999 Regulations is in like form, subject  to  the
omission of the words in parentheses.

68. We were told at the  hearing  in  December  2012  that  the  appellant's
oldest child was aged 4 years 6 months and will thus become  5  during  this
academic year. This means he will not be of compulsory school age  until  31
August 2013: see the 1996 Act, section 8(3) and SI No.  1998/1607.  On  that
basis, and disregarding as remote the possibility  of  successfully  arguing
that what is provided in the reception class is not "suitable" for  children
of that age, then if those definitions  are  relevant,  what  the  child  is
receiving is indeed," nursery education".

69. Such a  definition  is,  moreover  consistent  with  the  definition  of
"nursery school" in section 6(1) of the 1996 Act.

70. Starting from the substituted concepts of "early  years  provision",  it
is relevant to note certain features of provision as it presently exists  in
England. Section 20 of the 2006 Act provides that  "[i]n  this  Part  "early
years provision" means the provision of childcare for a young child". It  is
also relevant to note certain  features  of  early  years  provision  as  it
presently exists in England. Section 19 provides that:

    "For the purposes of this Part and Part 3, a child is a  "young  child"
    during the period-
    (a) beginning with his birth, and
    (b) ending immediately before the 1st September next following the date
    on which he
    attains the age of five."

71. By section 18(2) and (3) of the 2006 Act:

   "(2) "Childcare" means any form of care  for  a  child  and,  subject  to
   subsection (3), care includes:
        a) Education for a child, and
        b)  any other supervised activity for a child.


     (3) "Childcare" does not include-
         (a) education (or any other  supervised  activity)  provided  by  a
         school during school hours for a registered  pupil  who  is  not  a
         young child, or
         (b) any form of health care for a child".


72. Section 7 of the 2006 Act and regulation  4  of  The  Local  Authorities
(Duty to Secure Early Years Provision Free of Charge)  Regulations  2008  SI
No.1724 contain a duty to secure such provision for each young child who  is
over a prescribed age (as the child  in  the  present  case  is)  but  under
compulsory school age. Such provision is regulated, inter alia, through  the
statutory Early Years Foundation Stage, under a different regime  from  that
which applies to children above compulsory school age.

73. Applying these provisions to the older  son  of  the  appellant  and  Ms
Mantezolo, he is a "young child" and  what  he  receives  in  the  reception
class is "early years provision". The emergence of "early  years  provision"
as the statutory successor, in England, to the concept of nursery  education
is a further route leading to the conclusion that  the  expression  "nursery
education" in regulation 15A includes what is  received  by  a  child  under
compulsory school age in the reception class  of  a  maintained  school.  We
consider that bearing  in  mind  our  analysis  of  the  relevant  education
provisions applied in England and Wales (and even  applying  a  teleological
approach based on Court of Justice jurisprudence), it would be  a  step  too
far to seek to read "nursery education" as  not  including  reception  class
education.

74. We add that this also appears consistent  with  our  initial  researches
into the position  in  Scotland,  where  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a
definition of "nursery education", but the definition in section 1(5)(a)  of
the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 ("the 1980 Act") of  cognate  terms  makes
reference to "activities in schools and classes (such  schools  and  classes
being in this Act called "nursery schools"  and  "nursery  classes"),  being
activities of a kind suitable in the ordinary case for pupils who are  under
school age". Broadly, to be  of  "school  age"  requires  a  child  to  have
attained the age of five: 1980 Act, section 31.

75. As regards the situation in Northern  Ireland,  our  limited  researches
suggest that there does not appear to be a definition of  nursery  education
but the Education and Libraries (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 SI No. 594  NI
3), as amended in particular by  the   Education  (Northern  Ireland)  Order
1998 SI No. 1759 (N.I.13) defines a nursery school as "...a  primary  school
which is used mainly for the purpose of  providing  full-time  or  part-time
education for children who have attained the age of 2 years  but  are  under
compulsory school age". Many primary schools  have  opened  special  nursery
units to provide such education.

76. We conclude this part of our decision by noting some of  the  regulatory
features which now characterise "early years provision". Those  who  provide
early years provision are under a statutory duty (2006 Act, section  40)  to
secure that the provision meets, inter alia, the "learning  and  development
requirements". These are to be found, via the Early Years  Foundation  Stage
(Learning and Development Requirements) Order  2007/1772  in  the  Statutory
Framework for the Early Years Foundation stage, published by  the  Secretary
of          State           in           March           2012:           see
http://www.education.gov.uk/schools/teachingandlearning
curriculum/a0068102/early-years-foundation-stage-eyfs.

77. The requirements cover three "prime" areas (communication and  language,
physical development and personal, social  and  emotional  development)  and
impose a requirement to "support children in four  specific  areas,  through
which the primary areas are  strengthened  and  applied",  namely  literacy,
mathematics, understanding the world and expressive arts and design.

78. We note that in her latest submissions the respondent made reference  to
the AAC case of CIS/3960/2007 and SSWP v  IM  (IS)  [2011]  UKUT  231  (AAC)
(also known as CIS/0097/2008) which expressed the view that in  the  context
of England and Wales Article 12 should be understood  as  applying  only  to
children who had begun primary school. However, we would  observe  that  the
judge in these cases  was  concerned  with  the  legislative  position  then
prevailing. In both cases he was concerned with the circumstances  obtaining
at the time of decisions refusing benefit which had been  taken  in  January
2007.  Both  thus  concerned  (as  in  the   second   case   was   expressly
acknowledged) the situation prior to changes to the law brought into  effect
in 2008 (namely the introduction with effect from 1 April 2008 of  the  duty
on local authorities in respect of early years provision under section 7  of
the 2006 Act; and the duty on early  years  providers  to  comply  with  the
Early Years Foundation Stage under section 40 of the same Act,  with  effect
from 1 September 2008). For that reason we  derive  little  assistance  from
them.

Article 12, Regulation 1612/68

79. We have already intimated that we do not think  that  the  jurisprudence
of the Court  of  Justice  pertaining  to  Article  12,  Regulation  1612/68
provides clear guidance on the question of whether education  undertaken  by
a child of a former or current migrant worker in a reception class can  give
rise to a derivative right of residence for the  primary  carer  of  such  a
child. The Court  of  Justice's  jurisprudence  on  Article  12,  Regulation
1612/68 has  been developed through cases such as Case  C-7/94  Gaal  [1995]
ECR I-1031,  Case C-413/99 Baumbast and R v Secretary of State for the  Home
Department [2002] ECR I-7091, Case C-310/08 Ibrahim and Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department  [[2010] ECR I-1065, Case C-480/08  Teixeira  [2010]
ECR I-1107 and Joined Cases C-147/11 and C-148/11 Czop and  Punakova  [2012]
ECR I-0000. (See now also C-529/11 Alarape & Anor v Secretary of  State  for
the Home Department [2013] EUECJ (08 May 2013)) [23]-[31].)

80. It is certainly clear that the Court of Justice considers  that  Article
12 of  Regulation  1612/68  should  be  interpreted  consistently  with  the
European Convention of Human Rights: see Case C-389, 390/87  Echternach  and
Moritz v Minister van Onderwijs  [1990]  2  CMLR  305.  But  that  does  not
necessarily point in favour of one view or the other   on  the  question  of
whether Article 12 applies only to school education after the age  at  which
it has become compulsory.

81. There is a clear tension between two opposing views. On the one hand  it
would appear that in all the cases dealing with children the  assumption  of
the Court has been that education begins when the  child  commences  school:
see e.g. Baumbast [53]. In addition, it is only  at  the  stage  of  primary
education that Member States are obliged to ensure  universal  education  in
the  general  interest  of  the  community.  In   the   context   of   wider
international human  rights  obligations,  the  UN  Committee  on  Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 'General Comment No. 13 the right to  education'
has endorsed the position taken by UNICEF, namely  that  "primary  education
is the most important component of basic education".   On  the  other  hand,
the jurisprudence on Article 12 does not specify any age limit and has  said
that there is no upper age limit: see e.g. the  Advocate  General's  opinion
in Teixeira, [40].  For  the  most  part  the  Court  contents  itself  with
reference to the point at which a child is "in education" or  "first  enters
education". In regard to context and purpose, it might be said that  if  the
aim behind the right is to ensure migrant workers will feel free to move  to
another Member State in  order  to  take  employment  there,  then  what  is
essential is that there should be  the  best  possible  conditions  for  the
integration of the family (as to which the importance  attributed  to  early
years provision by the provisions cited at  [65]-[73]  above  cited  may  be
material) and that there should be equality of treatment  between  a  Member
State's own nationals and children of  nationals  of  another  Member  State
(see Case C-308/89 Di Leo, [13] and [15], cited with  approval  in  Baumbast
at [50] and [53]). Further, the right to education guaranteed by  the  First
Protocol of the ECHR is a right  of  access  to  all  levels  of  education,
including entry to nursery, primary, secondary  and  higher  education:  see
Belgian Linguistics Case (1968) 1 EHRR 252 [1].


82. The issue, therefore,  is  subject  to  a  degree  of  uncertainty.  Our
inclination is towards the view that having rejected an upper age limit  the
Court would also reject a lower limit and thus would see the question as  to
be one of fact for  each  Member  State  to  decide.  But  in  view  of  the
uncertainty, if this were a material matter  in  this  case  we  would  have
given further thought to whether to make an order for  reference  addressing
it.

83. We have however decided that a reference is unnecessary as the issue  is
not material to the outcome of the appeal. It is  not  material  because  in
our judgment the appellant is entitled to succeed in her  appeal  by  virtue
of the Secretary of State's concession  that  she  will  treat  the  primary
carer parent of a child of a former worker as falling within  the  scope  of
(the new) regulation 15A of the 2006 EEA Regulations. We  have  already  had
cause to note that Article 37 of the  Directive  permits  Member  States  to
make more generous provisions in relevant law if they choose  and  that  the
Directive itself does not provide for  a  derived  right  of  residence  for
primary carers of children in education.

84. Accordingly whilst we regard the answer to the question  of whether  the
primary carer of a child of a  former  migrant  worker  who  has  still  not
commenced primary education can benefit from Article 12, Regulation  1612/68
directly as uncertain, we do not consider that  matters  on  the  particular
facts of this case. The appellant is entitled to succeed in  his  appeal  on
the basis that he comes  within  the  terms  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
concession summarised at [62]  above.   There  being  nothing  discretionary
about the terms of this concession we are in  a  position  to  conclude  not
only that the decision of the respondent is not in accordance with  the  law
but also that the appellant's appeal should be allowed outright.  Under  the
Secretary of State's  concession  the  appellant  has  a  derived  right  of
residence.  Although such a right does not qualify  him  under  the  current
state of the law for the  purposes  of  accruing  permanent  residence  (see
regulation 15(1A): "Residence in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  a
derivative right of residence does not constitute residence for the  purpose
of this regulation"), it does  entitle  him  to  be  granted  a  "derivative
residence card": see regulations 2 and 18A (the latter states  that  such  a
card will be valid for five  years  or  any  other  date  specified  by  the
Secretary of State when issuing it).

Article 8

85. The  appellant  submitted  in  his  skeleton  argument  that  the  Upper
Tribunal should revisit its earlier decision that the FtT judge did not  err
in law in rejecting the appellant's Article 8 grounds of  appeal.   However,
given that (1)  the  respondent  now  accepts  that  the  appellant  has   a
derivative  right  of  residence  under  regulation  15A  of  the  2006  EEA
Regulations; and (2) that the EEA  decision  cannot  in  the  light  of  our
findings be one which even hypothetically  might  lead  to  the  appellant's
removal, we consider that the Article 8 grounds fall away.

Disposal

86. For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge materially erred in law.  The decision we re-make  is  to
    dismiss the appeal under regulation 6 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  but
    to allow it on the basis that the decision of the respondent is not  in
    accordance with the law. Given that the respondent now accepts that the
    appellant has a derivative right of  residence,  we  allow  the  appeal
    outright.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey







APPENDIX A: RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

         A. Citizens Directive


              Article 7 Right of residence for more than three months


             1.   All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on
                  the territory of another Member State for a period of
                  longer than three months if they:


                  (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in the host
                      Member State; or


                  (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and their
                      family members not to become a burden on the social
                      assistance system of the host Member State during
                      their period of residence and have comprehensive
                      sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or


                  (c)  - are enrolled at a private or public establishment,
                      accredited or financed by the host Member State on
                      the basis of its legislation or administrative
                      practice, for the principal purpose of following a
                      course of study, including vocational training; and


                      - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the
                      host Member State and assure the relevant national
                      authority, by means of a declaration or by such
                      equivalent means as they may choose, that they have
                      sufficient resources for themselves and their family
                      members not to become a burden on the social
                      assistance system of the host Member State during
                      their period of residence; or


                  (d)  are family members accompanying or joining a Union
                      citizen who satisfies the conditions referred to in
                      points (a), (b) or (c).


             2.   The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall
                  extend to family members who are not nationals of a Member
                  State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the
                  host Member State, provided that such Union citizen
                  satisfies the conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a),
                  (b) or (c).


             3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who
                  is no longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain
                  the status of worker or self-employed person in the
                  following circumstances:


                  (a)  he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of
                      an illness or accident;


                  (b)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment
                      after having been employed for more than one year and
                      has registered as a job-seeker with the relevant
                      employment office;


                  (c)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment
                      after completing a fixed-term employment contract of
                      less than a year or after having become involuntarily
                      unemployed during the first twelve months and has
                      registered as a job-seeker with the relevant
                      employment office. In this case, the status of worker
                      shall be retained for no less than six months;


                  (d)  he/she embarks on vocational training. Unless he/she
                      is involuntarily unemployed, the retention of the
                      status of worker shall require the training to be
                      related to the previous employment.


             ...


             Article 14 Retention of the right of residence


             1.   Union citizens and their family members shall have the
                  right of residence provided for in Article 6, as long as
                  they do not become an unreasonable burden on the social
                  assistance system of the host Member State.


             2.   Union citizens and their family members shall have the
                  right of residence provided for in Articles 7, 12 and 13
                  as long as they meet the conditions set out therein.


                  In specific cases where there is a reasonable doubt as to
                  whether a Union citizen or his/her family members
                  satisfies the conditions set out in Articles 7, 12 and 13,
                  Member States may verify if these conditions are
                  fulfilled. This verification shall not be carried out
                  systematically.


             3.   An expulsion measure shall not be the automatic
                  consequence of a Union citizen's or his or her family
                  member's recourse to the social assistance system of the
                  host Member State.


             4.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 and without
                  prejudice to the provisions of Chapter VI, an expulsion
                  measure may in no case be adopted against Union citizens
                  or their family members if:


                  (a)  the Union citizens are workers or self-employed
                      persons, or


                  (b)  the Union citizens entered the territory of the host
                      Member State in order to seek employment.


                  In this case, the Union citizens and their family members
                  may not be expelled for as long as the Union citizens can
                  provide evidence that they are continuing to seek
                  employment and that they have a genuine chance of being
                  engaged."


         Recital 16


         As long as the beneficiaries of  the  right  of  residence  do  not
         become an unreasonable burden on the social  assistance  system  of
         the host Member State they should not be  expelled.  Therefore,  an
         expulsion measure  should  not  be  the  automatic  consequence  of
         recourse to the social assistance system.  The  host  Member  State
         should examine whether it is a case of temporary  difficulties  and
         take  into  account  the  duration  of  residence,   the   personal
         circumstances and the amount of aid granted in  order  to  consider
         whether the beneficiary has become an unreasonable  burden  on  its
         social assistance system and to proceed to  his  expulsion.  In  no
         case should an expulsion measure be adopted against workers,  self-
         employed persons or job-seekers as defined by the Court of  Justice
         save on grounds of public policy or public security."


         Recital 21


         However, it should be left to  the  host  Member  State  to  decide
         whether it will grant social  assistance  during  the  first  three
         months of residence, or for a longer period in  the  case  of  job-
         seekers, to Union citizens other than those who are workers or self-
         employed persons or who retain that status or their family members,
         or  maintenance  assistance  for  studies,   including   vocational
         training, prior to acquisition of the right of permanent residence,
         to these same persons."


         "B. 2006 EEA Regulations (as amended)


         Worker",  "self-employed  person",  "self-sufficient  person"   and
         "student"


         4.   (1)      In these Regulations -


                (a)    "worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article
                    39 of the Treaty establishing the European Community;


                (b)    "self-employed person" means a person who establishes
                    himself in order to pursue activity as  a  self-employed
                    person in accordance  with  Article  43  of  the  Treaty
                    establishing the European Community;


                (c)    "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-


                    (i)    sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on
                        the social assistance system of the United  Kingdom
                        during his period of residence; and


                    (ii)   comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in  the
                        United Kingdom;


                (d)    "student" means a person who-


                    (i)    is enrolled at a private or public establishment,
                        included  on  the  Department  for  Education   and
                        Skills'  Register   of   Education   and   Training
                        Providers(6) or financed from public funds, for the
                        principal purpose of following a course  of  study,
                        including vocational training;


                    (ii)   has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the
                        United Kingdom; and


                    (iii)  assures the Secretary of State,  by  means  of  a
                        declaration, or by such  equivalent  means  as  the
                        person may choose, that he has sufficient resources
                        not to become a burden  on  the  social  assistance
                        system of the United Kingdom during his  period  of
                        residence.


           (2)    For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  (1)(c),  where  family
                members of the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom
                and their right to reside  is  dependent  upon  their  being
                family members of that person-


                (a)    the requirement for that person  to  have  sufficient
                    resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on   the   social
                    assistance system  of  the  United  Kingdom  during  his
                    period of residence  shall  only  be  satisfied  if  his
                    resources and those of the family members are sufficient
                    to avoid him and the  family  members  becoming  such  a
                    burden;


                (b)    the requirement for that person to have comprehensive
                    sickness insurance cover in  the  United  Kingdom  shall
                    only be satisfied if he and his family members have such
                    cover.


           (3)    For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  (1)(d),  where  family
                members of the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom
                and their right to reside  is  dependent  upon  their  being
                family members of that  person,  the  requirement  for  that
                person  to  assure  the  Secretary  of  State  that  he  has
                sufficient resources not to become a burden  on  the  social
                assistance system of the United Kingdom during his period of
                residence  shall  only  be  satisfied  if  he  assures   the
                Secretary of State that  his  resources  and  those  of  the
                family members are sufficient to avoid him  and  the  family
                members becoming such a burden.


           (4)    For  the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (1)(c)  and  (d)  and
                paragraphs  (2)  and  (3),  the  resources  of  the   person
                concerned and, where applicable, any family members, are  to
                be regarded as sufficient if they exceed the  maximum  level
                of resources which a United Kingdom national and his  family
                members may possess if he is to become eligible  for  social
                assistance under the United Kingdom benefit system.


         "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"


         5.   (1)      In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person
                who has ceased activity" means an EEA national who satisfies
                the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


           (2)    A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-




                (a)    terminates his activity as a worker or  self-employed
                    person and-


                    (i)    has reached the age at which he is entitled to  a
                        state pension on the date on  which  he  terminates
                        his activity; or


                    (ii)   in the case of a worker, ceases working  to  take
                        early retirement;


                (b)    pursued his activity as  a  worker  or  self-employed
                    person in the United Kingdom for at least twelve  months
                    prior to the termination; and


                (c)    resided in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more
                    than three years prior to the termination.


           (3)    A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-


                (a)    he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a
                    worker  or  self-employed  person  as  a  result  of   a
                    permanent incapacity to work; and
                (b)    either-


                    (i)    he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for
                        more than two years prior to the termination; or


                    (ii)   the incapacity is the result of  an  accident  at
                        work or an occupational disease that  entitles  him
                        to a pension payable in  full  or  in  part  by  an
                        institution in the United Kingdom.


           (4)    A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-


                (a)    he is active as a worker or self-employed  person  in
                    an EEA State but retains his place of residence  in  the
                    United Kingdom, to which he returns as a rule  at  least
                    once a week; and


                (b)    prior to becoming so active in that EEA State, he had
                    been continuously resident and continuously active as  a
                    worker or self-employed person in the United Kingdom for
                    at least three years.


           (5)    A person who satisfies the condition in paragraph  (4)(a)
                but not the condition in paragraph  (4)(b)  shall,  for  the
                purposes of paragraphs (2) and  (3),  be  treated  as  being
                active and resident in the United Kingdom during any  period
                in which he is working or self-employed in the EEA State.


           (6)    The conditions in paragraphs (2) and (3) as to length  of
                residence and activity as a worker or  self-employed  person
                shall not apply in relation to  a  person  whose  spouse  or
                civil partner is a United Kingdom national.


           (7)    For the purposes of this regulation-


                (a)    periods of inactivity for reasons not of the person's
                    own making;


                (b)    periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and


                (c)    in the case  of  a  worker,  periods  of  involuntary
                    unemployment duly recorded by  the  relevant  employment
                    office,


                shall be treated as periods of activity as a worker or self-
                employed person, as the case may be.


         "Qualified person"


         6.   (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
                who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-


                (a)    a jobseeker;


                (b)    a worker;


                (c)    a self-employed person;


                (d)    a self-sufficient person; or


                (e)    a student.


           (2)    A person who is no longer working shall not cease  to  be
                treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-


                (a)    he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                    illness or accident;


                (b)    he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                    having been employed in  the  United  Kingdom,  provided
                    that he has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                    employment office and-


                    (i)    he was employed  for  one  year  or  more  before
                        becoming unemployed;


                    (ii)   he has been  unemployed  for  no  more  than  six
                        months; or


                    (iii)  he  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
                        employment in the United Kingdom and has a  genuine
                        chance of being engaged;


                (c)    he is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on
                    vocational training; or


                (d)    he has voluntarily ceased  working  and  embarked  on
                    vocational training that  is  related  to  his  previous
                    employment.


           (3)    A person who is no longer in  self-employment  shall  not
                cease to be  treated  as  a  self-employed  person  for  the
                purpose of paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily  unable  to
                pursue his activity as a self-employed person as the  result
                of an illness or accident.


           (4)    For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means  a
                person who enters  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  seek
                employment and can  provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
                employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.
           ..."

One  of  the  entirely  new  provisions  inserted  by  the  2012   Amendment
Regulations is regulation 15A:

         "15A. Derivative right of residence


         (1)  A person ("P") who is not entitled to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom  as  a  result  of  any  other  provision   of   these
             Regulations and who satisfies the criteria in  paragraph  (2),
             (3), (4) or (5) of this regulation is entitled to a derivative
             right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  for  as  long  as  P
             satisfies the relevant criteria.


         (2)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


             (a)  P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the  relevant
                  EEA national"); and


             (b)  the relevant EEA national-


                  (i)  is under the age of 18;


                  (ii)     is residing in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                      sufficient person; and


                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                      if P were required to leave.


         (3)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


             (a)  P is the child of an  EEA  national  ("the  EEA  national
                  parent");


             (b)  P resided in the United Kingdom at a time  when  the  EEA
                  national parent was residing in the United  Kingdom  as  a
                  worker; and


             (c)  P is in education  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  in
                  education there at a time when the EEA national parent was
                  in the United Kingdom.


         (4)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


             (a)  P is the primary carer of a person meeting  the  criteria
                  in paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and


             (b)  the relevant person would be unable  to  continue  to  be
                  educated in the United  Kingdom  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave.


         (5)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


             (a)  P is under the age of 18;
             (b)  P's primary carer is entitled to a  derivative  right  to
                  reside in the United Kingdom by virtue of paragraph (2) or
                  (4);


             (c)  P does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the  United
                  Kingdom; and


             (d)  requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent P's
                  primary carer from residing in the United Kingdom.


         (6)  For the purpose of this regulation-


             (a)  "education" excludes nursery education; and


             (b)  "worker" does not include a jobseeker  or  a  person  who
                  falls to be regarded as a worker by virtue  of  regulation
                  6(2).


         (7)  P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if


             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
                  person; and


             (b)  P-


                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                      person's care; or


                  (ii)      shares  equally  the  responsibility  for   that
                      person's care  with  one  other  person  who  is  not
                      entitled to reside in the United Kingdom as a  result
                      of any other provision of these Regulations  and  who
                      does not have leave to enter or remain.


         (8)  P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a person's
             care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis  of  a
             financial contribution towards that person's care.


         (9)  A person who otherwise satisfies  the  criteria  in  paragraph
             (2), (3), (4) or (5) will not  be  entitled  to  a  derivative
             right to reside in the United Kingdom where the  Secretary  of
             State has made a decision under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1)  or
             20A(1).".


         C. Article 12, Regulation 1612/68 (now  Article  10  of  Regulation
             492/2011)


This Article provides:


"The children of a national of a Member State who is or  has  been  employed
in the territory of another Member State shall be admitted to  that  state's
general educational, apprenticeship and vocational  training  courses  under
the same conditions as the nationals of that state,  if  such  children  are
residing in its territory.

Member States shall encourage all efforts to enable such children to  attend
these courses under the best possible conditions".
