


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  Pembele (Paragraph 399(b)(i) - "valid leave" - meaning) [2013] UKUT 00310
                                    (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 18 April 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                             PAUL ZANOTO PEMBELE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner, instructed by Birnberg Peirce and
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The  term  "valid  leave",  as  appears  at  paragraph  399(b)(i)   of   the
Immigration Rules, means leave to enter or remain under the Immigration  Act
1971. Periods of temporary admission  cannot  be  counted  when  calculating
whether a person has achieved the necessary 15 years  residence  under  that
rule.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
      (DRC), born on 8 March 1983. He has been given  permission  to  appeal
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision that section 32(5) of the UK Borders
      Act 2007 applied.

   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 13 August 1991 with his parents and
      sister. His father made an application for asylum including him  as  a
      dependant. As the asylum claim was still outstanding in  January  1999
      his father was granted indefinite leave to enter on 28  February  1999
      as part of an asylum backlog clearance announced by the Government  in
      a White Paper. He was granted leave in line with his father.

   3. Between February 1999 and March 2011 the appellant amassed a total  of
      29 convictions for 86 offences in the United Kingdom. On 4 May 2010 he
      was convicted on three  counts,  of  handling  stolen  goods,  driving
      whilst disqualified and using a  vehicle  without  insurance.  He  was
      sentenced on 29 July 2010 to 15 months' imprisonment on count 1 and  3
      months' imprisonment consecutive on count 2, with no separate  penalty
      on count 3, making a total of 18 months'  imprisonment.  He  was  also
      disqualified from driving for 5 years. Whilst  serving  his  custodial
      sentence for these offences he was convicted, on 31 January  2011,  of
      unlawful wounding, and  sentenced  on  8  March  2011  to  18  months'
      imprisonment concurrent to the aggregate of  18  months'  imprisonment
      imposed on 29 July 2010.

   4. As a result of his convictions, the  appellant  was  informed,  on  14
      November  2011,  of  his  liability  to  automatic   deportation.   He
      responded, giving details of his partner, SN, a  British  national  of
      Congolese origin, with whom he had been in a relationship  since  June
      1999 (in subsequent evidence amended to 2003) and  his  three  British
      children from that relationship with whom he had been living prior  to
      his imprisonment, with his partner, namely MP born in 2005, BN born in
      2006 and SP born in 2010.

   5. A deportation order was signed against the appellant on 2 October 2012
      and on 3 October 2012 a decision was made that section 32(5) of the UK
      Borders Act 2007 applied. He appealed against that  decision  and  his
      appeal was heard on 7 January 2013 before the First-tier Tribunal,  by
      a panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Boardman and  Mr  M  G
      Taylor.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The Tribunal heard from the appellant, his partner SN, his sister  and
      his friend. They noted that it was accepted by the respondent that  he
      had three British children; that, aside from when in  prison,  he  had
      continuously lived with his children at  his  partner's  address;  and
      that it would not be reasonable to expect them to relocate to the  DRC
      with him. They found that his partner was not willing to  relocate  to
      the DRC and that she would be able to care for  the  children  in  the
      United Kingdom if he were  removed.  As  such,  they  found  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The Tribunal found further that the appellant had a
      relationship with SN, albeit not a strong one, and that they had lived
      together since 2005. However, since he had lived in the United Kingdom
      with valid leave for less than 15 years, having acquired his leave  to
      remain in 1999 and spent 5 years  in  prison,  he  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 399(b) of the Rules. Neither could  he  meet
      the requirements of paragraph 399A and, as such, and in the absence of
      any exceptional circumstances, his deportation  was  required  in  the
      public interest, in accordance with the Immigration Rules. With regard
      to Article 8 of the ECHR, the Tribunal found that  the  appellant  had
      established family and private life ties in the United Kingdom, albeit
      neither were strong ties, and that Article 8 was engaged as  a  result
      of the interference caused by the respondent's decision to deport him.
      They   found,   nevertheless,   that   such   interference   was   not
      disproportionate to the legitimate  aims,  namely  the  prevention  of
      crime and the maintenance of an  effective  immigration  control,  and
      that his deportation would not  breach  Article  8.  They  accordingly
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on behalf of the
      appellant, on several grounds. The grounds, in  summary,  assert  that
      the Tribunal had  erred  in  law  in  its  Article  8  proportionality
      assessment by failing to consider the length  of  time  spent  by  the
      appellant in the United Kingdom as a child, by failing  to  take  into
      account that he had been lawfully in the United Kingdom throughout the
      entire period of his stay, by perversely drawing a distinction between
      valid leave and being lawfully  present  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      failing to take this into account as a near miss, by failing  to  take
      account of the children's best interests as a primary  factor  and  by
      finding that the appellant's family and private life was  not  strong.
      The grounds assert further that the Tribunal erred in law  in  stating
      that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      399(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules and by  excluding,  in  calculating
      the relevant 15 year period, the period spent lawfully in  the  United
      Kingdom on temporary admission from his entry in 1991 until the  grant
      of indefinite leave in 1999.

   8. In granting permission to appeal on 8 February  2013,  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Martin considered it arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
      erred in finding that paragraph 399(a) or (b) did not apply  since  it
      was arguable that the appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  with
      leave throughout. Permission was also  granted  on  the  basis  of  an
      arguable failure to address the principles in Uner v The Netherlands -
      46410/99 [2006] ECHR 873 and Maslov v Austria -  1638/03  [2008]  ECHR
      546 when considering Article 8.

Appeal hearing and submissions

   9. The appeal came before us on 18 April  2013.  Skeleton  arguments  had
      been  submitted  by  both  parties  in  advance  of  the  hearing,  in
      accordance with directions from the Tribunal,  to  address  the  first
      point  upon  which  permission  had  been  granted,  with  respect  to
      paragraph  399(b)(i)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The   respondent's
      skeleton had been prepared by Mr Deller, although it was Mr Avery  who
      appeared before us on behalf of the respondent.

  10. Mr Furner took us through his skeleton argument in submitting that the
      meaning of the phrase "valid leave" in paragraph  399(b)(i)  was  that
      the individual concerned had lawful permission to  be  in  the  United
      Kingdom throughout the relevant period. In so doing, he referred us to
      case law relevant to the interpretation of the Immigration  Rules  and
      to the Explanatory Memorandum to HC  194,  the  Statement  of  Changes
      which incorporated paragraph  399(b)  into  the  Rules.  He  submitted
      further that periods of stay on temporary admission  were  periods  of
      lawful residence, so that the appellant's stay in the  United  Kingdom
      from his entry in 1991 until the grant of indefinite leave  to  remain
      in 1999 was valid leave within the meaning of paragraph 399(b)(i) such
      that the requirements of that  Rule  had  been  met.  Accordingly  the
      decision to deport the appellant was unlawful and the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal ought to be set aside and re-made by allowing  the
      appeal. In the event that we were  against  him  in  that  regard,  Mr
      Furner submitted that the Tribunal had erred  in  law  by  failing  to
      consider, in their Article  8  proportionality  assessment,  that  the
      distinction  between  valid  leave  and  lawful   residence   was   an
      objectionable one and was  unjustifiable  in  the  context  of  public
      interest  considerations;  by  failing  to   take   account   of   the
      respondent's delay in dealing with  the  appellant's  father's  asylum
      claim; by failing to apply the principles in Maslov and by failing  to
      give proper consideration to the best interests of  the  children.  He
      submitted  further  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  by  finding   the
      appellant's private life not to be a strong one.

  11. Mr Avery submitted that temporary admission was not  leave  to  remain
      under the Immigration Rules and did not constitute "valid leave" under
      paragraph 399(b)(i). The distinction between the two did not give rise
      to any public interest considerations under Article 8 of the ECHR  and
      the Tribunal had not erred in their findings on Article 8 in  that  or
      any other respect.

  12. Mr Furner, by way of response, reiterated the points initially made.

  13. It was agreed by all parties that if we were to find an error  of  law
      in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  in  regard  to  the  period  of
      "valid leave" for the purposes of paragraph 399(b)(i)  of  the  Rules,
      that would be the end of the matter, since the decision  would  simply
      have to be re-made by allowing the appellant's appeal. If, however, we
      found no error in that respect, but found errors on the other  grounds
      relating to Article 8 of the  ECHR,  the  hearing  would  have  to  be
      resumed on a subsequent occasion in order for submissions to  be  made
      with a view to re-making the decision.

Consideration and findings

  14. We commence by setting out the relevant provisions of the  Immigration
      Rules relating to deportation and Article  8,  as  introduced  by  the
      Statement of Changes in HC194 on 9 July 2102,  at  paragraphs  396  to
      399B. We have highlighted the significant section for the purposes  of
      this appeal:
    396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
    that the public interest requires deportation.  It  is  in  the  public
    interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a deportation
    order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.
    397. A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
    pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's  obligations  under
    the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human   Rights   Convention.   Where
    deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will only be
    in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation is
    outweighed.

    Deportation and Article 8

    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and
    (a) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
    they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  4
    years;
    (b) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  4
    years but at least 12 months; or
    (c) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because, in the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law,
    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will
    be outweighed by other factors.
    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
    (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
    (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  the  7
    years immediately preceding the date of the immigration  decision;  and
    in either case
    (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK; and
    (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for  the  child
    in the UK; or
    (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
    who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK, or in the
    UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
    (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously for at
    least the 15 years immediately preceding the date  of  the  immigration
    decision (discounting any period of imprisonment); and
    (ii) there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that
    partner continuing outside the UK.
    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
    (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years
    immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting
    any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including  social,
    cultural or family) with the country to which he would have  to  go  if
    required to leave the UK; or
    (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least  half  of
    his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding  the  date
    of the immigration decision (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
    and he has no ties (including social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
    399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be  granted
    for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be given  subject
    to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems appropriate. Where a
    person who  has  previously  been  granted  a  period  of  leave  under
    paragraph 399B would not fall  for  refusal  under  paragraph  322(1C),
    indefinite leave to remain may be granted.
  15. No challenge has been made to the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that
      the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of paragraph  399(a)
      of the Rules.

  16. It is relevant to note, with respect to paragraph 399(b), that it  was
      accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant had  a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his partner, SN.  Although  we  found
      the Tribunal's findings in that respect,  at  paragraph  64,  somewhat
      unclear,  Mr   Furner's   submissions   proceeded   on   the   express
      understanding that that was not in issue and Mr Avery did not seek  to
      challenge that. Neither was  it  in  dispute  that  there  were  clear
      findings of insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's  family  life
      with SN continuing outside the United Kingdom.

  17. The only basis, therefore, upon which  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
      requirements of paragraph 399(b) had not been met, was with respect to
      the period spent by the appellant living in the  United  Kingdom  with
      valid leave. As such, if the Tribunal's findings in that  respect  are
      found to be in error, the only conclusion, on the  otherwise  accepted
      findings made by the Tribunal, including that he had been resident  in
      the United Kingdom for over 15 years, is that the appellant  was  able
      to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

  18. It was Mr Furner's submission that the meaning of "valid leave" had to
      be the same as "lawfully in the United Kingdom", so that the appellant
      had accumulated more than the 15 years required for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 399(b)(i). However, the respondent maintained that the  term
      referred to a period of leave to enter or remain under the Immigration
      Act 1971 so that the relevant period had not been accumulated.

  19. It is the case that there is no specific definition of either  of  the
      terms "leave" or  "valid  leave"  in  the  interpretation  section  at
      paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  We  therefore  turn  to  the
      guidance provided in the authorities referred to by Mr Furner  in  our
      consideration of the meaning of the terms. With regard to  the  proper
      interpretation of the Rules, Lord Hoffman gave the following  guidance
      in Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  UKHL
      25, at paragraph 4 of the judgement:

"Like any other question of construction, this depends upon the language  of
    the rule, construed against the relevant background.  That  involves  a
    consideration of the immigration rules as  a  whole  and  the  function
    which they serve in the administration of immigration policy."

  20. In the Supreme Court case of Mahad  (previously  referred  to  as  AM)
      (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance  Officer  [2009]  UKSC  16,  Lord  Brown,
      having referred to the discussion in Odelola, said at paragraph 10:

"...The Rules are not to be construed with all the strictness applicable  to
    the construction of a statute or a statutory instrument  but,  instead,
    sensibly according to the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  words
    used, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of  State's
    administrative policy...True, as I observed in Odelola (para 33):  "the
    question is what the Secretary of State intended.  The  rules  are  her
    rules." But that intention is to  be  discerned  objectively  from  the
    language  used,  not  divined   by   reference   to   supposed   policy
    considerations. Still less is the Secretary of State's intention to  be
    discovered from the Immigration Directorates' Instructions (IDIs)..."

  21. Mr Furner relied upon the Explanatory Memorandum to HC 194 as  an  aid
      to discerning the Secretary of  State's  intentions  with  respect  to
      paragraph 399(b) and referred us to the form of  wording  used  there,
      which differed from that appearing in the Rules themselves, in that it
      used the wording "lived here lawfully" rather than "with valid leave."
      His case, therefore, was that the Secretary of State intended to  make
      provision, in paragraph  399(b)(i),  for  those  who  had  lived  here
      lawfully for 15 years, rather than requiring them to have had leave to
      enter or remain for that period. The respondent's  case,  however,  is
      that that did not entitle the appellant  to  ignore  the  use  of  the
      wording in the Rules themselves. We find ourselves in  agreement  with
      the respondent in this regard.

  22. In making his case, Mr Furner relied upon guidance  in  the  cases  of
      Westminster City Council v National Asylum Support Service [2002] UKHL
      38 and D & M, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  Work
      & Pensions [2010]  EWCA  Civ  18  in  regard  to  the  status  of  the
      Explanatory Memorandum as an expression of the  Secretary  of  State's
      intention. However, we note that, whilst the  Courts  in  those  cases
      found  that  such  explanatory  documents  were  useful  as  aids   to
      construction, they both emphasised the limitations of such  documents.
      In the latter case, Lord Justice Carnwarth (as he then was) stated, at
      paragraph 49:

"49. Thus, the explanatory memoranda in the present  case  represent  formal
    statements of the Secretary of State's intentions as the author of  the
    relevant statutory instrument..."

but then went on to state as follows:

"51...I would emphasise that, even accepting  the  special  significance  of
    explanatory  documents  such  as  these,  they  remain  only  aids   to
    construction, and no more.  The  essential  task  is  to  construe  the
    language of the legislation, not that of the explanatory material. Thus
    in the present case, the memoranda may help to explain  the  background
    and general purpose of the regulations. They do nothing to explain why,
    contrary to the  apparent  intention  to  "align"  the  various  rules,
    different wording was used in the two provisions.  For  the  answer  to
    this question, in the default of other aids,  one  is  driven  back  to
    analysis of the words of the legislation.  "

  23. That, we consider, is a clear reflection of what Lord Brown stated  in
      Mahad,  when  referring  to  the  IDI's.  We  have  no  hesitation  in
      concluding that the Secretary of State's  intention  was  that  "valid
      leave" should mean leave to enter or remain under the Immigration  Act
      1971. That is the plain and obvious meaning and is  reflected  in  the
      use of the word "leave" at section 3(1)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
      and in the context in which it appears throughout various  definitions
      within paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  such  as  within  the
      definition of "overstaying", and in the use of the term "valid  leave"
      within the definition in paragraph 6 of "working  illegally"  and  "in
      breach of immigration laws", all of  which  are  plainly  intended  to
      refer to a period of leave within the 1971 Act.  Indeed the use of the
      word "valid" serves only to emphasise the formality of the  leave  and
      in that respect we note that  "a  valid  application"  is  defined  in
      paragraph 6 as an application made in accordance with the requirements
      of the Rules.  We also agree with the point  made  by  the  respondent
      that had the intention of the Secretary of State been  that  paragraph
      399(b)(i) imported a period of 15 years' lawful residence, it was open
      to her to use the same terminology as in paragraph 276B and  that  the
      use of different wording in paragraph 399(b)(i)  would  seem  to  have
      been deliberate.

  24. We find no merit in  Mr  Furner's  submission  that  the  respondent's
      interpretation of paragraph 399(b)(i) was  unlawful  and  incompatible
      with Article 8, as privileging people with a more  temporary  purpose,
      such as visitors and students, above those who  are  more  established
      (for example having remained lawfully awaiting a decision on an asylum
      claim). We would find it hard to  conceive  of  a  situation  where  a
      person had managed to accumulate 15 years of leave to enter and remain
      and still be considered as remaining here on a temporary basis. In any
      event we find no reason why those here on the  basis  of  a  grant  of
      leave to enter or remain under the 1971 Act ought not to  be  entitled
      to  benefit  from  such  formal  status.  Indeed  that  was  a  matter
      considered by the Supreme Court in ST Eritrea, R (on  the  application
      of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC  12,
      albeit in a different context, to which we shall come shortly.  It  is
      relevant, in any event, to take account of the fact that, as found  in
      MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 and Izuazu (Article
      8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 45,  the  Rules  are  not  normally
      conclusive of an Article 8 assessment and it is for the Tribunal to go
      on to consider such matters within the wider context of Article 8.  It
      was because of such residual discretion that the Administrative  Court
      in Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2013] EWHC 720 found that the new rules were not unlawful.

  25. Accordingly, we find that  the  term  "valid  leave",  as  appears  at
      paragraph  399(b)(i)  means  leave  to  enter  or  remain  under   the
      Immigration Act 1971. Periods of temporary admission cannot be counted
      when calculating whether a person has achieved the necessary 15  years
      residence  under  that  rule.  Therefore,  the  period  spent  by  the
      appellant on temporary admission prior  to  the  grant  of  indefinite
      leave to enter in 1999 is not counted as part of the required 15  year
      period.

  26. We find, in any event, that such a  period  cannot  be  considered  as
      lawful residence for the purposes Mr Furner would have us  accept  and
      we find that his submissions in that regard were somewhat  misleading.
      Whilst it was found that that was the case by the House  of  Lords  in
      Szoma v. Secretary of State for the Department of  Work  and  Pensions
      [2005] UKHL 64, to which we were referred by Mr Furner, we  note  that
      the Court of Appeal in JA (Ivory Coast) ES (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1353 subsequently  found
      that to be limited to the circumstances of that case, which related to
      eligibility for public benefits. At paragraph  20  of  JA,  the  Court
      found that:

"Szoma neither decides nor gives any basis for  inferring  that  an  illegal
    entrant is to be  assimilated  for  any  wider  purposes  to  a  lawful
    entrant. As the House made clear in Khadir [2002]  UKHL  39,  temporary
    admission is a term of art within the Immigration  Act  1971,  allowing
    the temporary release  (under  strict  limits  prescribed  by  law)  of
    persons otherwise liable to administrative detention pending removal as
    illegal entrants. Illegal entrants who are temporarily admitted  rather
    than detained may thus be lawfully present here in the restricted sense
    material  to  the  decision  in  Szoma;  but  they  remain  without  an
    entitlement to be here."

  27. That was a view subsequently endorsed and  adopted  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  ST  (Eritrea)
      [2010] EWCA Civ 643, followed by the Supreme Court in  ST  Eritrea,  R
      (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2012] UKSC 12,  when  considering  the  wording  "lawfully  in  their
      territory" in Article 32(1) of the Refugee Convention. At paragraph 66
      of the judgement of the Supreme Court, Lord Dyson stated as follows:

"there is nothing in article 32(1) which requires  us  to  disapply  section
    11(1) of the 1971 Act and say that a refugee  who  is  given  temporary
    admission pending determination of her status is lawfully in the United
    Kingdom."

  28. We would add that we do not consider the fact that the  appellant  was
      subsequently granted indefinite leave to enter,  and  that  the  grant
      came after a delay of some years, adds anything to our view above. The
      grant of indefinite leave was made on the basis  of  the  Government's
      backlog clearance, and was not  confirmation  of  a  status  that  had
      existed since his father's arrival, as would have been the case had he
      been granted leave as a refugee. There has never been any evidence  to
      show that his father's asylum  claim  would  have  been  successful  -
      indeed the fact that he was deported to the DRC suggests that it would
      not. The appellant can therefore only be said to have benefitted  from
      the delay.

  29. It follows, therefore, that we consider that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      did  not  err  in  their  conclusions  at  paragraph   65   of   their
      determination, when finding that the appellant had not  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom with valid leave for 15 years, and that  they  properly
      found that he  was  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      399(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules.

  30. For the same reasons we  find  no  merit  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
      asserting that the Tribunal failed, in their Article 8 assessment,  to
      consider the proximity to the Immigration Rules, given the  period  of
      the appellant's lawful residence. We consider that the  argument  made
      in the grounds of appeal to that effect is no more than a  "near-miss"
      argument, albeit that Mr Furner sought to persuade us that it was not,
      and as such is adequately disposed of by reference  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal judgement in Miah & Ors v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 261. In any event, this was  not  a  "near-
      miss" since, as we have found, the Rules clearly  require  a  15  year
      period of leave to  enter  remain  within  the  1971  Act,  which  the
      appellant fell two years short of being able to establish.

  31. We also find no merit in the grounds  complaining  of  the  Tribunal's
      consideration of  the  appellant's  family  life.  The  Tribunal  were
      entitled to find that his family life was not  strong  and  they  gave
      full and proper reasons for so concluding, at paragraphs 64 and 74  of
      their determination. Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, we find
      further  that  the  Tribunal  gave  full  consideration  to  the  best
      interests of the children, in line with the relevant  principles,  and
      found that it would not be in their best interests for  the  appellant
      to be deported.  They  took  that  into  account  in  their  balancing
      exercise, recognising, as they were required to do, that  that  was  a
      primary consideration.

  32. However, we consider that the Tribunal failed, nevertheless,  to  take
      into   account   all   relevant   matters   when   conducting    their
      proportionality balancing exercise. There is no indication,  in  their
      findings, that they applied any of the principles in Maslov v  Austria
      to the appellant's circumstances. Although reference was made to  that
      case on page 6 of their determination and to the principles therein at
      paragraph ee) on page 8, that was simply by way  of  setting  out  the
      respondent's reasons for deportation. Similarly, reference was made to
      the appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom and the  age
      at  which  he  arrived  here  at  paragraph  60,  page   23   of   the
      determination, but again that was only by way of recording submissions
      made on his behalf. Their findings on Article 8 commence at  paragraph
      71. At paragraph 88 they noted the appellant's length of residence  in
      the United Kingdom and at paragraph 91 they noted that  he  had  never
      returned to the DRC. However, at no point did  the  Tribunal  consider
      and assess the fact that the appellant came to the United Kingdom as a
      young child and that he spent the majority of his childhood here,  nor
      that in such circumstances  very  serious  reasons  were  required  to
      justify  expulsion.  On  the  contrary,  their   findings   that   the
      appellant's private life was not strong and  that  he  had  no  strong
      connections to the United Kingdom suggest  that  they  had  completely
      overlooked such matters in conducting the balancing  exercise,  rather
      than giving them the detailed consideration  required  by  the  Maslov
      principles.

  33. We consider the Tribunal's failure in that regard to be a  fundamental
      and material one. As such, we set aside the decision with  respect  to
      Article 8 of the ECHR, with a view to  the  issue  of  proportionality
      being re-visited and a fresh decision made by the Upper Tribunal.

  34. Our preliminary view, as we indicated at the hearing on 18 April 2013,
      was that there would be no need to  hear  further  oral  evidence.  We
      maintain that view to the extent that the Tribunal's findings of  fact
      stand and the decision is simply to  be  re-made  by  undertaking  the
      proportionality balancing exercise ourselves. However,  we  appreciate
      that it may be helpful to  be  provided  with  any  relevant  evidence
      relating to the appellant's current circumstances and to that  extent,
      therefore, we would be prepared to hear limited oral evidence.

  35. Accordingly, we make the following directions for the resumed hearing.

Directions

(a) No later than ten  days  before  the  date  of  the  next  hearing,  any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party  is  to  be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.

(b) The appellant or his representatives are to file with the  Tribunal  and
    serve upon the respondent a consolidated, indexed and paginated  bundle
    containing all documentary evidence relied upon.

(c) In respect of any witness who is to be  called  to  give  oral  evidence
    there must be a witness statement drawn in sufficient detail  to  stand
    as evidence in chief filed  with  the  Tribunal  and  served  upon  the
    respondent.

(d) The appellant's representatives are to file with the Tribunal and  serve
    upon the other party a skeleton  argument  setting  out  all  lines  of
    argument to be pursued at the hearing.



















                               Signed                                  Date
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
