

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                  E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011]
UKUT 00315 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2011                               |22 July 2011                 |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE JARVIS

                                   Between
                                    O E-A
                                  O O. E-A
                                  O O. E-A
                                    I E-A
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr M Rudd, instructed by Gulbenkian Andonian
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Ms D Cantrell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

        i) The correct starting point in considering the welfare  and  best
           interests of a young child would be  that  it  is  in  the  best
           interests of a child to live with and be brought up  by  his  or
           her parents, subject to any very strong contra-indication. Where
           it is in the best interests of a  child  to  live  with  and  be
           brought up by his or her parents, then the child's removal  with
           his parents does not involve any separation of family life.
       ii) Absent other factors, the reason why  a  period  of  substantial
           residence as a child may become a weighty consideration  in  the
           balance of competing considerations is that  in  the  course  of
           such time roots are put down, personal identities are developed,
           friendships are formed and links are  made  with  the  community
           outside the family unit. The degree to which these  elements  of
           private life are forged and therefore the weight to be given  to
           the passage of time will depend upon the facts in each case.
      iii) During a child's very early years, he or she will  be  primarily
           focused on self  and  the  caring  parents  or  guardian.   Long
           residence once the child is likely to have formed  ties  outside
           the family is likely to have greater impact on his or  her  well
           being.
       iv) Those who have their families with them during a period of study
           in the UK must do so in the light of the expectation of return.
        v) The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 was not  ruling
           that the ability of a young child to readily adapt to life in  a
           new  country  was  an  irrelevant  factor,   rather   that   the
           adaptability of the child in each case must be assessed  and  is
           not a conclusive consideration on its own.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Facts

    1. The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, whose dates of birth are  given
       as 6 January 1968; 14 April 2005; 8 November 2006, and 2 April  1979
       respectively, shall be referred to as the first, second,  third  and
       fourth  appellants  in  this  determination.   They  appeal  against
       decisions of  Immigration  Judge  Gurung-Thapa,  who  dismissed  the
       appellants' appeals on human rights grounds pursuant  to  Article  8
       ECHR, in a determination issued on 31 January 2011.


    2. The immigration  history  of  the  appellants  is  this.  The  first
       appellant entered the UK on 30  November  2004  as  a  student.  The
       second and fourth appellants entered the UK on 27  October  2005  in
       possession of valid entry  clearance  as  the  dependents  of  their
       student father/husband, with leave until 4 February 2006.

    3. The first, second and fourth  appellants  were  granted  periods  of
       leave to remain as a student  and  his  dependent  family  until  31
       August 2008, as was the third appellant, following her birth in  the
       UK on 8 November 2006.

    4. A further period of such leave was granted to the appellants from 17
       September 2008, when the first appellant was granted leave as a tier
       1 post study work migrant under the points based system (PBS), to 17
       September 2010.

    5. The fourth appellant is qualified as a lawyer in Nigeria  where  she
       had worked as a lawyer before coming to the UK  in  2005.  She  took
       steps to take the Qualified Lawyers Transfer Test (QLTT)  to  enable
       her to practise as a solicitor in England  and  Wales,  passing  the
       necessary  examinations  and  then   seeking   the   required   work
       experience. She did not, however, complete the necessary  period  of
       work experience as Lloyds bank, for whom she had been working,  were
       unable in the event to sponsor her as a tier 2 PSB applicant. As  it
       was too close to the expiry of her leave by the time she  discovered
       the inability of Lloyds to sponsor her,  she  made  the  application
       that became the subject of her appeal. The Immigration  Judge  finds
       that it was by no means certain that the fourth appellant would have
       succeeded in a tier 2 application even if there had been  a  sponsor
       and sufficient time in which to lodge it.

    6. The Secretary of State refused applications for an extension of stay
       on 26 October 2010. The respondent was not satisfied that  leave  to
       remain was being sought for a purpose  covered  by  the  Immigration
       Rules  or  that  there   were   any   exceptional,   compelling   or
       compassionate circumstances to  justify  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules so that the applications fell to be refused  under
       para 322(1) of HC 395 (as amended).  She went  on  to  consider  the
       applications under article 8 ECHR, taking the view that  whilst  the
       appellants may have established a private and family life in the UK,
       they would all be returning home together as a  family.   The  state
       having  the  right  to  control  entry  of  non-nationals  into  its
       territory, it did not follow that an individual could  choose  where
       to enjoy private life, and any interference with the  private  lives
       of the appellants was justified  in  the  interests  of  immigration
       control.

The Immigration Judge's decision

    7. The Immigration Judge noted that the first appellant had  failed  to
       produce any certificates to show that he had  been  awarded  an  MSc
       Information Technology  as  claimed.  In  addition,  she  took  into
       consideration that the appellants were all granted leave  to  remain
       on the strength of the first appellant's  claimed  qualification  of
       post graduate diploma in business management dated  July  2008  (p62
       appellants' bundle) from the Cambridge College of  Learning  (CCOL).
       He also lodged a transcript of his academic  record  at  CCOL  which
       states that he commenced the course in October 2007 and finished  in
       July 2008. The judge took into account the guidance of the  Tribunal
       in NA and Ors (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009]  UKAIT
       00031 in which it was held that the CCL never ran  any  such  course
       and that a person relying upon a certificate of such an  award  will
       be making a false representation and will fall foul of para  322(1A)
       of the Immigration Rules. Without going so far as to find  that  the
       first appellant does fall foul of para 322(1A), the judge  concludes
       that the case law guidance is contrary to his evidence and that  his
       credibility is thereby adversely affected.

    8. The Immigration Judge took into consideration the evidence going  to
       private life outside of  work  in  the  UK.  The  first  and  fourth
       appellants are said to be active members of the Lovesoul  Choir  and
       have raised money for charity. The first appellant is said to  be  a
       volunteer teacher at Covenant Life Ministries where the  second  and
       third appellants attend Sunday school. The second appellant has been
       a pupil at the Holy Family  Catholic  Primary  School,  Southampton,
       since 3 September 2009. The third appellant has attended  the  Trust
       Taplins Childcare Learning Centre nursery since 2 February 2009.

    9. The Immigration Judge concluded that the first and fourth appellants
       are well educated individuals. The first appellant has worked for  a
       considerable period of time in Nigeria in the IT  field.  He  has  a
       registered business in the UK, but it is not operational. He  has  a
       business in Nigeria in partnership. The first appellant is qualified
       as a lawyer and has been employed as such in Nigeria. She has  added
       to her work experience whilst in the UK. Both have their parents  in
       Nigeria and the appellants have visited Nigeria since having come to
       the UK. There are siblings, most of whom appear to be abroad.  There
       was no reason why the first and fourth appellants would not be  able
       to take up work again in Nigeria, whether in their own businesses or
       as employees.

   10. As for the second and third appellants, the judge deals  with  their
       appeals at para 29 of her determination. She  was  referred  by  the
       respondent to the case of Holub and Anor v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ 343,
       stating that it was held that a child's right to education whilst in
       the UK  does  not  carry  with  it  the  right  to  stay  here.  The
       Immigration Judge noted that whilst the respondent  must  take  into
       consideration any educational difficulties it is said that  a  child
       will suffer if returned to the country of  origin  as  part  of  the
       compassionate grounds for granting exceptional  leave,  she  is  not
       obliged to take a view as to whether the child's right under article
       2 of Protocol 1 will be infringed there.

   11. The Immigration Judge noted that the second  appellant  was  in  her
       first year at primary school and that the third appellant, (who  was
       at nursery), was born in the UK.  However,  noting  that  the  whole
       family would return home together, she finds  that  the  second  and
       third appellants are of an age where they will be able  to  re-adapt
       to life in Nigeria. There are  English  speaking  schools  and  they
       would attend such a school or schools, following which, any problems
       they may have had in understanding the accents of their grandparents
       in the course of visiting Nigeria, or visits by the grandparents  to
       the UK, would soon be overcome.

   12. The Immigration  Judge  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision
       entailed no breach of family and private life rights of any  of  the
       appellants.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 7 April 2011
       only in relation to ground 2 of the grounds:

           "Ground 2 refers to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. It is  arguable
           that in her assessment of the effect on the children of  removal
           the Immigration Judge does not give effect to the  principle  of
           the centrality of the welfare of the  children  as  set  out  in
           ZH(Tanzania), and  to  that  extent  it  is  arguable  that  the
           Immigration Judge made a material error of law."

Appellants' Submissions

   14. Mr Rudd on behalf of the appellants  submitted  a  written  skeleton
       argument dated 12 July 2011 on which he relied. It was accepted that
       the appellants had no claim under the immigration rules. Father  had
       run out of study leave and mother  had  no  sponsor  for  a  tier  2
       application. The grant of permission was in relation  to  article  8
       and the appellants assert that the following facts are  relevant  to
       the  assessment  of  the  article  8  rights  of  the  children  and
       consequently the family:


                 a. Nigeria is a foreign country to the children
                 b. The second appellant arrived in the UK when she was  six
                    months old
                 c. The third appellant was born in the UK
                 d. Neither child knows nor has any recollection of Nigeria
                 e. The children do not speak any of the native languages of
                    Nigeria
                 f. The children have lived at the same address since  their
                    arrival and it is the only home they have known
                 g. The appellants have lived in the UK lawfully  throughout
                    their entire stay
                 h.  The  fourth  appellant  has  an  exemplary  record   of
                    employment and effort toward qualifying as  a  solicitor
                    in the UK and is in a  difficult  position  due  to  the
                    inability of her employer to make good assurances  given
                    to her that they would sponsor her as a tier 2 migrant
                 i.  The  appellants  have  complied  with  all   conditions
                    attached to their stay
                 j. The first and fourth appellants  have  made  substantial
                    financial, personal and professional investments  toward
                    the settlement and integration of the family in  the  UK
                    and  a  significant  contribution  to  British   society
                    through their voluntary and charitable work.


   15. There was an error of law because the Immigration Judge did not give
       effect to the centrality and primacy of the welfare of the  children
       when considering the proportionality of the interference with  their
       acknowledged article 8 ECHR rights and this was a material error  of
       law. The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) establishes  that  the  best
       interests of the children are a primary consideration  and  although
       they will not always determine the  outcome  of  a  case,  no  other
       factor should be given  more  weight.  The  best  interests  of  the
       children must be considered first (Lady Hale para 26). Mr Rudd  also
       referred to Lord Kerr's judgment at para 46.

   16. Mr Rudd submitted that the best interests of the  children  in  this
       case are clearly served by allowing them to remain in  the  UK,  the
       only country they have known and that they consider  home.  It  goes
       further than the time that they have spent in  the  UK.  Nigeria  is
       alien to them. They would be taken away  from  their  home,  school,
       friends and all they have known, to live in an  essentially  foreign
       country.


   17. As to countervailing reasons, the immigration history of the parents
       in this case does not bear comparison with those  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
       and the only countervailing factor was the maintenance of  firm  and
       fair immigration control. However, there were  no  reasons  in  this
       case to conclude  that  such  a  reason  has  the  compelling  force
       necessary to outweigh the best interests of the children. It was for
       the respondent to demonstrate that there were reasons of  compelling
       force that outweigh the best interests  of  the  children  and  such
       reasons did not, in his submission, exist so that the appeals should
       be allowed.


   18. Ms Cantrell submitted that we should  find  that  the  determination
       disclosed no material  error  of  law.  All  that  could  have  been
       considered had been considered even when applying ZH (Tanzania). The
       judge does consider the children at para 29 and has  considered  all
       aspects relevant to  their  best  interests  including  their  wider
       family.


   19. We reserved our decision which we now give with our reasons.

The decision in ZH (Tanzania)

   20. Mr Rudd took us to paragraph 29 of  the  judgment  where  Lady  Hale
       considers what might be encompassed in the 'best  interests  of  the
       child' :

           "29. Applying, therefore, the approach in Wan to the  assessment
           of proportionality under article 8(2), together with the factors
           identified in Strasbourg,  what  is  encompassed  in  the  "best
           interests of the child"? As the UNHCR says, it broadly means the
           well-being of the child. Specifically, as Lord Bingham indicated
           in EB (Kosovo), it will involve asking whether it is  reasonable
           to expect the child to live in another country. Relevant to this
           will be the level of the child's integration in this country and
           the length of absence from the other  country;  where  and  with
           whom the child is to live and the arrangements for looking after
           the child in the other country; and the strength of the  child's
           relationships with parents or other family members which will be
           severed if the child has to move away."


   21. Further, at para 31, Lady Hale states:

           "31.  Substituting  "father"  for   "mother",   all   of   these
           considerations apply to the  children in  this  case.  They  are
           British  children;  they  are  British,  not  just  through  the
           "accident" of being born here, but by  descent  from  a  British
           parent; they have an unqualified right of abode here; they  have
           lived here all their lives; they are being educated  here;  they
           have other social links with the community  here;  they  have  a
           good relationship with their father here. It is  not  enough  to
           say that a young child may readily  adapt  to  life  in  another
           country. That may well be so, particularly  if  she  moves  with
           both her parents to a country which they  know  well  and  where
           they can easily re-integrate in their own  community  (as  might
           have been the case, for example, in Poku, para 20,  above).  But
           it is very different in the case of children who have lived here
           all their lives and are being expected  to  move  to  a  country
           which they do not know and will be separated from a parent  whom
           they also know well".

   22. Lord Kerr concurring said:

           "46. It is a universal theme of the  various  international  and
           domestic instruments to which Lady Hale has  referred  that,  in
           reaching decisions that  will  affect  a  child,  a  primacy  of
           importance must be accorded to his or her best  interests.  This
           is not, it is agreed, a factor of limitless  importance  in  the
           sense that it will prevail over all other considerations. It  is
           a factor, however, that must rank higher than any other.  It  is
           not  merely  one  consideration  that  weighs  in  the   balance
           alongside other competing factors. Where the best  interests  of
           the child clearly favour a certain course, that course should be
           followed unless countervailing  reasons  of  considerable  force
           displace them. It is not necessary to express this in terms of a
           presumption but the primacy of this consideration  needs  to  be
           made clear in emphatic terms. What is  determined  to  be  in  a
           child's best interests should customarily dictate the outcome of
           cases such as  the  present,  therefore,  and  it  will  require
           considerations of  substantial  moment  to  permit  a  different
           result.


           47. The significance of a child's nationality must be considered
           in two aspects.  The  first  of  these  is  in  its  role  as  a
           contributor to the debate as to where the child's best interests
           lie. It seems to me self evident  that  to  diminish  a  child's
           right to assert his or her nationality will not normally  be  in
           his or her best interests.  That  consideration  must  therefore
           feature in the determination of where the best interests lie. It
           was also accepted by  the  respondent,  however,  (and  I  think
           rightly so) that if a child is a British citizen,  this  has  an
           independent value, freestanding of the  debate  in  relation  to
           best interests, and this  must  weigh  in  the  balance  in  any
           decision that may affect where a child will live. As  Lady  Hale
           has said, this is not an  inevitably  decisive  factor  but  the
           benefits that British citizenship brings, as so aptly  described
           by Lord Hope and Lady Hale, must not readily be discounted."


Did the immigration Judge make an error of law?

   23. The appellants rely on the failure of the Immigration Judge to apply
       the guidance in ZH (Tanzania) and in particular to fail to treat the
       best interests of the second and third appellants as a first  and  a
       primary consideration.


   24.  We note that she does not appear to have been helped in  her  task,
       as although she determined the appeals on 31  January  2011,  a  few
       days before the judgment in ZH (Tanzania) was issued on  4  February
       2011, neither party referred her to the existing  guidance   of  the
       Upper Tribunal in LD (Article 8-best interests of child)  (Zimbabwe)
       [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC), and in  particular  to  paragraph  3  of  the
       guidance:

           "3.   The interests of minor children and their  welfare  are  a
              primary consideration. A failure to treat them as  such  will
              violate Article 8(2)".


   25. In addition, s. 55 of the  Borders,  Citizens  and  Immigration  Act
       2009, that provides a safeguarding duty in all immigration  decision
       making, as is referred to by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania), was
       in force at the time of the hearing and no regard  was  had  to  it,
       although again the judge does not appear to have been referred to it
       by the parties (there is no mention, for example, in the appellants'
       skeleton argument that was before the Immigration Judge).


   26.  Although the child appellants before us are  not  British  citizens
       and  although  the  immigration  decision  under  appeal  does   not
       contemplate the  separation  of  a  family,  we  recognise  that  an
       application for discretionary leave by children who have resided  in
       the United Kingdom for five and four years and the youngest of  whom
       was born here and has lived here all her life, engages  a  claim  to
       respect for the private life of the child  under  Article  8(2)  and
       thus requires an assessment of the best interests  if  the  children
       and the impact of the decision under appeal on their welfare.

   27. The case of Holub and Anor,  relied  on  by  the  respondent  is  of
       limited assistance. The question is not  whether  the  child  has  a
       right to stay to continue with education under Protocol 1, Article 2
       of the ECHR but: first, whether private  life  is  being  interfered
       with; second, if so,  whether  the  interference  is  sought  to  be
       justified for reasons of national security,  public  safety  or  the
       economic well-being of the country, for the prevention  of  disorder
       or crime, for the  protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
       protection of the  rights  and  freedoms  of  others;   and   third,
       whether the interference was necessary, that a fair balance  of  the
       competing interests and proportionate having regard to the interests
       of the child as a first and primary consideration.

   28. The Immigration Judge notes that the second appellant is in year one
       at primary school. She then notes that the third appellant was  born
       in the UK.  The  fact  that  the  third  appellant  attends  nursery
       education is  overlooked,  and  the  Immigration  Judge  then  moves
       straight to making a  general  conclusion  unsupported  by  reasons,
       that:  "However, both are of an age where they will be able  to  re-
       adapt to life in Nigeria," and  in  so  doing,  overlooks  that  the
       second appellant left Nigeria aged six months so will have little or
       no memory of life there, and that the third appellant  was  born  in
       the UK and has never lived in Nigeria.

   29.  We are satisfied that there was a material misdirection,  and  that
       analysis of the best interests of the children entirely through  the
       prism of the right to education was  too  narrow  an  approach.  The
       error might well be a material one and we will accordingly set aside
       the decision and remake it in the light of the evidence  before  the
       judge and the submissions made to us.

Our conclusions

   30. In immigration appeals the burden of proof normally  rests  with  an
       appellant, the standard of proof being the balance of probabilities.
       In coming to our determination, following s. 85(4) of the 2002  Act,
       we may take into account evidence about any matter  which  we  think
       relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence  which
       concerns a matter arising after the date of decision. We will assume
       that where the  Secretary of State is proposing to refuse  to  grant
       applications for exceptional discretionary leave to remain made when
       the applicants each have leave to remain she should  look  ahead  to
       any compassionate factor that would be relevant if making a  removal
       decision as well as making an Article 8 assessment.

   31. Mr Rudd founds upon his central submission that the second and third
       appellants have been in the UK for some 5 or 6 years, therefore  the
       UK is their home and Nigeria is a foreign  country,  from  which  it
       follows that they should be allowed to remain in the UK, where  they
       are at school. There  are  no  countervailing  factors  he  submits,
       because, like the children,  their  parents  have  good  immigration
       histories and are integrated into their community.

   32. It will be recalled that former policy  DP5/96,  which  came  to  be
       referred to as 'the Seven Year Child Concession' was said to  strike
       a balance between safeguarding the interests of  children  who  have
       established close connections with the UK over a significant  period
       of time and the need to ensure that  no  incentive  is  provided  to
       parents to seek to circumvent and abuse the  system  of  immigration
       control. In withdrawing  the  policy  on  9  December  2008  it  was
       acknowledged by the Minister that a child's residence in the UK will
       continue to be an important relevant  factor  in  removal  decisions
       that would in future be decided under article 8 ECHR


   33. Apart from a reference to 7 years residence as a basis for  granting
       leave to remain in the absence of countervailing factors, the policy
       made reference to other matters but these were not to be treated  as
       exhaustive  and  each  case  still  had  to  be  considered  on  its
       individual facts:

           "Whilst it is important that each individual case must be
           considered on its merits, the following are factors which may be
           of particular relevance:
                 .    (a)     the length of the parents' residence without
                   leave;
                 .    (b)     whether removal has been delayed through
                   protracted (and often repetitive) representations or by
                   the parents going to ground;
                 .    (c)     the age of the children;
                 .    (d)     whether the children were conceived at a time
                   when either of the   parents had a leave to remain;
                 .    (e)     whether return to the parents' country of
                   origin would cause extreme hardship for the children or
                   put their health seriously at risk;
                 .    (f)     whether either of the parents has a history of
                   criminal behaviour or deception."
   34. In addition, there is a Criminal Casework Directorate 'Children  and
       Family Cases Process Instruction' in which the UKBA acknowledges its
       duty to carry out its safeguarding instruction in removal cases. The
       duty is defined as protecting children from maltreatment; preventing
       impairment  of  children's  health  or  development;  ensuring  that
       children  are  growing  up  in  circumstances  consistent  with  the
       provision of safe and effective care; and undertaking that  role  so
       as to enable those children to have  optimum  life  chances  and  to
       enter adulthood successfully.


   35. In our judgment, putting together the various  sources  of  guidance
       noted above, the correct starting point in considering  the  welfare
       and best interests of a young child would be that it is in the  best
       interests of a child to live with and be brought up by  his  or  her
       parents, subject to any  very  strong  contra-indication.  Here  the
       parents and the children are Nigerian. The parents came here for the
       temporary purpose of study by the first appellant and  neither  they
       nor their children had any basis of expectation that they  would  be
       allowed to make  their  future  home  here.  The  children  have  no
       connection with the United Kingdom by  way  of  nationality  or  any
       other nexus independent or their residence  as  being  part  of  the
       parents household.

   36. It is clear from the evidence and findings of the Immigration  Judge
       that this is a family unit that functions effectively,  the  parents
       having been well-educated, in employment, providing properly for the
       needs of their children, parenting them appropriately, and there  is
       no evidence that shows or tends to show that the  interests  of  the
       children or either of them is best served by  separating  them  from
       their parents.  There is no evidence to suggest that the  return  of
       these children to Nigeria with their parents places them at any risk
       of harm or prejudice to their welfare.

   37. The third appellant has been resident in the United Kingdom for five
       years and  her  younger  sister  four  years  at  the  date  of  the
       respondent's decision. A further nine  months  residence  has  taken
       place since the decision has been under appeal.  Neither  under  the
       former DP/5/96 nor any other source of guidance referred to us would
       residence of that duration suggest the whole family  should  now  be
       permitted to remain here.

   38. We recognise  that  these  periods  represent  most  of  the  second
       appellant's and all of the third appellant's life,  and  that  there
       might come a time when it would be contrary to their best  interests
       and  disproportionate  in  maintaining  social  order  through   the
       enforcement of immigration control to refuse them permission to stay
       or require them to leave.  We  accept  that  there  is  no  criminal
       conduct or breach of the immigration  laws  here,  albeit  that  the
       first appellant's basis of permission to remain  as  a  CCL  student
       must be highly questionable.

   39.  Absent other factors,  the  reason  why  a  period  of  substantial
       residence as a child may  become  a  weighty  consideration  in  the
       balance of competing considerations is that in the  course  of  such
       time  roots  are  put  down,  personal  identities  are   developed,
       friendships are formed and links are made with the community outside
       the family unit. The degree to which these elements of private  life
       are forged and therefore the weight to be given to  the  passage  of
       time will depend upon the facts in each case.

   40. In the cases of these children we conclude  that  whilst  they  have
       been in the UK for a considerable period of  time,  the  nature  and
       degree of private life that they have forged  is  such  that  it  is
       still of a very personal, intra-family nature in the main, with  the
       focus on the home and family, although they have begun to take their
       first tentative steps toward socialisation and the world outside the
       family.  They  have  just   begun   primary   and   nursery   school
       respectively. The letters from their schools do no more than confirm
       that they have been attending since September 2009 and there  is  no
       evidence to suggest  that  either  has  any  particular  difficulty,
       special educational needs, special ability, or particular dependency
       on any provision made by their schools. Nor is it  said  that  there
       are any health problems of any kind. They are also attending  Sunday
       school classes at church. It is not clear for  how  long  they  have
       been doing that, but it is difficult to see that it  can  have  been
       for long given their young ages.

   41. There is no evidence to show that the second and third appellants or
       either of them has  as  yet  formed  any  deep,  strong  friendships
       outside the family and given their  young  ages  it  is  not  to  be
       expected that  this  would  be  the  case.   During  the  period  of
       residence from birth to the age of about four,  the  child  will  be
       primarily focused on self and the caring parents or guardian.   Long
       residence after this age is likely to have  greater  impact  on  the
       well being of the child.

   42. Whilst we recognise  that  a  move  to  Nigeria  will  require  some
       adaptation to a new home, new school and church, we  see  no  reason
       why that should not be a positive experience for  the  children  who
       will be supported by their parents. English is a language spoken  in
       Nigeria.  As  the  Immigration  Judge  observed   there   are   good
       educational facilities there, and the skills of both parents suggest
       they have the capacity to give to their children a high  quality  of
       life. Further, we note that apart from their parents, the second and
       third appellants have no family members in the UK, whereas they have
       both sets of grandparents and no doubt other relatives  in  Nigeria,
       although the siblings of their parents, or certainly some  of  them,
       appear to be living outside Nigeria at present.

   43. It is important to recall that although the appellants may all  have
       been here lawfully, they came to the UK for a temporary purpose with
       no expectation of  being  able  to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  third
       appellant happened to be born in the UK whilst her parents were here
       for a temporary purpose. The expectation was  that  they  would  all
       return to Nigeria once the first appellant's studies were completed.
       Those who have their families with them during a period of study  in
       the UK must do so in the light of that expectation of return.

   44. Mr Rudd relied upon paragraph 31 of ZH (Tanzania) and he highlighted
       parts of that paragraph that state that:

          "It is not enough to say that a young child may readily adapt  to
          life in another country.That may well be so, particularly if  she
          moves with both her parents to a country which they know well and
          where they can easily re-integrate in  their  own  community  (as
          might have been the case, for example, in Poku, para 20,  above).
          But it is very different in the case of children who  have  lived
          here all their lives and are being expected to move to a  country
          which they do not know and will be separated from a  parent  whom
          they also know well".

   45. We are not persuaded that this passage leads to the conclusion  that
       discretion  was  wrongly  exercised  in  this  case  or   that   the
       interference  with  private  life  is  disproportionate.  Here   the
       Immigration Judge has found and we agree  that  the  children  would
       readily adapt.  The Supreme Court was not ruling that  this  was  an
       irrelevant factor but adaptability was not  conclusive  against  the
       claim on its own.  Here the expectation has always  been  that  they
       would in due course have to change  their  place  of  residence  and
       adapt. They have no real links with  the  UK  other  than  residence
       whereas there are substantial links through nationality  and  family
       with Nigeria.


   46. Equally we do not conclude that the  fact  that  the  children  have
       lived in the UK all or most of their lives and are being expected to
       move  to  a  country  they  do  not  yet  know,  makes   that   move
       disproportionate.  There  must  be  individual   consideration   and
       assessment of best interests in each and  every  case.  By  contrast
       with ZH (Tanzania) the move to Nigeria from the UK does not  involve
       separation from  a  carer  or  the  country  of  nationality.  These
       decisions do not interfere with the enjoyment of family life on  the
       part of any of the appellants.

   47.  Having  assessed  the  best  interests  of  the  second  and  third
       appellants as a first and primary consideration and found that  they
       favour the course of remaining within the family unit, whether  that
       be in the UK or in Nigeria where, on the evidence produced, each  of
       the appellants would  be  able  to  thrive  and  continue  attending
       school, work,  church,  and  doing  charitable  works;  we  move  to
       consider whether requiring the appellants to  go  to  Nigeria  is  a
       necessary, proportionate and a fair balance  between  the  right  to
       respect for the private life of the appellants  and  the  particular
       public interest in question.

   48. We have no doubt that  it  is.  The  purpose  for  which  the  first
       appellant came to the  UK  has  been  fulfilled.  It  was  always  a
       temporary purpose and there was no expectation that he or any of his
       dependents who joined him here or were born here would  be  able  to
       remain indefinitely in the UK and no reasonable expectation that the
       fourth appellant would be enabled  to  qualify  as  a  solicitor  in
       England and Wales. The  reasonable  requirement  of  firm  and  fair
       immigration control consistently applied between one like  case  and
       another is that he and his family would leave the UK  on  completion
       of his studies. There is no evidence in these appeals to  show  that
       the factors referred to in the polices mentioned above are  relevant
       here so as to demand a grant of leave, nor does  the  evidence  show
       that there are any compelling or compassionate or other reasons  why
       the public interest in the maintenance of firm and fair  immigration
       control should not prevail.

   49. We conclude that requiring the appellants to leave the UK and to  go
       to Nigeria is justified by the public interest identified  in  these
       appeals and is a proportionate measure and a  fair  balance  between
       the competing interests.

   50. We remake the  decisions  by  dismissing  the  appeals  of  all  the
       appellants against the decisions of the respondent dated 26  October
       2010.




                                  Signed




                                     Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal




