

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Abiyat and others (rights of appeal) Iran [2011] UKUT 00314(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 June 2010 and 22 June 2011              |                             |
|                                              |20 July 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 HADI ABIYAT
                               DAVOOD GANDAGHI
                            ADAM MOHAMMAD HASSAN
                            CLAUDE BETANA BABINGI

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (22 June  2010);  Mr  C  Avery  (22  June
                    2011),                                            Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officers





   1. There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  under  s.83  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a refusal  of
      asylum triggered by a subsequent grant of more than one  year's  leave
      to remain, even if there  has  been  a  previous  unsuccessful  asylum
      appeal.


   2. There is a right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal declining jurisdiction, when that decision has
      been made after full consideration and is embodied in a determination.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1.    There are four appellants,  linked  only  by  the  identity  of  the
    questions their cases raise.  Those questions are: (1) Do they  have  a
    statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's  most   recent
    decisions against them? (2) Do they have a right of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that they have
    no statutory right of appeal against the respondent's decisions?

 2.    There were originally five appellants.  The  fifth,  Sipho  Khumalo,
    has withdrawn any appeal extant under  file  no  AA/02555/2010.  Notice
    acknowledging the withdrawal was sent out on 28 April 2011.

 3.    These matters were listed for  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    consisting of myself and Senior Immigration Judge Ward on 22 June 2010.
     We had considerable difficulty in reaching agreement on the answers to
    the questions posed.  After considerable discussion we  had  agreed  on
    the answer to the first question, with one  reservation  that  I  shall
    deal with in due course.  We failed to reach agreement on the answer to
    the second question.  SIJ Ward's illness and tragic  early  death  have
    deprived me, and indeed the parties, of the  further  benefits  of  her
    wisdom.   At a further hearing on 22 June 2011 the parties consented to
    my now determining these appeals alone.


The Facts

 4.    I do not need to set out the facts in any great detail; I  take  the
    following gratefully from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    first appellant is a national of Iran,  born  on  22  July  1968.   The
    second appellant is a national of Iran, born on 8  January  1971.   The
    third appellant is a national of Sudan, born on 1  October  1969.   The
    fourth appellant is a national of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,
    born on 5 December 1982.  Each of them came to the  United  Kingdom  in
    2002, 2003 or 2004 and claimed asylum; each of them was refused.   Each
    of them appealed unsuccessfully.   Following the expiry of their appeal
    rights, each of them made  further  submissions  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, some on more than one occasion.  There was no response to  those
    submissions.  However, between November 2009 and January 2010  each  of
    the appellants received a letter from  the  respondent.   The  material
    parts of each of the letters is as follows:

          "Your  case  has  been  reviewed.   Having  fully  considered  the
          information  you  have  provided,  because   of   the   individual
          circumstances of your case, it  has  been  decided  to  grant  you
          indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  This leave  has
          been granted exceptionally, outside the Immigration  Rules.   This
          is due to your strength of connections in the United  Kingdom  and
          length of residence in the United Kingdom.

          This means that you are free to stay in this country permanently
          ...
          On reviewing your case it is noted that you  have  an  outstanding
          Fresh Asylum Claim (post ARE [appeal rights  exhausted]).   Unless
          you contact us within the next 14 calendar days we will assume you
          wish to withdraw the outstanding claim."

 5.    None of the appellants wished or wish to withdraw their  outstanding
    asylum claims.  They each claim entitlement to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom  not  exceptionally  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  as
    refugees.

 6.    Each of the appellants gave  notice  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  A hearing  was  arranged  before  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Renton and Immigration Judge C Lloyd on 22 March  2010.   Having  heard
    submissions from Mr  Mackenzie,  who  has  represented  the  appellants
    throughout, and from Mr C Hobb on behalf of the Respondent, they issued
    a  document  headed  "Determination  and  Reasons"  and  concluding  as
    follows:

           "DECISION


            12. Our decision is that the purported appeals are dismissed in
        that we find that
            there are no valid appeals before the Tribunal.   The  Tribunal
        will take no further action
            in respect of them."

 7.    It is against that determination or decision that the appellants now
    seek to appeal.  They were granted  permission  by  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Nichols on 23 April 2010.

The right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8.    In para 1, I set out the questions raised by  these  cases,  in  the
    order in which they arose; but I need to  answer  question  (2)  first,
    because if the answer is in the negative, there will be no scope for my
    providing an answer to question (1).  Expressed rather more fully,  the
    issue raised by question (2) is whether there is a right of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    reached after a hearing and expressed in the form of  a  determination,
    that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain a purported  appeal.



 9.    The relevant statutory revisions are as follows:

10.    Section 11(1)-(3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    provides for a right of appeal, to be exercised only  with  permission,
    on any point of law arising from a  decision  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than an excluded decision.   s.11(5) gives  the  meaning
    of the phrase "excluded decision".  The first five paragraphs  of  that
    sub-section list specific types of decision: none of them are  relevant
    in these proceedings.   Para (f) is as follows:

        "(f)  any  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  of  a
        description specified in an order made by the Lord Chancellor"

11.    Sub-sections (6) and (7) of s.11 set out restrictions on  the  power
    to make Orders under s.11(5)(f).  A description  may  be  specified  in
    such an order only if either there is already  a  right  of  appeal  at
    least as large as that provided by s.11(1)-(3) or if there was no right
    of appeal before the relevant appellant structure was transferred  into
    the Tribunal system created by the 2007 Act.

12.    The latter provision is of some interest in considering issues  such
    as that before me now, because it shows that the provisions relating to
    appeals from decisions from the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (whose
    functions were transferred on 15 February 2010)  are  of  relevance  in
    construing any order made under s.11(5)(f).  For example, a description
    specified in such an order is likely to have to be construed in such  a
    way as not to include decisions  which,  prior  to  15  February  2010,
    carried a right of appeal.

13.    There is an order made under s.11(5)(f): it is the Appeals (Excluded
    Decisions) Order 2009 (SI 2009/275) (as amended).  Article  3  of  that
    Order provides, in part, as follows:

          "3. For the purposes of s.11(1) and 13(1) of the Tribunals, Courts
          and Enforcement Act 2007 [which has provisions relating to appeals
          to the Court of Appeal], the following decisions of the First-tier
          Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal are excluded decisions -
          ...
          (m) any procedural, ancillary  or  preliminary  decision  made  in
          relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A of  the
          British Nationality Act  1981,  section  82,  83  or  83A  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, or regulation 26  of
          the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

14.    If the appellants have the right of appeal, it is under s.83 of  the
    2002 Act.

15.    The First-tier Tribunal has a procedure for dealing with cases where
    a Notice of Appeal is submitted by a person who has no right of appeal.
     That procedure is in the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 (SI  2005/230),  which  as  amended  continue  to  apply  to
    proceedings  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    Rule   2   contains
    definitions, of which the following is relevant:


          "'Relevant decision' means a decision against which  there  is  an
          exercisable right of appeal to the Tribunal."

    It is convenient also to set out the following definition here, also in
    rule 2.

          "'Determination', in relation to an appeal, means  a  decision  by
          the Tribunal in writing to allow or dismiss the appeal,  and  does
          not include a procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision"

16.    Rule 9 is headed "Where the Tribunal may  not  accept  a  notice  of
    appeal" and is as follows:

          "(1)   Where a person has given a notice of appeal to the Tribunal
               and the circumstances in para (1A) apply, the  Tribunal  may
               not accept the notice of appeal.


          (1A)     The circumstances referred to in paragraph (1) are that -


                       (a)  there is no relevant decision; or
               b)  the  notice  of  appeal  concerns  the  refusal  of   an
                  application for entry clearance which was not made for  a
                  purpose falling within section 88A (1)(a) or (b)  of  the
                  2002 Act, and the notice  of  appeal  does  not  rely  on
                  either of the grounds specified in section  88A(3)(a)  of
                  the 2002 Act.


          (2)   Where the Tribunal does not accept a notice  of  appeal,  it
          must -
                       (a)  notify the person giving the  notice  of  appeal
          and the respondent; and
                       (b)  take no further action."

17.    The Senior President's Practice Statements for the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  have
    relevant provisions.  The wording was  adopted  in  the  light  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in JH (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
    78, to which I shall make further reference shortly:

            "3.        Where the Tribunal may not accept a notice of  appeal

          1. First-tier rule 9 (where the Tribunal may not accept a  Notice
             of Appeal) imposes a duty on the Tribunal  not  to  accept  an
             invalid Notice of Appeal (in the  circumstances  described  in
             rule 9(1A)) and to serve notice to this effect on  the  person
             who gave the Notice of Appeal and on the respondent.
          2. The Tribunal will scrutinise a Notice of  Appeal  as  soon  as
             practicable after it has been given.  First-tier rule 9  makes
             no provision for the issue for validity to  be  determined  by
             means of a hearing or by reference to any  representations  of
             the parties.
          3. Once the Tribunal has served the Notice described in paragraph
             3.1, First-tier rule 9 provides that the tribunal must take no
             further action in relation  to  the  Notice  of  Appeal.   The
             decision under First-tier rule 9 is, accordingly a  procedural
             or preliminary decision.
          4. The fact that a hearing  date  may  have  been  given  to  the
             parties does not mean that  the  appeal  must  be  treated  as
             valid.  Accordingly, if at a hearing (including a CMR hearing)
             it transpires that the Notice of Appeal does not relate  to  a
             decision against which there  is,  in  the  circumstances,  an
             exercisable right of appeal, the Tribunal must so find; but it
             will do so in the form of  a  determination,  rather  than  by
             means of a notice under First-tier rule 9. "

18.     In  JH  (Zimbabwe)  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Asylum   and
    Immigration Tribunal was allowed; but on reconsideration  the  Tribunal
    substituted a determination dismissing the appeal.  That  decision  was
    in its turn set aside by consent in the Court of Appeal which  remitted
    the case for reconsideration by the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    differently  constituted.   The  appeal  was  listed  before  a  Senior
    Immigration Judge, who decided that there had never been any  right  of
    appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  He  said  that  he  was
    obliged to issue a notice to that effect under rule 9.

19.    The  appellant  wanted  to  challenge  that  decision.   Three  Lord
    Justices (Laws, Wall and Richards LJJ)  sat  to  consider  the  matter,
    ready to constitute themselves as a Court of Appeal  if  the  appellant
    was entitled to appeal against the Senior Immigration Judge's decision,
    and as a Divisional Court if the  decision  was  amenable  to  Judicial
    Review only.  Richards LJ gave the leading judgment; the other  members
    of the Court agreed with  him.   After  setting  out  Rule  9  and  the
    statutory provisions relating  to  reconsideration  (which  allowed  an
    appeal to the Court of Appeal, with permission, from a  decision  taken
    after reconsideration) he said this:

        "7.  For the Secretary of State, Mr Beer  submits  that  the  SIJ's
        decision was not a decision  taken  after  reconsideration  of  the
        appeal, so as to engage a right of appeal under s.103B(1), but  was
        taken pursuant  to  rule  9  of  the  Procedure  Rules  and  was  a
        procedural or preliminary decision within the meaning of s.103A(7).
         Although the case had been remitted by the Court of Appeal  for  a
        fresh reconsideration, what happened thereafter was  that  the  SIJ
        expressly declined to reconsider the case, on the ground  that  the
        Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to accept  the  appeal  in  the  first
        place.  Mr Beer seeks to reinforce his case  by  policy  arguments,
        contending  that  Parliament  must  have  intended  that   Tribunal
        decisions on procedural or preliminary points would  be  final  and
        would not be subject to appeal (though judicial review might  still
        lie).


        8.  I have no hesitation in rejecting those submissions.   In  this
        case the tribunal had moved far  beyond  the  rule  9  stage.   The
        notice of appeal had been accepted by the tribunal and  the  appeal
        had already been determined and reconsidered once.   The  case  had
        then gone to the Court of Appeal and had been remitted for a  fresh
        reconsideration.  That was how it came before the SIJ.  I think  it
        plain that his decision was reached on a  reconsideration  pursuant
        to the remittal and that the conditions for a further appeal to the
        court of Appeal under s.103B(1) and (2) were  therefore  satisfied.
        Although the SIJ referred to rule 9 it makes no sense to treat  his
        decision as having been made under rule 9 or  as  a  procedural  or
        preliminary decision of the kind  referred  to  in  s.103A(7).   It
        happens from time to time that the Tribunal, on  the  determination
        of an appeal or on reconsideration, decides that the Tribunal lacks
        jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.  I  see  no  good  reason  of
        principle or policy why such a decision  should  be  excluded  from
        review  or  appeal  under  s.103A  or  s.103B.   In   the   unusual
        circumstances of the present case, where a decision on jurisdiction
        was made for the first time on a second reconsideration,  it  would
        in my view be extraordinary if no right of appeal  existed.   I  am
        satisfied that a right of appeal does exist. "

20.    What is clear from JH (Zimbabwe), which is binding on me,  is  that,
    at the time JH (Zimbabwe) was decided, there might be a right of appeal
    against a decision by the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  that  it
    lacked jurisdiction. That right was recognised  by  the  Court  on  the
    basis that, when there had been consideration  of  the  appeal  by  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, it made no sense to treat  a  decision
    of the kind in question as merely procedural or preliminary.   Thus  it
    was not excluded from appeal by the statutory provisions (which were to
    all intents and purposes the same as those applying after  15  February
    2010) excluding appeals against procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary
    decisions.

21.    Both Richards LJ and the Senior President's Practice Statement leave
    open the question of whether decisions as to jurisdiction are for these
    purposes "procedural". Before me, Mr Avery submitted that a decision as
    to jurisdiction was procedural.  Mr Mackenzie briefly submitted that  a
    decision could only be procedural if it  related  to  procedure  in  an
    appeal  before  the  Tribunal.   I  am  inclined  to  agree  with  that
    submission, but, in any event, it  is  very  difficult  to  see  how  a
    decision that the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  would  be  sometimes
    excluded from appeal  and  sometimes  not,  if  it  was  in  any  event
    "procedural".  It seems to me that a decision as to jurisdiction is not
    procedural; but it may  be  preliminary.    "Preliminary"  for  present
    purposes has two possible meanings.  It may mean "at the beginning", or
    it may mean in relation "in relation to the possibility of commencing".
     Again, if it has  the  latter  meaning,  it  must  have  that  meaning
    whenever the decision is taken; but if it means "at the beginning",  it
    would apply to a notice under rule 9 issued before and instead  of  any
    other proceedings in the Tribunal, but would not apply to a decision as
    to jurisdiction issued later.  Such a decision might be preliminary  in
    the second sense, but not in the first.  I conclude that JH  (Zimbabwe)
    essentially decides that a decision as to jurisdiction made  after  the
    Tribunal has begun to consider an appeal, including a  case  where  its
    consideration is limited to the issue of whether there is jurisdiction,
    is not procedural, and is not preliminary in the sense intended by  the
    legislation governing the asylum and immigration tribunals.

22.    Such an interpretation accords with what one would  broadly  expect.
    If a Tribunal (whether by initial notice under  rule  9  or  any  other
    means) declines to determine a case in which it has  jurisdiction,  the
    remedy would naturally  be  a  mandatory  order  obtained  on  judicial
    review.  If, however, the Tribunal is part  of  a  structure  in  which
    there is a further right of appeal, and it  reaches  a  decision  after
    consideration of an issue, the assumption would be that recourse should
    be had to the right of appeal.  But, decisions  taken  on  the  way  to
    arriving at a determination of appeal are probably  excluded  from  the
    appellate process, because the latter's role is to entertain challenges
    against  decisions  which  dispose  of  the  appeal.   There   may   be
    exceptional circumstances where a procedural or ancillary decision  can
    properly be challenged (by judicial review) before the appeal has  been
    determined, but, generally, the proper  procedure  is  to  await  final
    determination;  if  there  is  an  appeal,  the  grounds  may   include
    assertions about preliminary or ancillary decisions that led to it.

23.   The outcome of JH (Zimbabwe) is clearly that, on the  facts  of  that
    case, there was a right of appeal.  It is I think worth pausing  for  a
    moment to consider in a little more detail what the appeal was against.
      The  history  of  the  case  shows  that  although  there  had   been
    consideration of the appellant's appeal twice by the AIT  and  once  by
    the Court of Appeal, each decision had set the previous decision aside.
     Thus, when following remittal by the Court of Appeal, the SIJ made his
    decision, he was (newly) making the  first  judicial  decision  on  the
    appellant's  notice  of  appeal.   It  is  that   decision   which   is
    characterised by the Court of Appeal as not procedural or  preliminary.
    It does not appear to me  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  was
    limited to cases where there had been as lengthy a process as  in  that
    case; the distinguishing feature of the SIJ's decision was not that  it
    was made after remittal by the Court of Appeal, but that it was made at
    a time when there had been proceedings  before  the  AIT,  and  it  was
    therefore too late to say that the Tribunal had not accepted the notice
    of appeal or that the decision was "preliminary".

24.    It would be possible to  move  straight  from  the  wording  of  the
    provisions governing appeals against decisions  of  the  AIT  to  those
    governing appeals against decisions of the First-tier Tribunal.   As  I
    have  already  said,  the  wording  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes
    identical.   But to do that would be to omit  an  important  step.   It
    seems to me that the position is not merely that  the  wording  of  the
    Excluded Decisions Order can and probably should have the same  meaning
    as the provisions relating to the AIT,  but  that  it  must  have  that
    meaning.  I derive that conclusion from s.11(6) of the  2007  Act.   If
    there was a right of appeal against such a decision of the  AIT,  there
    must after transfer of the functions of that Tribunal to the  structure
    established by the 2007 Act, continue to  be  a  right  of  appeal:  it
    cannot be lawfully excluded by an order made under  s.11(5)(f).   Thus,
    whatever  temptation  there  might  be  to  construe  the   new   words
    differently from the old is removed by the  statutory  provision  under
    which the new Order is made.

25.    In the present case, the First-tier Tribunal did not issue a rule  9
    Notice as its immediate and only response to the appellants' notice  of
    appeal.  It took jurisdiction to consider whether there was a right  of
    appeal, and the decision it issued was not procedural,  because,  as  I
    have decided, a decision to decline jurisdiction is not procedural, and
    was not preliminary within the meaning of the Order, because, like  the
    decision in JH (Zimbabwe), it was not made at  the  very  start.    The
    First-tier Tribunal's decision therefore carries the right of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Permission has been granted, and  that  appeal  is
    validly before me.

    Was  the  First-tier  Tribunal  right  to  decide  that   it   had   no
    jurisdiction?


26.    I turn then to the first  of  the  two  questions  set  out  at  the
    beginning of this determination.  The First-tier Tribunal decided  that
    the appellants had no right of appeal.   Was  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    right?

27.    Since  the  Upper  Tribunal  heard  argument  in  this  case,  those
    representing the appellant have pursued judicial review proceedings  in
    relation to claimants whose cases were similar, save that the decisions
    made by the First-tier  Tribunal  were  undoubtedly  "preliminary",  so
    carried no right of appeal.  In R (S and others) v First-tier  Tribunal
    (IAC) and SSHD [2011] EWHC 627 (Admin),  Beatson  J  decided  that  the
    claimants had a right of appeal under s.83 of the 2002  Act,  and  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to refuse to entertain it.   That  is
    also the conclusion which SIJ Ward  and  I  had  reached  and,  in  the
    circumstances, I need to  say  little  more  save  that  I  adopt  with
    gratitude the reasoning of Beatson J.

28.    Section 83 of the 2002 Act is as follows:

        "83.  Appeal: asylum claim
        (1) This section applies where a person has made  an  asylum  claim
        and -
        a) his claim has been rejected  by the Secretary of State, but
        b) he has been granted leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom for a
                            period  exceeding  one  year  (or  for  periods
           exceeding one year in
                           aggregate).
           (2)  The  person  may  appeal  [to  the  Tribunal]  against  the
        rejection of his asylum
                  claim."


29.    The right of appeal is triggered by the grant of leave, not  by  the
    rejection of the asylum claim; s.83 does not require a link between the
    rejection of the asylum claim and the grant of leave; and s.83 does not
    exclude the right of appeal under that section  if  there  has  already
    been a  previous  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  against  an  immigration
    decision within the meaning of s.82.

30.    All four of the present appellants had a right of appeal under s.83,
    which arose on the grant to them of a period  of  leave  exceeding  one
    year.  (A grant of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  is  a  grant  for  a
    "period": s.3(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971 refers to leave "either
    for a limited or for an indefinite period".  This is the point to which
    I referred in paragraph 3 as a "reservation".)

31.    It follows that each of the appellants, having  been  subject  to  a
    decision "which is appealable", was entitled to a notice complying with
    the requirements of the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  (SI
    2003/658).  None of them has, so far as I am aware, yet received such a
    notice, so time for appealing has not begun to run against any of them.
    Each  of  them  has,  however,  apparently  waived   the   Regulations'
    requirements for notice of their right  of  appeal  and  has  issued  a
    notice of appeal.  It follows that each of them has an appeal  awaiting
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

