
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Vassallo (Qualifying residence; pre-UK accession) [2014] UKUT 00313 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BENEDETTO VASSALLO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R. Halim, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors

(1)  A  person  may  acquire  qualifying  residence  for  the  purposes   of
exercising Treaty rights in respect of periods of residence  arising  before
the UK became part of the European Community on 1 January 1973.

(2) Similarly, a person may  acquire  qualifying  residence  in  respect  of
periods of residence arising before the implementation  of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2000.

(3) However, in each case the residence in question must  be  in  accordance
with the conditions laid down in Article 7(1) of Directive  2004/38/EC  (the
Citizens Directive) or in accordance with Schedule 4,  paragraph  6  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience we refer to the parties as they were before
       the First-tier Tribunal. Thus, the appellant, Benedetto Vassallo, is
       a citizen of Italy, born on 1 January  1948.  He  is  said  to  have
       arrived in the UK in 1952.

    2. The appellant has been convicted of  numerous  and  varied  criminal
       offences. They are  summarised  in  the  refusal  letter  as  having
       commenced in 1963, involving 68 offences in the UK, Switzerland  and
       Sweden, and consisting mostly of offences  of  dishonesty  including
       numerous offences of burglary. He has  received  many  sentences  of
       imprisonment.

    3. His offending culminated in a  conviction  in  the  Crown  Court  at
       Canterbury on 21 May 2012 for an offence of (residential)  burglary,
       resulting in a sentence of 29  months'  imprisonment.  That  offence
       involved the burglary of the home of an elderly couple in their 90's
       who had been watched leaving the premises.  The  appellant  and  his
       accomplice  were  apprehended  after  leaving   the   property,   in
       possession of jewellery, ornaments and cash.

    4. On 19 August 2013 a decision was made to make  a  deportation  order
       pursuant to the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
       2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  The appellant's  appeal  against  the
       decision was allowed under the EEA  Regulations  by  a  panel  ("the
       Panel") of the First-tier Tribunal consisting of First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Nightingale and non-legal member Sir Jeffrey  James,  after  a
       hearing on 21 November 2012.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in concluding that the
       appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence and could only
       be deported on imperative grounds of public security.

   The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

    6. The Panel of the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant  had
       established that he had been resident in the UK since  1952  as  had
       been claimed and that his parents were in employment here  from  the
       time that the appellant arrived.

    7. The Panel also found that he had been continuously  resident  for  a
       period of 10 years prior to his first sentence  of  imprisonment  in
       1963, and in that time  he  had  been  in  education.  He  had  thus
       acquired protection against removal at  the  highest  level,  namely
       imperative grounds of public security under regulation 21(4) of  the
       EEA Regulations. The periods of time that he  spent  in  Sweden  and
       Switzerland did not break the continuity  of  residence.  The  Panel
       found in the alternative that the appellant had  acquired  permanent
       residence on the basis of five years continuous residence.

    8. He had been to Italy only once since the  age  of  5  for  a  family
       holiday of about three weeks and he has not remained in contact with
       relatives there. It was found  that  he  neither  reads  nor  writes
       Italian and that his spoken Italian  is  limited.  He  was,  to  all
       intents and purposes, raised as a British child, married  a  British
       woman and is the father of two British national children to whom  he
       is "reasonably" close emotionally.

    9. The Panel found that the appellant had committed a large  number  of
       criminal offences but represented a low risk of reoffending.

   Submissions

   10.  Mr Melvin submitted that the Panel was wrong to take  into  account
       the period from 1953 to 1963 as demonstrating that the appellant had
       acquired permanent residence in the UK, thus entitling  him  to  the
       highest  level  of  protection  against  removal,  namely  only   on
       imperative grounds of public security. This is because  the  UK  did
       not become part of the European Community ("EC") until 1973.

   11. In addition, the Panel had been wrong to conclude that the appellant
       had integrated into the community in the  UK,  he  having  committed
       offences  over  a  47  year  period.  The  decision  in  Essa  (EEA:
       rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) was  relied  on.
       He is a serial offender who could not be said to have  become  fully
       integrated. There is very little evidence of the exercise of  Treaty
       rights whilst he has not been in prison.

   12. Mr Halim relied on the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Taous
       Lassal [2009] EWCA Civ  157  in  relation  to  the  objects  of  the
       Citizens  Directive  and  the  need  to  facilitate  free  movement.
       Notwithstanding that the  appellant's  life  in  Europe  took  place
       before formal union, he has been here since the age of 5 which is  a
       matter that should attract weight.

   13. Between 1953 and 1963 the appellant was a student.  Paragraph  6  of
       Schedule 4 to the EEA  Regulations  meant  that  that  period  as  a
       student could be taken into account. Even if he had not qualified by
       reason of his studies, he was a family member of persons  exercising
       Treaty rights. It  was  not  argued,  however,  that  the  appellant
       qualified as a worker in his own right.

   14.  Furthermore,  it  had  not  been  established  that  the  appellant
       represented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
       affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. The Secretary
       of State was not entitled  to  go  behind  the  OASys  report  which
       referred to his risk of reoffending as low. The appellant had  spent
       many years in the UK, had no ties to  Italy,  could  not  speak  the
       language and could be said to be a 'home grown' criminal.

   15. The appeal would otherwise have been allowed under Article 8 of  the
       ECHR if not under the EEA Regulations, the Panel having referred  to
       the decision in Maslov [2008] ECHR 546.

   16. In reply, Mr Melvin submitted that if the appellant were not able to
       succeed on the basis of his studies between 1953 and  1963,  equally
       he could not rely on his being a dependant of  his  parents  because
       the same principle applies: he could not benefit from membership  of
       the EC at that time.

   Our assessment

   17. It is as well to set out at this  stage  the  relevant  elements  of
       Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Directive" or  "Citizens  Directive")  as
       transposed  into  UK  domestic  law  by  the  EEA  Regulations.  The
       Regulations are as follows:

     "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

     19.- ...

             (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who  has
             entered the United Kingdom or  the  family  member  of  such  a
             national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             (a) that person does not have or ceases  to  have  a  right  to
             reside under these Regulations; or

             (b) the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 21.

             (4) A person must not be removed under  paragraph  (3)  as  the
             automatic  consequence  of  having  recourse  to   the   social
             assistance system of the United Kingdom.

             (5) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if he  has
             a right to remain in the United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of  leave
             granted under the 1971 Act unless his removal is  justified  on
             the grounds of public policy, public security or public  health
             in accordance with regulation 21.

             ...

             Decisions taken on public policy, public  security  and  public
             health grounds

             21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
             decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security
             or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b) is under the age of 18, unless  the  relevant  decision  is
             necessary in  his  best  interests,  as  provided  for  in  the
             Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted  by  the  General
             Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989(11).

             (5) Where a relevant decision is taken  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be  taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

             (a)  the  decision  must   comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b) the decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent
             a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests of society;

             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify
             the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not   in
             themselves justify the decision.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public
             policy or public security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the  age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic  situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's  social
             and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent
             of the person's links with his country of origin."

   18. The Citizens Directive sets out a hierarchy of levels of  protection
       from removal in the case of EEA nationals, of which the appellant is
       one, being a citizen of Italy.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
       that the appellant was entitled to the highest level of  protection,
       namely  in  terms  of  imperative  grounds   of   public   security;
       alternatively, although it was not actually spelt out in terms,  the
       lower level namely  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
       security.

   19. At the outset we can dispose of one matter raised in  the  Secretary
       of State's grounds of appeal. That is the contention that the First-
       tier Tribunal concluded that because the appellant had acquired five
       years residence he could only be removed on "imperative  grounds  of
       public security". That is however, a misunderstanding  of  what  the
       Panel said. At [62] the Panel said this:

             "By 1963 the appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  as,  we
             accept,  the  child,  that  is  to  say  the  relative  in  the
             descending line, of EEA nationals working here. We accept  that
             he had, consequently, been here for  five  continous  years  on
             that basis and, indeed for ten years residence at the  time  he
             was first sent to prison."

   20. At [63] the Panel went on to state that:

             "We  accept  on  balance  that  the  appellant  had,  by  1963,
             residence for ten years continuously in the United Kingdom.  We
             also accept on balance that after  five  years  in  the  United
             Kingdom he had acquired permanent residence. It follows that we
             find that he has established that he is entitled to the highest
             level of protection against removal, that is to say  imperative
             grounds of public security, under Regulation 21(4)."

   21. Reading those paragraphs together, it is clear  the  Panel  did  not
       equate five years residence with a removal that could only be  based
       on imperative grounds of public security. Rather, it concluded  that
       in addition to the  five  years  which  entitled  him  to  permanent
       residence,  he  had  acquired  a  further  five   years   qualifying
       residence.

   22. The central question in this appeal is  whether  the  appellant  has
       acquired EU rights such as would enable him to resist removal except
       as provided for in the Directive.

   23. That question arises in the following way: the appellant arrived  in
       the UK in 1952, so the First-tier  Tribunal  found.  The  period  of
       residence prior  to  his  committing  criminal  offences  and  being
       subject to imprisonment or its young persons' equivalent was  before
       the Citizens Directive came into force, which  was  29  April  2004.
       More to the point, it accrued at a time before the UK was even  part
       of the European Communities (subsequently  the  EU)  which  did  not
       happen until the coming into force of the European  Communities  Act
       1972 on 1 January 1973.

   24. Our reference above to  the  "period  of  residence"  prior  to  his
       committing offences requires further  refinement  in  terms  of  the
       findings made by the First-tier Tribunal because,  as  can  be  seen
       from the authorities we refer to  below,  mere  'residence'  without
       connection to a relevant activity, by the individual or in  relation
       to another person's activity, does not give rise to the  acquisition
       of any EU rights, whenever that residence occurred.

   25. The First-tier Tribunal accepted at  [61]  that  the  appellant  had
       arrived in the UK in 1952. It concluded that by  1963  he  had  been
       resident continuously in the UK for 10 years. At [62] it  was  found
       that he had lived here since 1952 as the  child  "of  EEA  nationals
       working here", that is his parents. At [61] it  was  concluded  that
       the appellant was educated until the age  of  14,  a  period  of  10
       years.

   26. It is as well to state at this point that it  is  not  suggested  on
       behalf of the appellant that he is able to rely  on  any  period  of
       employment or self employment that he was  himself  engaged  in,  or
       indeed any other qualifying status or activity. All that  is  relied
       on in terms of qualifying residence is his having  been  a  student,
       alternatively  his  status  as  a  child  of  parents  who  were  in
       employment.

   27. Mr Halim principally relied on the provisions of the EEA Regulations
       in support of the contention that  the  appellant  had  acquired  EU
       rights of residence. Although in one sense it is logical to consider
       the relevant domestic legislative provisions  first,  it  is  useful
       before turning to the relevant provisions of Schedule 4, paragraph 6
       of the EEA Regulations, to consider the authorities to which we were
       referred.

   28. Case C-162/09 Taous Lassal [2011] 1 CMLR 31 was a case concerning  a
       claim for income support by a French  national  whose  period(s)  of
       residence preceded  the  transposition  into  domestic  law  of  the
       Citizens Directive.[1] The European Court of Justice ("ECJ") said as
       follows from [29]:

             "29      As a preliminary point,  it  must  be  observed  that
             citizenship of the Union confers on each citizen a primary  and
             individual right to move and reside freely within the territory
             of  the  Member  States,  subject  to   the   limitations   and
             restrictions laid down by the Treaty on the functioning of  the
             European   Union   and   the   measures   adopted   for   their
             implementation,  freedom  of  movement   for   persons   being,
             moreover, one of  the  fundamental  freedoms  of  the  internal
             market, which was also reaffirmed in Article 45 of the  Charter
             of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

             30      With regard to Directive 2004/38, the Court has already
             had  occasion  to  point  out  that  that  directive  aims   to
             facilitate the exercise of the primary and individual right  to
             move and reside freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member
             States that is conferred directly  on  Union  citizens  by  the
             Treaty and that it aims in particular to strengthen that right,
             so that Union citizens cannot  derive  less  rights  from  that
             directive than from the instruments  of  secondary  legislation
             which it amends or repeals (see Case C-127/08 Metock and Others
             [2008] ECR I-6241, paragraphs 82 and 59).

             31      The Court has also observed that, having regard to the
             context and objectives of Directive 2004/38, the provisions  of
             that directive cannot be interpreted  restrictively,  and  must
             not in any event be deprived of their effectiveness (see Metock
             and Others, paragraph 84).

             32      As recital 17 in the  preamble  to  Directive  2004/38
             states, the right of permanent residence is a  key  element  in
             promoting  social  cohesion  and  was  provided  for  by   that
             directive  in  order  to  strengthen  the  feeling   of   Union
             citizenship.

             33      It  is  true  that  it  is  common  ground  that  the
             acquisition of the right of permanent residence on  the  ground
             of legal residence for a continuous period of five years in the
             host Member State, provided for in Article 16(1)  of  Directive
             2004/38, did not appear in the EU law instruments  adopted  for
             the application of Article 18 EC prior to that directive.

             34      However, such a finding cannot lead to the  conclusion
             that only continuous periods of  five  years'  legal  residence
             either ending on 30 April 2006  or  thereafter,  or  commencing
             after 30 April 2006 are  to  be  taken  into  account  for  the
             purposes of acquisition of the  right  of  permanent  residence
             provided for in Article 16 of Directive 2004/38."

   29. In relation to the question of  retrospectivity,  the  Court  stated
       that:

             "38    Furthermore, it should be noted that, in so far  as  the
             right of permanent residence provided  for  in  Article  16  of
             Directive 2004/38 may only be acquired from 30 April 2006, the
             taking into account of periods of  residence  completed  before
             that date does not give retroactive effect  to  Article  16  of
             Directive  2004/38,  but  simply  gives   present   effect   to
             situations which arose before the date of transposition of that
             directive.

             39      It should be borne in mind in  that  regard  that  the
             provisions on citizenship of the Union are applicable  as  soon
             as they enter into force and therefore they must be applied  to
             the present effects of situations arising previously (see  Case
             C-224/98 D'Hoop [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 25 and  the  case-
             law cited)."

   30. At [40], the conclusion expressed by the Court was that:

     "...for the purposes of the  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent
             residence provided for in  Article  16  of  Directive  2004/38,
             continuous periods of five years'  residence  completed  before
             the date of transposition of that directive,  namely  30  April
             2006, in accordance with the earlier EU law  instruments,  must
             be taken into account."

   31. It is  to  be  noted  that  the  conclusion  at  [40]  included  the
       qualifying  phrase  "in  accordance  with   the   earlier   EU   law
       instruments". That has potential relevance for the appellant  before
       us if there were no earlier EU law instruments in force because  the
       UK was not, at the time  of  the  appellant's  potentially  relevant
       residence, part of the EC.

   32. This brings us to the next decision of significance,  Case  C-424/10
       [2011] EUECJ Ziolkowski. This was  a  case  involving  nationals  of
       Poland living in  Germany  who  sought  confirmation  of  rights  of
       residence where the periods of residence included  a  period  before
       Poland's accession to the European Union.

   33. The ECJ considered the aims and purposes of the  Citizens  Directive
       including, at [36] of the decision, "to  facilitate  and  strengthen
       the exercise of the primary and individual right to reside and  move
       freely within the territory of the Member States". It also noted the
       following at [37]

             "It is apparent from recitals  3  and  4  in  the  preamble  to
             Directive 2004/38 that the aim of the directive  is  to  remedy
             the sector-by-sector piecemeal approach to the right of freedom
             of movement and residence in order to facilitate  the  exercise
             of this right by providing a single legislative  act  codifying
             and revising  the  instruments  of  European  Union  law  which
             preceded the directive."

   34. After considering other  decisions  and  EU  instruments  the  Court
       concluded as follows:
             "60 Consequently, the provisions of Article 16(1) of  Directive
             2004/38 can be relied (sic) by Union citizens and be applied to
             the present and future effects of situations arising before the
             accession of the Republic of Poland to the European Union.
             61 It is,  admittedly,  true  that  the  periods  of  residence
             completed in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State  by  a
             national of another State before the accession  of  the  latter
             State to the European  Union  fell  not  within  the  scope  of
             European Union law but solely within the law of the host Member
             State.
             62 However, provided the person concerned can demonstrate  that
             such periods were completed in compliance with  the  conditions
             laid down in Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, the taking into
             account of such periods from  the  date  of  accession  of  the
             Member State concerned to the  European  Union  does  not  give
             retroactive effect to Article  16  of  Directive  2004/38,  but
             simply gives present effect to situations  which  arose  before
             the date  of  transposition  of  that  directive  (see  Lassal,
             paragraph 38).
             63 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer  to
             Question 2 is that periods of residence completed by a national
             of a non-Member State in the territory of a Member State before
             the accession of the non-Member State  to  the  European  Union
             must, in the absence of  specific  provisions  in  the  Act  of
             Accession, be  taken  into  account  for  the  purpose  of  the
             acquisition of the right of permanent residence  under  Article
             16(1)  of  Directive  2004/38,  provided  those  periods   were
             completed in  compliance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in
             Article 7(1) of the directive. "

   35. In order  to  put  that  decision  into  context,  we  set  out  the
       provisions of Articles 7 and 16 of the Citizens  Directive.  Article
       16 provides as follows:

           "1. Union citizens who have resided  legally  for  a  continuous
           period of five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the
           right of permanent residence there.  This  right  shall  not  be
           subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.


           2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members  who  are  not
           nationals of a Member State and have legally  resided  with  the
           Union citizen in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
           of five years.


           3. Continuity of residence shall not be  affected  by  temporary
           absences not exceeding a total of  six  months  a  year,  or  by
           absences of a longer duration for compulsory  military  service,
           or by one absence of a maximum  of  12  consecutive  months  for
           important reasons such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious
           illness, study or vocational training, or a posting  in  another
           Member State or a third country.


           4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost
           only through absence from the host Member  State  for  a  period
           exceeding two consecutive years.'"

       Article 7 states that:



           "1. All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on  the
           territory of another Member State for a period  of  longer  than
           three months if they:


           (a) are workers or self-employed  persons  in  the  host  Member
           State; or


           (b) have sufficient resources for themselves  and  their  family
           members not to become a burden on the social  assistance  system
           of the host Member State during their period  of  residence  and
           have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  host  Member
           State; or


           (c) -  are  enrolled  at  a  private  or  public  establishment,
           accredited or financed by the host Member State on the basis  of
           its legislation or administrative practice,  for  the  principal
           purpose of following a course  of  study,  including  vocational
           training; and
           - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member
           State and assure the relevant national authority, by means of  a
           declaration or by such equivalent means as they may choose, that
           they have sufficient resources for themselves and  their  family
           members not to become a burden on the social  assistance  system
           of the host Member State during their period of residence; or


           (d) are family members accompanying or joining a  Union  citizen
           who satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a),  (b)  or
           (c)."

   36. It is evident that  the  situations  in  the  cases  of  Lassal  and
       Ziolkowski differ from that of the appellant before us  in  that  in
       the case of the former both France and the UK were members of the EU
       at the relevant time. In the case of the latter, Poland  was  not  a
       member of the EU at the time of the period of residence in  question
       but Germany was. In the case of this appellant, the  UK  was  not  a
       member of the (now) EU but Italy was.

   37. In our view that distinction  is  not  one  of  substance  when  one
       considers that regard must be had to the purposes and  aims  of  the
       Citizens Directive as elaborated in Ziolkowski and which we  do  not
       need to repeat. We are satisfied that the principles to  be  derived
       from those two decisions, and  those  referred  to  in  them,  apply
       mutatis mutandis to the case of the appellant before us.

   38. However, even accepting that the appellant is able to count  periods
       of residence prior to the UK's accession to the EEC for the  purpose
       of assessing his periods of residence, we consider that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal was wrong to  conclude  that  the  appellant  acquired
       rights of residence whilst he was a student, because on the basis of
       the decisions of the ECJ to which we have  referred,  in  particular
       Ziolkowski, the appellant would have to establish that  as  well  as
       being a student he had comprehensive sickness insurance and provided
       an assurance of sufficient resources not to become a burden  on  the
       State, in accordance with Article 7(1)(c) of the Citizens Directive.
       This follows from [63] of Ziolkowski. For reasons given below, we do
       not consider  that  an  assessment  of  that  issue  under  the  EEA
       Regulations yields a different result.

   39. We also consider that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       relation to the question  of  whether  the  appellant  had  acquired
       protection against removal on  the  basis  of  10  years  residence.
       Although we were not referred to it, we have taken into account  the
       decision of the ECJ in Case C-400/12 MG. That was a  judgment  which
       post-dated the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  so  of
       course the Panel could not be criticised  for  not  taking  it  into
       account. Rulings of the ECJ have legally binding  effect  and  hence
       must be applied immediately. In relation to periods of  imprisonment
       the Court stated as follows:

           "31   ...when   interpreting   Article   16(2)   of    Directive
           2004/38,...the  fact  that  a  national  court  has  imposed   a
           custodial sentence is an indication that  the  person  concerned
           has not respected the values of the society of the  host  Member
           State,  as  reflected  in  its  criminal  law,  and   that,   in
           consequence,  the  taking  into  consideration  of  periods   of
           imprisonment for the purposes of the acquisition, by members  of
           the family of a Union citizen who are not nationals of a  Member
           State, of the right of permanent residence  as  referred  to  in
           Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38 would clearly be contrary  to
           the aim pursued by that directive in establishing that right  of
           residence (Case C-378/12 Onuekwere [2014] ECR I-0000,  paragraph
           26).


           32 Since the degree of integration of the persons concerned is a
           vital consideration underpinning both  the  right  of  permanent
           residence  and  the  system  of  protection  against   expulsion
           measures established by Directive 2004/38, the reasons making it
           justifiable for periods of imprisonment not  to  be  taken  into
           consideration for the purposes of granting a right of  permanent
           residence or for such periods to be regarded as interrupting the
           continuity of the period of residence  needed  to  acquire  that
           right must also be  borne  in  mind  when  interpreting  Article
           28(3)(a) of that directive.

           33 It follows that periods of imprisonment cannot be taken  into
           account for the purposes of  granting  the  enhanced  protection
           provided for in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 and  that,
           in principle, such  periods  interrupt  the  continuity  of  the
           period of residence for the purposes of that provision."

   40. Earlier, the Court concluded at [28] that  the  10  year  period  of
       residence must be continuous and must be calculated by counting back
       from the date of the decision ordering the expulsion of  the  person
       concerned.

   41. In this case the decision to deport the appellant  was  made  on  19
       August 2013. Counting back 10 years brings the commencement  of  the
       period of residence relevant for the purposes of 10 years  residence
       to 2003. In 2006 he was sentenced to  15  months'  imprisonment  for
       burglary  and  theft.  In  2010  he  was  sentenced  to  29  months'
       imprisonment  for  like  offences.  We  do  not  consider  in  these
       circumstances that the appellant could be said to have acquired  the
       necessary continuous 10 years residence; the periods of imprisonment
       broke the continuity of that residence.

   42. But we must now return  to  the  EEA  Regulations  to  consider  the
       question of whether, under those Regulations, the appellant could be
       said to have acquired qualifying residence of five  years.  In  this
       context it is clear that (unlike the position in respect of  the  10
       years condition governing protection against  deportation)  we  must
       count forward from the  time  the  qualifying  period  of  residence
       began.

   43.  Schedule 4, paragraph 6 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:

             "6. Periods of residence prior to the entry into force of these
             Regulations


             (1) Any period during which a  person  ("P"),  who  is  an  EEA
             national, carried out an activity or was resident in the United
             Kingdom in accordance with the conditions in  subparagraph  (2)
             or (3) is to be treated as a period  during  which  the  person
             carried out that activity or was resident in the United Kingdom
             in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  the  purpose  of
             calculating periods of activity and residence there under.


             (2) P carried out an activity, or was resident, in  the  United
             Kingdom  in  accordance  with  this  subparagraph  where   such
             activity or residence was at that time in accordance with-
             (a) the 2000 Regulations;
             (b) the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Order  1994(a)
             ("the 1994 Order"); or
             (c) where such activity or residence preceded  the  entry  into
             force of the 1994 Order, any of the following Directives  which
             was at the relevant time in force  in  respect  of  the  United
             Kingdom-
             (i) Council Directive 64/221/EEC;
             (ii) Council Directive 68/360/EEC;
             (iii) Council Directive 72/194/EEC;
             (iv) Council Directive 73/148/EEC;
             (v) Council Directive 75/34/EEC;
             (vi) Council Directive 75/35/EEC;
             (vii) Council Directive 90/364/EEC;
             (viii) Council Directive 90/365/EEC; and
             (ix) Council Directive 93/96/EEC.


             (3) P carried out an activity or was  resident  in  the  United
             Kingdom in accordance with this subparagraph where P-
             (a) had leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom; and
             (b) would have been carrying out that activity or  residing  in
             the United Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations had the
             relevant state been an EEA State at that  time  and  had  these
             Regulations at that time been in force.


             (4) Any period during which P carried out an  activity  or  was
             resident in the United Kingdom in accordance with  subparagraph
             (2) or (3) will not be regarded as  a  period  during  which  P
             carried out that activity or was resident in the United Kingdom
             in accordance with these Regulations where it was followed by a
             period-
             (a) which exceeded two consecutive years and for  the  duration
             of which P was absent from the United Kingdom; or
             (b) which exceeded two consecutive years and for  the  duration
             of which P's residence in the United Kingdom-
             (i) was not in accordance with subparagraph (2) or (3); or
             (ii) was not otherwise in accordance with these Regulations.

             (5) The relevant state for the purpose of subparagraph  (3)  is
             the state of which P is,  and  was  at  the  relevant  time,  a
             national."

   44. The explanatory note to the amendments to the EEA Regulations, which
       for the most part came into force on 16 July 2012, expressly  states
       that paragraph 6 of Schedule 4  is  to  reflect  the  principles  in
       Lassal, Dias, and Ziolkowski. We shall have  to  consider,  however,
       whether the EEA Regulations do reflect the principles in those cases
       in so far as is relevant to this appellant.

   45. We do not consider that the  appellant  is  able  to  bring  himself
       within paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 4 in terms of his  having  been  a
       student, or indeed as the family member of a person who was  engaged
       in relevant activity as, for example, a worker, as his parents  have
       been found to have been between 1952 and 1963. Paragraph  6(2)  does
       not refer to periods of  relevant  activity  that  would  have  come
       within the 2000 Regulations or the  other  EU  instruments  set  out
       there had they been in force. This is  readily  apparent  from  sub-
       paragraph (c) which refers to any of the Directives  which  was  "at
       the relevant time" in force in respect of the United Kingdom.  Thus,
       for the activity to count, it must have been  at  a  time  when  the
       Regulations, Order or any of the Directives were in force.

   46. It is sub-paragraphs (3) and (4)  that  are  most  relevant  to  the
       appellant's case. We are satisfied that on the basis of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal's findings, the appellant was resident in  the  United
       Kingdom in accordance with sub-paragraph (3).  His residence was  as
       a family member of his parents. It  is  at  least  implicit  in  the
       findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that,  in  relation  to  sub-
       paragraph (3)(a) he had leave to enter the UK when  he  arrived,  to
       join his parents who were working, that being  a  relevant  activity
       for the purposes of "these" EEA Regulations (had they been in  force
       at the time, which this sub-para expressly provides for).

   47. However, it could be  said  that  sub-paragraph  (4)  precludes  the
       appellant from being able to benefit from residence when  he  was  a
       dependant family member. This is because, as we have seen, it is not
       suggested that the appellant can rely on any  relevant  activity  of
       his own, for example in terms of employment or self-employment.  The
       acquisition of any EU rights he may have are entirely  dependent  on
       his having derived rights from his parents.  We need to  look  again
       at sub-paragraph (4). To summarise, the appellant's  residence  that
       would otherwise be counted under paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 is not to
       be counted where it was followed by  a  period  which  exceeded  two
       consecutive years and for the  duration  of  which  the  appellant's
       residence was not in accordance with sub-paras 2 or 3.

   48. However long his status as a dependent family member existed, it  is
       clearly the case that thereafter he did not undertake  any  activity
       of his own or have any period of residence that  qualified.  He  was
       not working or self-employed or otherwise undertaking  a  qualifying
       activity; for much of the  time  he  was  in  prison,  or  at  least
       committing criminal offences, which was evidently his way of life.

   49. If sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) are to be followed, the  appellant  is
       not able to succeed in establishing that he acquired  qualifying  EU
       rights as a result of the period between 1952 and 1963.

   50. However, we mentioned at [44]  above  that  we  would  consider  the
       extent to which the EEA Regulations reflect the  principles  in  the
       cases to which we have referred. We must also consider the extent to
       which the EEA Regulations in this context are in conformity with the
       Citizens Directive.

   51. It is true to say that the cases we have referred to in relation  to
       what  we  may   call   pre-accession   rights,   concern   different
       circumstances from those of the appellant before us. Ziolkowski  for
       example, does not deal with cases where  a  person  has  ceased  any
       qualifying activity for a period exceeding two consecutive years, as
       set out in the EEA Regulations. However, in the case  of  Ziolkowski
       there is reference to Article 16(4) of the Citizens Directive  which
       states that once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be
       lost only through absence from the host Member State  for  a  period
       exceeding two consecutive  years.  There  is  no  provision  in  the
       Citizens Directive  equivalent  to  that  in  paragraph  6(4)(b)  of
       Schedule 4 to the EEA Regulations.

   52. We have considered whether this provision of the EEA Regulations  is
       in conformity with the Citizens Directive, in that it could be said,
       for example, to further the principle of  integration.  However,  we
       have come to the view that it  is  inconsistent  with  the  Citizens
       Directive which states expressly in  Article  16(4)  that  permanent
       residence shall be lost only through absence from  the  host  Member
       State for a period exceeding two consecutive years. That,  it  seems
       to  us,  is  an  unambiguous  statement  of  intent  in   expressing
       exhaustively the circumstances in which permanent residence will  be
       lost.

   53. Having come to the view therefore, that the EEA Regulations in  this
       respect do not accurately transpose the Directive, we  look  to  the
       Directive for the answer to the question of  whether  the  appellant
       acquired permanent residence which he has not lost.  The  answer  to
       that question, having regard to the authorities  to  which  we  have
       referred, in particular Ziolkowski, is that  he  has  acquired  that
       residence which he has not lost.

   54. We summarise the position up to this point. The First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law in  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
       permanent residence on the basis of having been a student. Neither a
       consideration of the EEA Regulations nor of the Directive  leads  to
       that conclusion. The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  erred  in  law  in
       relation to whether the appellant had acquired 10  years  residence,
       thus  entitling  him  to  protection  against  removal   except   on
       imperative grounds of public security.

   55. However, the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in terms of  its
       conclusion that the appellant has  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
       residence on the basis of five years' qualifying residence.

   56.  We now  deal  with  the  remaining  challenges  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's determination.

   57. The grounds at [2] identify matters that it is said  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not have sufficient regard to  in  the  proportionality
       assessment. These include matters such as the appellant's propensity
       to re-offend, failure to address factors that led to his  offending,
       downplaying of involvement, escalating seriousness in offending  and
       continuation of offending even after being warned  of  the  risk  of
       deportation. It is said that there is no evidence that  his  chances
       of rehabilitation are better in the UK than in Italy.  What  can  be
       summarised as his connections with Italy, are matters that are  also
       relied on in the grounds. Even  if  he  is  entitled  to  protection
       against  deportation  on  the  basis  of  imperative  grounds,   his
       deportation is warranted it is argued.

   58. We consider that those arguments amount to no more than disagreement
       with the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the evidence. The Panel
       took into account the length of time that the appellant has been  in
       the UK (almost 60 years), his relative lack of connections to  Italy
       and his family connections to the UK. The Panel manifestly did  take
       into account the appellant's long history of offending, for  example
       stating at [72] that his criminal offending has been  reprehensible,
       particularly his most recent offending. At [66]  it  expressed  some
       concerns that the appellant sought to downplay his knowledge of  the
       fact that the owners of the house that was burgled  in  the  instant
       offence, were elderly.

   59. Crucially,  the  Panel  found  that  he  presented  a  low  risk  of
       reoffending. That is a finding that is in conformity with  the  very
       detailed OASys report. Whilst it may be  that  another  Panel  might
       have come to a different view of that risk,  provided  there  was  a
       reasoned basis for departing from the view expressed  in  the  OASys
       report, Mr Melvin conceded that in the  circumstances  it  would  be
       difficult to contend that the Panel was not entitled  to  find  that
       the appellant was at low risk of reoffending.

   60. At [68] the Panel noted that the appellant's conduct must  represent
       "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
       the  fundamental  interests  of  society".  It   referred   to   the
       seriousness of offences of burglary and the OASys  assessment  of  a
       medium risk of harm. However, having concluded  that  the  appellant
       represented a low risk of reoffending, it  was  all  but  inevitable
       that the Panel would have been bound to conclude that  his  personal
       conduct did not represent the necessary level of threat.  That  this
       is so is supported by what was said in Essa  at  [32]  where  it  is
       stated that:

             "We observe that for any deportation  of  an  EEA  national  or
             family member of such national to be justified on  public  good
             grounds (irrespective of whether permanent residence  has  been
             achieved) the claimant  must  represent  a  present  threat  to
             public policy. The fact of a criminal conviction is not enough.
             It is not permissible in an EEA case to deport  a  claimant  on
             the basis of criminal offending simply to deter  others.   This
             tends to mean, in case of criminal conduct short  of  the  most
             serious threats to the public  safety  of  the  state,  that  a
             candidate for EEA deportation must represent a  present  threat
             by reason of a propensity to re-offend or an unacceptably  high
             risk of re-offending.  In such a case, if there  is  acceptable
             evidence   of   rehabilitation,   the   prospects   of   future
             rehabilitation do not  enter  the  balance,  save  possibly  as
             future protective factors to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation
             remains durable."

   61. It is as well to observe at this point that the position in relation
       to the deportation of an EEA national is materially  different  from
       that in relation to a person who is not entitled to the  benefit  of
       EEA status, and who relies on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  to  resist
       deportation. Thus  for  example,  in  the  case  of  EEA  nationals,
       decision makers, including Tribunals, are simply  not  permitted  by
       the Directive and the EEA Regulations to take into account questions
       of general deterrence of  criminality  when  making  a  decision  on
       deportation. This contrasts with the position  in  Article  8  cases
       where the proportionality of removal must take into account, amongst
       other  things,  the  public  interest   in   deterring   criminality
       generally.

   62. Mr Melvin emphasised the issue of integration, submitting that it is
       difficult to see how,  with  the  appellant's  history  of  repeated
       offending, it could be said that he has integrated into  society  in
       the UK. He relied on the Opinion of the Advocate General in Case  C-
       378/12 Onuekwere. However, that Opinion, and the subsequent decision
       of the ECJ in the same  case,  was  concerned  with  acquisition  of
       permanent rights of residence and the issue of imprisonment in terms
       of continuity of residence. As noted above, the Panel in the case of
       this appellant concluded that he had  acquired  permanent  residence
       before embarking on his criminal activities. In any event, the Panel
       did consider the  question  of  integration  in  the  light  of  the
       appellant's offending and imprisonment.

   63. Evidently without any enthusiasm, the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
       the appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  Although  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law in the respects to  which  we  have  referred,
       those errors of law are not such as to require the  decision  to  be
       set aside, given the alternative basis for its  conclusions,  namely
       that the appellant had acquired permanent residence on the basis  of
       five years qualifying residence.





Decision

   64. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. However, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is not set aside and the decision to allow the appeal under
       the EEA Regulations therefore stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                   15/05/14
-----------------------
[1] See also the decision of the Court of Justice in Dias [2011] 3 CMLR 40


