
                                                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                          RB (Linguistic evidence -
Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2010                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McKEE

                                   Between

                                     RB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison instructed by Corbin & Hassan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms P Whipple QC instructed by the Treasury
Solicitors


   1. Linguistic analysis reports from Sprakab are entitled to  considerable
      weight. That conclusion derives from the data available to Sprakab and
      the process it uses. They should not  be  treated  as  infallible  but
      evidence opposing them will need to deal with the  particular  factors
      identified in the report.

   2. Recordings of all material derived from  the  appellant  and  used  as
      material for linguistic analysis  should  be  made  available  to  all
      parties if the analysis is to be relied on in the Tribunal.

   3. Sprakab linguists and analysts are not to be required  to  give  their
      names  (as   distinct   from   their   identifiers,   experience   and
      qualifications) unless there  is  a  good  reason  particular  to  the
      individual case.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Contents

Para

1 - 2       Introduction

3 - 8       Procedural history

9 - 22           Linguistic reports in the present case

23 - 27          Anonymity of Sprakab personnel

28 - 82          The claimant's claim in its factual aspects

83 - 98          Sprakab

99 - 116    The individual linguistic evidence in the present appeal

117 - 119   Submissions

120 - 123   Other evidence

124 - 142   Post hearing evidence

143 - 153   Findings and Conclusion: the appellant

154 -169    Findings and conclusion: Sprakab

170 - 174   General guidance on linguistic analysis evidence

175         Conclusion


Introduction

   1. It is a matter of common experience that it is sometimes  possible  to
      tell where people come from by the way they speak.  In  asylum  cases,
      the question of where the claimant comes  from  is  often  of  crucial
      importance. First, a claim falls to be assessed against the claimant's
      nationality, so it is important to be  able  to  establish  what  that
      nationality is. Secondly, even within one country  the  risks  may  be
      different for those from different parts, or  with  different  tribal,
      clan or cultural backgrounds. The question  is  the  extent  to  which
      analysis of the way in which the claimant speaks can be  used  in  the
      executive and judicial determination of those issues,  when  they  are
      relevant.

   2. In what is now a considerable number of cases,  the  Home  Office  has
      commissioned analysis from Skandinavisk Spr�kanalys  AB  (Sprakab),  a
      privately owned  company  in  Stockholm,  Sweden.  It  has  relied  on
      Sprakab's analysis to a greater  or  lesser  extent  in  reaching  its
      conclusions on the claim, and has invited immigration judges  to  take
      account of the analysis  if  the  claimant  appeals  to  the  Tribunal
      against the rejection of his  claim.  Such  a  case  is  that  of  the
      appellant. In this determination, to the writing of which we have  all
      contributed, we give  our  assessment  of  the  processes  adopted  by
      Sprakab, and the manner in which Sprakab analyses ought  to  be  taken
      into account in asylum appeals.


Procedural History

   3. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  20  June  2007,  and
      applied for asylum, stating that she was from Somalia. She was briefly
      interviewed on that date. During the  course  of  that  interview  the
      interviewer referred her case to Sprakab, who  conducted  a  telephone
      interview with her, and concluded that she was not Somali. The  result
      of that analysis was communicated to the appellant. She was  asked  to
      return for a fuller interview on 5 July.

   4. She did so, accompanied by a member of the  firm  of  solicitors  then
      representing her, and brought with her a  written  witness  statement,
      dated the previous day. A full interview was conducted.

   5. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter, dated 20 July, adopts the
      findings of the Sprakab analysis, but offers a number of other reasons
      for the respondent's disbelief of the appellant's claim. Asylum having
      been refused, the respondent made a decision to remove  the  appellant
      as an illegal entrant. That decision carried a right of appeal,  which
      the appellant exercised. Her appeal was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge
      Pugh on 31 August 2007. The appellant appeared in person: she was  not
      represented. The Presenting Officer was prepared to cross-examine only
      on a limited range of topics. The Immigration Judge thought  that  the
      appellant needed a better opportunity to present her case, and so took
      her through the reasons given in the refusal letter.  The  Immigration
      Judge concluded that  the  appellant's  claim  was  not  credible:  in
      particular, the appellant was not telling the truth about her origins.
      The Immigration Judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   6. The appellant sought an order for reconsideration. The  Tribunal  made
      no order, but on renewal of the application to the High Court, Black J
      ordered reconsideration. She said this:


         "It is plain that the Immigration Judge took great care  over  this
         case and dealt with it with considerable sensitivity.  I  am  quite
         satisfied that there is no arguable error of law in the majority of
         her decision for the reasons  that  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
         gives.

         The one issue that has given me concern is the question of language
         for the following reasons.

         1  There was a linguistic analysis to be found in the  Home  Office
           bundle which  indicates  that  the  Appellant  is  Kenyan.   The
           Immigration Judge accepts  the  analysis  as  very  careful  and
           detailed and relies on it, together with what she  was  entitled
           to  conclude  was  the  Appellant's  lack  of  consistency   and
           credibility in her evidence, to reach the  conclusion  that  the
           Appellant is an educated Kenyan woman tried to pass herself  off
           as a Somali (see paragraph 22 and  paragraph  29  particularly).
           The Appellant  complains  in  the  grounds  of  application  for
           reconsideration that the identity and expertise  of  the  expert
           was not established and the  identity  of  the  expert  was  not
           revealed to her or to the  court.   It  seems  to  me  that  the
           Appellant was entitled to know these  matters  and  to  consider
           whether to challenge the credentials  and/or  to  call  her  own
           linguistic expert.

         2  It appears  to  have  been  accepted  that  the  Appellant  gave
           evidence in Kibajuni. (Paragraph 7) which  contradicts  part  of
           the  Respondent's  case  (paragraph  15)  which  was   (as   the
           Immigration Judge recorded) that she "does not speak the variety
           of Swahili known as Kibajuni and found in the  area  from  which
           she claims to come".   I  cannot  be  clear  from  the  decision
           whether the suggestion  of  the  Respondent  was  (1)  that  the
           Appellant's form of Kibajuni was that found in Kenya rather than
           that found in Somalia (which would not pose a difficulty for the
           Immigration Judge's  findings  on  language)  or  (2)  that  the
           Appellant  did  not  speak  Kibajuni  at  all  (which  would  be
           inconsistent with paragraph 7).

         It seems to me that a material error of law may have been  made  in
         this area and given that the Immigration Judge  took  into  account
         the question of language in reaching her overall conclusions, there
         must be a real possibility that the AIT  would  decide  the  matter
         differently on reconsideration."

   7. There were two interlocutory hearings.  At  the  latter,  SIJ  Batiste
      declined to accept the argument put on behalf of the  respondent  that
      the Immigration Judge's conclusions were sound even without regard  to
      the linguistic evidence. He  observed  that  the  linguistic  evidence
      appeared to have caused the Immigration Judge to take  no  account  of
      the  appellant's  having  given  her  evidence  through   a   Kibajuni
      interpreter; he concluded that no specific findings of fact  could  be
      salvaged from the Immigration Judge's determination. He made a  number
      of  directions  in   relation   to   evidence,   and   adjourned   the
      reconsideration for oral evidence to be taken and the appeal to be re-
      determined.  Subsequently,  although  the  respondent  had   expressed
      reservations about this course  of  action,  the  present  appeal  was
      selected as an appropriate one in which to look in more general  terms
      at linguistic evidence and the Sprakab approach.

   8. The matter came before us on 24, 25 and 26 February 2010. At  the  end
      of the hearing, the respondent sought leave to put in further evidence
      (which was awaiting translation), subject to an  opportunity  for  the
      appellant to comment on it. We agreed to that. After the  hearing,  we
      became aware that the Immigration Law Practitioners Association (ILPA)
      had recently sent a circular to its members including statements about
      Sprakab analysis. We circulated the material to the parties,  inviting
      any further comment. Both parties made submissions on that material.

Linguistic reports in the present case

   9. It is convenient at this point to summarise the conflicting reports on
      the appellant's language, which have been compiled since her screening
      interview at the Home Office.

  10. The first 'Linguistic Analysis Report' on the appellant  is  dated  24
      June 2007, and is based on a tape recording  made  on  20  June  2007.
      This report is cited in the 'reasons for refusal' letter  of  20  July
      2007, and is said to provide "strong evidence" that the appellant does
      not come from Somalia and is not a Bajuni.  The analyst is 'EXP  249',
      who is said to originate from Kenya and to have completed the analysis
      "in co-operation with Sprakab linguist 03."  The  conclusion  is  that
      the appellant knows quite a bit about the Bajuni islands but speaks  a
      variety of Swahili spoken  in  Kenya.   Although  she  does  use  some
      Kibajuni words, her pronunciation, intonation and grammar are  typical
      of Kenyan Swahili, indeed with a level of grammatical rectitude  which
      shows her to be highly educated.

  11. A different conclusion was reached by Margaret Kumbuka, who  had  been
      instructed by those representing the appellant.  She  interviewed  the
      appellant on 11 July 2008 and compiled a report on 20 September  2008.
      She concluded that the appellant "is a Somali Bajuni from Koyama".

  12. On 3 December 2008 Ms Kumbuka produced a report for the appeal hearing
      at Surbiton, based upon the CD and transcript of the Sprakab interview
      of 20 June 2007 with which she had been provided by Corbin  &  Hassan.
      She is very critical of this interview, saying of the interviewer that
      he "spoke broken Swahili with  a  very  heavy  Kikuyu  accent",  which
      probably caused the appellant to adapt her  own  speech  towards  his.
      Thus she did not use much Kibajuni, as opposed to the way she spoke to
      Ms Kumbuka, who herself  used  Kibajuni  at  her  interview  with  the
      appellant in July.

  13. Almost simultaneously  with  Ms  Kumbuka's  second  report,  a  second
      Linguistic Analysis Report on the telephone interview of 20 June  2007
      was completed by Sprakab on 4 December 2008.  It is more detailed than
      the first, the analysis being conducted by analyst EA 19 and confirmed
      by analysts EA  14  and  249,  with  approval  by  linguist  04.   The
      qualifications  and  expertise  of  all  four  are  listed,  and   the
      conclusion is that the appellant "speaks a  variety  of  Swahili  with
      certainty not found in Somalia" but "with certainty  found  in  Kenya,
      nearest in the country's coastal regions, such as Lamu."  She is  said
      to sound "as if she is trying to alter her speech in  order  to  sound
      like she speaks Bajuni."

  14. The recording of the appellant's half-hour interview on 20  June  2007
      is the subject of yet a third Linguistic Analysis Report completed  on
      10 March 2009, and this time involving analysts EA 19, 14, 249 and 20,
      and linguists 4 and 1.  All of their credentials are listed  in  great
      detail, and the report itself is more detailed than the  two  previous
      ones.  But the  conclusion  is  the  same.   The  appellant  has  some
      knowledge of Koyama and Somalia, but speaks a variety of Swahili found
      "with certainty" on the coast of Kenya, e.g. Lamu.

  15. While the three Sprakab reports so far were all based on the interview
      of 20  June  2007,  the  appellant  was  interviewed  again  over  the
      telephone on 2 February 2010, and this resulted in a fourth Linguistic
      Analysis Report dated 15 February 2010.  This time the interviewer  is
      said to speak Somali Bajuni, while the analysts (EA  19  and  24)  are
      said to hail from Kenya and the Bajuni island of Chuvay  respectively.
      Their analysis is reviewed and approved by linguist 04.   This  report
      is  particularly  detailed.  It  identifies,   with   examples,   nine
      phonological features of her speech corresponding neither with  Somali
      Bajuni nor standard Swahili, four used inconsistently,  a  failure  to
      stress polysyllabic words in the Bajuni way,  and  seven  phonological
      features of her speech that are typical  of  the  variety  of  Swahili
      spoken on the Kenyan coast. It notes inconsistent and incorrect use of
      Bajuni vocabulary and ignorance  of  the  meaning  of  certain  common
      Bajuni words. The Sprakab linguist and analysts' assessment of this 20-
      minute interview  is  that  the  appellant  tries  to  use  linguistic
      features typical of Somali Bajuni, but often gets it wrong.  She is in
      fact a speaker of coastal Kenyan Swahili, who has not mastered  Somali
      Bajuni.

  16. Finally we come to Sprakab's response (prepared by analysts EA 19,  20
      and 249 and linguists 01 and 04) to Ms Kumbuka's two reports.  She  is
      criticised for not having visited any Bajuni-speaking area in Kenya or
      Somalia, and for lacking academic qualifications in linguistics.   The
      "Bajuni refugees" whom she had met in  the  UK  might  not  have  been
      Bajunis at all, and no recording is available of the  interview  which
      led to Ms Kumbuka's first report on 20 September 2008.

  17. The  Sprakab  writers  do  admit  that  the  appellant  displays  some
      knowledge of Bajuni life and culture,  but  note  that  the  appellant
      makes use of words which are Kenyan Swahili as well as Kenyan  Bajuni,
      and doubt whether the appellant would have picked up all  those  words
      while living in a refugee camp for Somali Bajuni in  Mombassa.   As  a
      woman staying with family members, her opportunities  for  intercourse
      with outsiders would have been restricted.

  18. The methodology of Ms Kumbuka's interview  is  criticised  as  falling
      short of professional linguistic standards and failing  to  adhere  to
      the Guidelines for the Use of Language Analysis, which are  summarised
      below in paragraph 121.

  19. As for Ms Kumbuka's second report of 3 December 2008, she is taken  to
      task for supposing that the interviewer on 20 June 2007 spoke  "broken
      Swahili with a very heavy Kikuyu accent."   The  interviewer  spoke  a
      variety of Kenyan Swahili close to standard Swahili, and cannot  speak
      Kikuyu at all.  This called in question Ms Kumbuka's ability to  carry
      out a proper language analysis.  During the interview, the interviewer
      spoke Swahili, with only a little  Bajuni,  lest  the  appellant  have
      difficulty understanding him.  (If the appellant was not  Bajuni,  she
      might have been unable to understand questions framed in Bajuni.)  The
      appellant herself used Kenyan Swahili and some Standard Swahili during
      the interview, but only a few words in Bajuni.

  20. There is also what might be  called  a  report  on  the  reports.  Pia
      Fernqvist, the manager of Sprakab, compiled a report for  the  hearing
      before us, in which she describes the expertise and qualifications  of
      'analysts' and 'linguists', and says of analysts EA  19,  20  and  249
      that they have all worked or resided at some time  in  Bajuni-speaking
      areas.  EA 19 is said to have "mastered Bajuni to a very high  level",
      while 249 speaks Bajuni "to the level of  a  mother  tongue  speaker."
      Another analyst, EA 14, is said to be a native Bajuni speaker.

  21. Ms Fernqvist goes on to describe the interview of 20 June  2007.   The
      interviewer (240) is said to be a native Swahili speaker with  mother-
      tongue competence in the Bajuni dialect, but no knowledge  of  Kikuyu.
      Hence there are no Kikuyu influences in his speech, contrary  to  what
      Ms Kumbuka  thought.   The  reason  why  the  interviewer  spoke  only
      standard Swahili to the appellant was that she would thereby  be  able
      to understand him whether she  was  Bajuni  or  not,  whereas  if  the
      interviewer had spoken to her in Bajuni, she might not have been  able
      to comprehend him if she was not Bajuni herself.  Ms Fernqvist ends by
      saying that it is unusual to have a second, far less a  third,  report
      on an interview, as happened in  this  case.   All  the  analysts  and
      linguists  who  were  involved  in  the  first  and   second   reports
      contributed to the third report.

  22. It is not Sprakab's policy to disclose the identity  of  its  analysts
      (hence the use of numbers) because of threats which have been directed
      at analysts in the past by disgruntled claimants.  Indeed, EA  14  has
      stopped working for Sprakab, because of such threats.

Anonymity of Sprakab personnel

  23. That observation by Ms Fernqvist takes us directly to the first of the
      two grounds upon which Black J ordered reconsideration. The respondent
      proposed to call oral evidence from a  number  of  those  involved  in
      preparing the Sprakab reports in this case,  but  asked  on  Sprakab's
      behalf that the identity of the individual analysts and  linguists  be
      not disclosed. We therefore needed to deal  with  this  issue  at  the
      outset of the hearing.

  24. Sprakab's policy is not to make the names or personal details  of  its
      analysts  public.  It  feels  that  analysts'  independence   may   be
      compromised, and their personal safety may even be endangered if it is
      known that they are producing analyses, some of which may be  adverse,
      for governmental authorities.  Sprakab  does,  however,  provide  each
      member of its  staff  with  a  unique  identifier,  and  the  language
      background  and  training,  and  any  other  relevant  experience,  is
      associated with the identifier.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to  see  the
      qualifications  and  background  of  the  individuals  involved  in  a
      particular analysis, and it is possible also to see whether  the  same
      or a different analyst has been involved in different pieces of  work.
      The only thing that is lacking is the analyst's personal details: name
      and address and so on.

  25. Sprakab's request for anonymity  extended  in  the  present  case  not
      merely to its employees as authors of the analyses, but in addition to
      some of those who provided written evidence or appeared before  us  as
      oral witnesses. During the hearing, we were provided with the names of
      all oral witnesses, which were not disclosed to the appellant  or  his
      representative; but the names themselves have no bearing at all on our
      decision. Although it is of course exceptional for witnesses  to  give
      evidence anonymously, it appeared to us that that was the  appropriate
      course to adopt in this case. In view of the potential of  threats  to
      Sprakab personnel, we concluded further that it was  proportionate  to
      give a direction prohibiting the disclosure to the  appellant  of  the
      names of those involved. (It is fair to say that Mr Davison raised  no
      reasoned objection to this course of action in the circumstance of the
      present case.) We accordingly directed that we be given the  names  of
      those giving oral evidence before us, but ordered under paragraphs (1)
      and (2) of Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 that the names should not be further disclosed.

  26. If a witness chooses to remain anonymous then it may be  difficult  or
      impossible for his or her curriculum vitae to be  checked  and  cross-
      examination on that issue may be handicapped. Below  we  endeavour  to
      explain with some care  Sprakab's  methods.  We  did  not  expect  the
      evidence from Sprakab to be so undermined by the anonymity of the team
      members that the evidence would be valueless, and it was not.

  27. Generally speaking, however, the position is simply that  there  is  a
      Sprakab report, available in writing, authenticated not by a signature
      but by one or more unique identifiers of Sprakab employees. Given  the
      information that is associated with the identifier, it seems to us  to
      be virtually  inconceivable  that  anybody  is  disadvantaged  by  not
      knowing the name or address of  the  individual  concerned.  It  might
      perhaps be that in some particular case there would be a proper reason
      for enquiring whether a named individual  had  been  involved  in  the
      analysis of a sample. If it was necessary to  ask  that  question,  it
      could be directed to Sprakab, and a Tribunal might in due course  have
      to decide how to deal with whatever  answer  was  given.  But  in  the
      general case the reports are available on  the  authority  of  Sprakab
      itself, with full information about the qualifications  of  those  who
      have contributed to them. That is sufficient.

The claimant's claim in its factual aspects

  28.  As  this  case  is  essentially  a  case  about  evidence   and   its
      interpretation, it is appropriate to set out the  evidence  from  both
      sides in some detail.

   Screening Interview

  29. The appellant applied for asylum on 20  June  2007.   She  attended  a
      screening interview the same day. She indicated there that she  wished
      to be interviewed in the Swahili language, although the record makes a
      tantalising reference to "see notes" which makes no sense to us.

  30. The appellant said that she was born in Koyamo in  Somalia.   In  1993
      she went to a camp in Mombassa in Kenya.  In 1996 she married in  that
      camp, but separated from her husband in 2004.

  31. She was asked about her travel to the  United  Kingdom.   Her  answers
      were not entirely clear but she appeared to be saying  that  she  left
      Somalia for the Yemen, arriving in Yemen in April  2007,  and  staying
      there for two months  before  travelling  from  Yemen  to  the  United
      Kingdom. She claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom by  airline
      at "around dawn".  She could not identify the  airline  on  which  she
      travelled. She never had a national passport.  She used a red passport
      provided by an agent to facilitate her travel to the  United  Kingdom.
      She passed through immigration control without difficulty.  An officer
      inspected and appeared to be content with her passport. In  answer  to
      the question "Have you ever been to or sought leave to enter any other
      country?" the appellant indicated that she had been to Yemen for about
      two and a half months in 2007 on  her  way  from  Somalia.  This  does
      contrast with an earlier answer where she said she last saw her mother
      in Koyama in Somalia.  She then  said  "I  then  went  to  a  camp  in
      Mombassa Kenya". She said she came to the United Kingdom  because  she
      was from the Bajuni clan and feared the Darood and Hawiye clan.

  32. After a  break  for  the  first  language  analysis  interview,  which
      concluded that she was a Kenyan national, it was put to her  that  she
      was not telling the truth. She insisted she was not a Kenyan  national
      but was from Somalia and had not been telling lies. The appellant then
      explained that she learned English in the Jomvu camp  in  Kenya.   The
      appellant said that "we were there from 1993-1998  and  then  we  went
      back to Somalia".

  33. She was also asked supplementary questions about  the  colour  of  the
      aeroplane on which she travelled and details of  the  uniform  of  its
      staff and any  motifs  on  that  uniform.  She  gave  answers  to  the
      questions which may be described as unilluminating but were not  shown
      to be wrong.

   Statement of 4 July 2007

  34. The appellant set out her case in a statement dated 4 July 2007.

  35. She repeated there that she was a Somali national  and  that  she  was
      born in Koyama Somalia.  She had married another member of the  Bajuni
      clan but they had now separated. She  said  she  had  had  an  Islamic
      education.  She had also learnt to write some Swahili when she was  in
      the Jomvu refugee camp in Kenya. She gave details of  her  family  and
      her last address in Somalia.

  36. She gave details of some of the traditions of the Bajuni minority clan
      and the likely employment of  clan  members.   She  said  that  people
      identified them as Bajuni because they spoke  the  Kibajuni  language.
      She then identified  the  clan  enemies.  She  explained  how  Somalis
      started attacking the Bajunis in 1991.  She gave  details  of  diverse
      and  nasty  acts  carried  out  on  Bajuni  people;  she  included  an
      allegation that she had been raped.

  37. In 1993, she said, things became worse.  She  lost  contact  with  her
      parents and on the advice of her uncle left Koyama  and  fled  to  the
      Jomvu refugee camp in Kenya. While she  was  there  she  was  married,
      again, on the instigation of her uncle, and gave birth to a son.  They
      remained in Jomvu until 1998.   The  Kenyan  government  led  them  to
      believe the situation was now peaceful in Koyama and closed  the  camp
      in Jomvu.  She returned to  Koyamo  with  her  uncle,  his  wife,  her
      husband and son.

  38. The situation had not improved.  In 2004 she was raped  for  a  second
      time.  She said that as well as the mental trauma of being  raped  she
      was left with lasting physical damage. The village was under  constant
      attack although it was not always easy to say if it was being attacked
      by members of the Darood or the Hawiye clans. The situation  continued
      to deteriorate and was  made  worse  by  Islamic  insurgents  imposing
      values that she found objectionable.

  39. Her uncle then decided that they had to leave and  they  joined  other
      people from Koyama on 1 April 2007 to travel to Yemen.  She  travelled
      under the supervision of her agent.  Her uncle told her she must  obey
      the agent to ensure the agent's complete support.

  40. She finished the statement by saying it had been read to  her  in  the
      Kibajuni language.

   Interview

  41. The appellant attended an interview on 5 July 2007 which was conducted
      in the Kibajuni language.

  42. She said that her last address in Somalia was Koyama Island,  Koyamani
      Street, Somalia. She gave details about her clan membership and,  when
      asked where she came from, said: "I am coming from the  island  called
      Koyama".  Her village was called Koyama Island and she had lived there
      until she moved to the Jomvu camp.  She  returned  to  Koyama  Island.
      She named other islands that she said were nearby.  She claimed  never
      to have made the journey to the mainland but understood from those who
      had that it was a three to four hour journey

  43. She described the island itself. She said that it is not  possible  to
      see the mainland from Koyama, but it  was  possible  to  see  it  from
      nearby islands. She answered questions about buildings on the  island.
      She said there were two mosques there and about 70 or 80  houses.  She
      guessed that between 700 and 800 Bajuni  people  still  lived  in  her
      village. She said that she was unemployed, but that her father  worked
      as a fisherman. She named people who she said were the local  leaders.
      She described her home and life before the civil war.

  44. She claimed not to be able to answer questions about  the  history  of
      her clan:

         "Unfortunately I cannot give you the history of my own clan  simply
         because I lost my granddad who was the  person  I  could  get  more
         history about our clan."

  45. She spoke about the village being attacked by  Daroods  in  1991.  She
      gave details of how she was attacked and how she had  left  the  Jomvu
      camp in 1993. She was asked about the camp and about her marriage  and
      her son being born. She repeated her claim that  in  1997  the  Kenyan
      government had said that her home area was safe and how "we decided to
      move back home". She confirmed that her husband left her in  2004  and
      that she left Yemen in 2007. She talked about the events that had  led
      up to the decision to move.

  46. She was asked about languages spoken in her village. The answer is not
      entirely clear from the manuscript record of the interview. It appears
      that she said:

         "We used to speak Kibajuni and I say some words  Kibajuni  if  when
         they are there say Kibajuni  here  say  Bajuni  language  and  some
         Arabic language we used to speak in my area).  But we do not  speak
         so much Arabic language we do not speak any  of  the  other  Somali
         language.  We know some Somali words 2, 3, 4 something like that."

  47. The appellant said  she  could  speak  Somali.  However  it  would  be
      difficult for her to be interviewed in Somali because she only knew  a
      few words. When the village was attacked it was attacked by people who
      spoke their own language. Sometimes people could speak Somali.

  48. When, towards the end of  the  interview,  it  was  put  to  her  that
      language analysis results appeared to show that she  was  Kenyan,  she
      insisted that she was not Kenyan. She attributed  her  accent  to  the
      time that she spent in Kenya in a refugee camp. She then  went  on  to
      speak about the state of her health.

   Statement of 12 September 2008

  49. The appellant made a further statement dated 12 September 2008. It was
      clearly based on her statement of 4 July 2007 but included  additional
      material.

  50. She repeated her claim to be a Somali national born in August 1975  in
      Koyamo in Somalia.  She said she was a  Bajuni  clan  member  who  had
      married another Bajuni clan member and  was  now  separated  from  her
      husband. She gave details of her  family  and  of  cultural  practices
      which were distinctive to or at least typical  amongst  Bajunis.   For
      example, she referred to the Kirumbizi dance  and  the  Msondo  dance.
      She said that Bajuni men tended to work as fishermen,  house  builders
      and shell gatherers. She said she had never been to mainland Somalia.

  51. She repeated that her problems began in 1991 when women  in  her  clan
      were  attacked.   She  gave  details  of  the  horrors  that  she  had
      experienced and of going to the Jomvu  camp.   There  is  no  need  to
      repeat the details here. The  things  that  she  described  were  very
      serious and, she said, led to lasting physical damage as well  as  her
      husband leaving her.

  52. She said her interview was conducted in the Kibajuni language and that
      she  had  no  difficulty  understanding   the   Kibajuni   interpreter
      throughout the 4 hour and 25 minutes in which she was interviewed. She
      maintained it was wrong to dismiss her claim to be Bajuni when she had
      demonstrated her proficiency in Kibajuni which is the mother tongue of
      the Bajunis.

   Oral Evidence

  53. The appellant gave  evidence  before  us.   She  was  assisted  by  an
      interpreter who was chosen because the  appellant  had  indicated  she
      wanted a person who could  interpret  the  Kibajuni  and  the  English
      languages.  We made it clear to the interpreter in clear terms that it
      was his duty to speak to the appellant in the Kibajuni language and no
      other language. We are not in  a  position  to  determine  whether  he
      carried out that instruction. It was not,  however,  suggested  to  us
      that  our  understanding  of  the  substantive  content  of  what  the
      appellant  said  had  been   affected   by   any   difficulties   with
      interpretation.

  54. Mr Davison reminded the appellant that she had made statements and had
      been interviewed.  She said there  was  a  mistake  in  the  interview
      record.  According to the record (question 72) the appellant said that
      her uncle was killed in 1990. The appellant said that  her  uncle  did
      not die in 1990. Her aunt died sometime in the  1990s.  The  appellant
      said that she told the interviewer that he aunt had died in the  1990s
      and the reference to her  uncle  dying  in  1990  was  the  result  of
      mistranslation. She confirmed that with these  corrections  her  claim
      was contained in the documents summarised above.

  55. Cross-examined by Ms Whipple, the appellant confirmed that she was  34
      years old and that she was born  in  1975  in  Koyama  an  island  off
      Somalia.  She said both parents were Bajuni and she  spoke  Bajuni  at
      the home as a child.  She said Bajuni was her native language and  she
      was speaking Bajuni now. She confirmed that her father was a fisherman
      and that she had two brothers and one sister and that her father  sold
      fish at the market.  She was one of the large family.   She  had  many
      cousins who were Bajunis.

  56. She said that problems began in 1991  when  her  aunt  was  raped  and
      killed. It was put to her that in her interview she had said that  her
      uncle had been beaten and  killed  as  well.   She  said  that  was  a
      mistake.  She was shown the record of  her  answer  to  the  question,
      "what happened when the Darood came to your village?" as follows:

         "In 1991 they came to our village they started  raping  women  they
         raped me too, they beat us.  They took everything from  our  house.
         They beat the brother of my dad until he died, they raped  my  aunt
         they killed my dad's brother, they killed  my  uncle  in  1990  and
         raped my aunt and killed her in 1990.  They made sure that if  they
         raped a woman she would become (?) completely handicapped could (?)
         all they were doing was to destroy us completely so that  we  can't
         ever move away from our own area."

  57. She said that was a mistranslation or  transcription.   She  said  the
      cassette, to which she had listened, was very  clear.   They  did  not
      beat the brother of her dad until he died.  They beat her  aunt.   Her
      aunt was killed not  her  uncle.  Ms  Whipple  pointed  out  that  the
      appellant had not said earlier that there was a mistake in the record.
      The appellant said that she had made the point to the  previous  judge
      and then said that she realised the error when  she  listened  to  the
      recording of the interview.

  58. The appellant confirmed that she left the island in 1993 and  went  to
      the Jomvu camp in Kenya with her family, that is with  her  uncle  and
      her aunt.   It was, she said, a different aunt. She was not  confusing
      her with the one who had died.  They went with a lot of  other  people
      from Koyama Island.  They travelled together.  She was  not  sure  how
      many went.  It was a boatful.  When pressed she said it could be about
      twenty people.

  59. While in the camp for four years she stayed with Bajuni people, and as
      well as their own language they were speaking  Swahili.  Pressed,  she
      insisted that they did  stay  with  people  in  the  camp.   They  did
      register  with  camp  officials.   She  said  it  was  her  uncle  who
      registered her and her aunt.  She did not register herself.

  60. In 1996 her uncle arranged the marriage to a  Bajuni  man.   She  said
      they did not make much of the wedding.  There was  a  small  group  of
      people, herself, her uncle, her aunt, her husband and his friends  and
      siblings.  Her husband's parents did not come.  She did not know their
      whereabouts.

  61. The appellant confirmed that she left the Jomvu camp in 1998 and  went
      back to the islands.  She went with her uncle and aunt and her husband
      and child.  The camp was closed.  Other Bajuni friends  and  relatives
      went back although very few people came back to the island. When  they
      got to the island they found that their house was destroyed.

  62. An uncle had remained there throughout. He supported  them  when  they
      returned to the island.  Her uncle and her husband went fishing.  They
      did not own their  own  boat.   She  did  not  know  exactly  how  the
      arrangements worked but her uncle and husband worked on fishing  boats
      owned by other Bajunis.  They also went to the coast  and  worked  for
      traders. Five people lived in her uncle's house.  She said  they  were
      poor.

  63. The appellant said the raids continued and  she  was  raped  again  in
      2004.  Her husband had gone and took the child with him.  She  claimed
      not to know if he had left the islands but she had not seen him.   She
      tried to find him.  She wanted her child back.  The  family  supported
      her.  She said that she was still with her uncle in 2007.  Her uncle's
      wife was attacked, beaten and raped and  died  afterwards.   This  was
      another aunt.  She was not confusing her with an  aunt  who  had  been
      raped and beaten and died on an earlier occasion.

  64. It was put to her  that  it  was  not  clear  from  her  statement  or
      interview that she had had two aunts who had  been  so  badly  treated
      that they died.  The appellant said that many of her  family  died  in
      the war and she could not mention all of them. She confirmed that  the
      aunt she had most recently been discussing was the one she  had  lived
      with for many years.

  65. She was asked if she could explain why she did not leave when she  was
      raped in 2004.  She said she could not make the decision: she  had  to
      do what her uncle said.  She  could  not  remember  exactly  when  her
      uncle's wife died.  She was attacked at the same time as the appellant
      was attacked.  Her uncle suggested the war was escalating and  it  was
      time to get out.  She was not consulted.  She was told.

  66. The appellant said they gathered their things and went.  It was not  a
      good house.  It was not fit to sell. They went by boat to Yemen  where
      they stayed for two months, then her uncle introduced her to  the  man
      who took her away.  She had family jewels and she used  them  to  pay.
      She was asked if she could explain why the jewels were not  stolen  by
      the intruders.  She said they were buried.  Her uncle had buried  them
      somewhere. She claimed not to know when he had buried  them.   It  was
      suggested to her that she knew when she  stopped  wearing  them.   She
      said he came back from the jungle and collected all their valuables.

  67. She was asked it if it really was her case that she took her jewellery
      to the Jomvu refugee camp and her uncle took it to bury it on the  way
      back.  She confirmed that that was her case. The wedding jewellery was
      an Islamic dowry.  There were very strong cultural pressures  to  give
      gold at the wedding. Her husband gave a dowry as did her  mother.   It
      was kept by her uncle. She said they all went together  to  the  Jomvu
      refugee camp and then back to the island.  There was enough  money  to
      pay for a false passport and the flight to Europe. She had since  lost
      contact with her uncle.

  68. She said that she arrived in England in June 2007 and  claimed  asylum
      straight away.  She confirmed she  had  arrived  wearing  a  sheepskin
      coat.  She was asked from where she had obtained that and she said  it
      was from a neighbour on the island.  It was, she said, given to her by
      someone she had not met before. It was a gift.

  69. Asked about her languages, she confirmed that she spoke Bajuni with  a
      little bit of Arabic and Somali. She said she had learnt to write some
      Swahali in the refugee camp. She said that on her two  interviews  she
      spoke the Bajuni language.  Bajuni was  the  only  language  that  she
      spoke. She said that she knew Arabic and  Swahili  but  had  forgotten
      Somali and she spoke Bajuni.  Bajuni is her native  language  and  she
      used it in both interviews. She knew some Swahili  and  understood  it
      but she did not speak it. When they were in the Jomvu camp they  spoke
      Kibajuni between themselves but used Swahili when talking to others.

  70. The appellant was asked about particular  words  that  the  linguistic
      analysis reports considered. She said  that  she  did  understand  the
      Bajuni word /ikoto/ but missed it  because  she  was  under  pressure.
      Similarly the word /jabiya/.  She understood  it  but  she  was  under
      pressure.  She was uncertain of the meaning of the word /mkuru/.

  71. She did know about /vehundu/.  She said  she  was  familiar  with  the
      word. She denied telling the interviewing officer that she had  little
      knowledge of the Bajuni culture because her grandfather had died.  She
      said that  was  a  misinterpretation.   She  said  she  had  explained
      sufficiently that the Bajunis had descended from Bantus and Arabs.

  72. She accepted that she had told the Immigration Service  that  she  was
      unemployed.  She said there is a tradition that women  do  not  go  to
      work although her mother  did  collect  and  sell  shells.   She  then
      qualified that to say that her mother collected shells but her  father
      took them to sell.

  73. It was put to the appellant expressly that she was  just  not  telling
      the truth and that she was in fact from Kenya.  She insisted  she  was
      Bajuni. It was similarly put to her that she did not speak Bajuni as a
      native language but she spoke Kenyan Swahili.   The  appellant  denied
      this. She said that she spoke Kibajuni.  She spoke  Swahili  sometimes
      when she lived in Kenya.  She got some Swahili words.

  74. Ms Whipple reverted to the Sprakab report and took her  in  detail  to
      her own responses in relation to the four words mentioned  above.  The
      report said that the appellant was not familiar with the word /jabiya/
      which the report described as a construction for gathering and storing
      water.  According to the report it is a well-known construction,  part
      of everyday life in Koyamo, and it is not  something  located  in  the
      ocean which is how the appellant described the  word  to  the  Sprakab
      interviewer.

  75. The report also showed that the appellant was not  familiar  with  the
      word  /ikoto/.   She  thought  the  word  was  connected  with   hair.
      According to the report, in Koyama the word /ikoto/ described a  woman
      who was not a virgin: that is a woman who  had  been  married  or  was
      married.  However in Kenya the word /igoto/, which was a variation  of
      the same word, refers to hair extensions believed to be from the  hair
      of virgins.

  76. The word /mkuru/, according to the report, refers to  a  non-religious
      leader, being an older man elected by the population  of  the  island,
      who has an advisory role.  It is a role fulfilled by one  person  only
      rather than several simultaneously, and it was quite contrary  to  the
      report writer's understanding of life in Koyama for there to be  three
      mkurus at any one time but, according  to  the  report  the  appellant
      named three people as mkuru in Koyama.

  77. Similarly the report said that the word 'vehundu' was used  in  Koyama
      to describe a red (meaning a lighter) skin  tone.   According  to  the
      report the name is used for part of the Bajuni ethnic  group  deriving
      from the Somali Bajuni island Koyama.  These persons have lighter skin
      compared to the rest of the population.  According to the  report  the
      appellant did  not  recognise  this  word  and  pronounced  it  in  an
      untypical way.

  78. The appellant said that she did not know why she had not been able  to
      explain these things at interview. The appellant agreed that they were
      ordinary Bajuni words.  She had no  reason  for  not  describing  them
      properly except that she was under pressure.  It was put to her if she
      had discovered their meaning  since  and  was  trying  to  change  her
      position. She said that was not the case.

  79. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, she said at first  that  she
      had been living in the United Kingdom for nearly four years, and  then
      corrected herself to say less than three years. She had been in  Kenya
      for five or six years. She accepted that on her figures she  had  been
      in Koyamo for 27 years. She confirmed that she had been in Koyamo both
      before and after living in the camp in Kenya.

  80. She said that she had not spoken any Swahili until  she  went  to  the
      camp.  She said she was somewhere between 18 and 20 when she last  had
      contact with her father.  It was not the habit amongst the  people  on
      the island to care too much about age.  She had remembered her  father
      and remembered he had worked as a fisherman.

  81. She claimed not to be sure if he had his own boat but she knew he  was
      fishing.  He did not go very far off the coast.  Sometimes she saw him
      working.  It was about twenty minutes walk away from their home.   She
      said that if he got a lot of fish he took them  to  market,  otherwise
      they were used solely for food at home.  They had  two  markets.   One
      was in Koyama, you had to take a boat to the other..

  82. When her mother collected shells her father took them for  sale.   The
      shells were used for decoration.

Sprakab

  83. Sprakab (whose full name Skandinavisk Spr�kanalys means  "Scandinavian
      Language Analysis"), is now  a  privately  owned  company,  though  we
      understand it was originally set up by the Swedish government.  It  is
      based  in  Stockholm.  Its  work  is  linguistic  analysis,  which  it
      undertakes for two primary reasons: the  identification  of  place  of
      origin of asylum seekers, and the matching  of  examples  of  recorded
      speech to the speech patterns  of  a  known  individual  for  forensic
      purposes. We are primarily concerned here with only the first of those
      fields of work.

  84.  The  company  has  a  large  number  of  clients.  They  include  the
      immigration  services  or  equivalent,  of  Canada,  Ireland,  Sweden,
      Australia, Estonia, Norway, Austria, the Netherlands, and  the  United
      Kingdom. Sprakab says that it has  conducted  over  40,000  linguistic
      analyses since the year 2000.  At  the  hearing  we  enquired  whether
      Sprakab works for private individuals. As we understand the  position,
      the company will not take instructions from a  private  individual  in
      circumstances  where  it  already  regularly  acts  for  the  relevant
      national authority. We were told  of  one  case  where  an  individual
      sought a language analysis in order to prove his  country  of  origin.
      Sprakab referred him to the national authority, who  agreed  that  the
      analysis should take place. We understand further  that,  despite  the
      fact that the  analysis  supported  the  individual's  claim,  he  was
      required to pay for it. That is the only example we were given of  the
      company accepting instructions from a private individual.

  85. As well as the  manager,  Pia  Fernqvist,  from  whom  we  heard  oral
      evidence,  and  other  administrative  staff,  the   company   employs
      linguists, who have  university  qualifications  in  various  relevant
      disciplines, are members of the International Association for Forensic
      Phonetics and Acoustics, and are subject to regular evaluation.

  86. The company has a pool of analysts,  which  it  employs  as  and  when
      necessary. In general they  speak  the  language  they  are  asked  to
      analyse at the native level, and  are  taught  at  Sprakab  to  "think
      critically and analytically regarding language". They are required  to
      keep their knowledge of their languages up to date.

  87. Analysts are recruited within Sweden,  using  what  is  apparently  an
      informal network of  education  institutions  and  recommendations  by
      existing analysts. They are subject  to  evaluation  before  they  are
      appointed, and to regular evaluation during their work for Sprakab.

  88. Linguistic analysis at Sprakab is a two-stage process. It starts  with
      an analyst listening to a  specimen  of  speech,  which  is  recorded.
      Typically, the analyst converses with the person whose speech is to be
      analysed. Using his developed skills as a listener, the analyst  notes
      features of the subject's speech which appear to be of interest. Those
      features may be phonological, that is to say related  to  the  precise
      sounds used in speaking, and to the intonation and  stresses  of  both
      words  and  sentences,  morphological,  that  is  to  say  related  to
      inflection, grammar and syntax, or lexical, that is to say related  to
      the speaker's choice of words.

   89. The analyst then discusses the features that  have  been  identified
       with a linguist. Together,  the  analyst  and  the  linguist  decide
       whether the features are indeed diagnostic in the sense of assisting
       to decide the speaker's origin.  A  report  is  produced,  giving  a
       judgement, usually in one of the four following forms:

         "The person speaks a variety of [language or dialect] found
             - with certainty in (or certainty not in):
             - most likely in:
             - likely in:
             -possibly in:"

   90. Sprakab's account of the measure of these phrases is as follows:

         "If the analyst is certain that the analysed language is found in a
         specific  region,  he/she  uses  the  degree  of  certainty   "with
         certainty in". The degree of certainty  decreases  if  the  speaker
         mixes in elements not normally found in use in  the  region  he/she
         maintains  his/her  linguistic  background  in.  Rationale  for   a
         determined degree of  certainty  is  ordinarily  explained  in  the
         report."

   91. The person conducting the interview  with  the  claimant,  which  is
       saved onto CD, may also be the analyst, in which case a  preliminary
       result can be given at the end of the interview.  Analysts are given
       extensive training by the linguists, so that they  will  be  on  the
       lookout for certain distinctive features of the language or  dialect
       spoken by the claimant.  Indeed, before analysts  are  taken  on  by
       Sprakab, they must undergo an evaluation process, in which they must
       listen to a dozen or so sample recordings from Sprakab's  collection
       and get the language or dialect  right.   Then  they  are  asked  to
       analyse for themselves another twenty or so  recordings  which  have
       already been analysed by an experienced analyst, and  only  if  they
       show themselves competent are they appointed to work for Sprakab.

   92. The contribution of the linguists is different.  They may  well  not
       speak the language of the claimant, but will check that the  analyst
       has identified linguistically significant features of the claimant's
       speech which enable a conclusion to  be  drawn  with  the  requisite
       degree of certainty.

   93. In her oral evidence, Pia Fernqvist confirmed what she had  said  in
       her written report about the training of analysts and linguists, and
       explained that the interviewer on 20  June  2007  had  used  Swahili
       because 97% of those claiming to be Bajuni turned  out  to  be  from
       Kenya.  That a second and third linguistic analysis had been carried
       out on that interview was not because  of  doubts  about  the  first
       analysis, but because  the  Home  Office  had  requested  them.   Ms
       Fernqvist assured us  that  her  analysts  made  due  allowance  for
       dialect and language mixing, but agreed that the "referral  details"
       about the appellant  given  to  Sprakab  by  the  Home  Office  were
       parsimonious.  They  said  merely  that  the  applicant  for  asylum
       claimed to come from the Bajuni islands in  Somalia,  and  that  the
       applicant's  first  language  and  other  languages   spoken   there
       comprised Swahili, Kibajuni and Somali.

   94. In cross-examination, Ms Fernqvist agreed that  linguistic  analysis
       cannot determine nationality (although it helps)  and  that  Sprakab
       only works for governments.  A report would normally be compiled for
       the Home Office, she said, after an interview lasting 20-30 minutes.
        The analyst would run through the recording of the interview  three
       times before producing a draft  report  and  discussing  it  with  a
       linguist.  There would then be  a  linguists'  meeting,  before  the
       report was typed up.  How was it, if that  were  so,  that  after  a
       telephone interview on the same day as the screening  interview  (20
       June 2007), the appellant was told by an immigration officer that it
       had been  concluded  that  she  hailed  from  Kenya?   Ms  Fernqvist
       explained that, on this occasion, the analyst had felt able to  give
       the Home Office a preliminary indication straight away.

   95. Mr Davison returned to what Ms Fernqvist had said in-chief about 97%
       of claimed Bajuni  being  Kenyans,  and  asked  whether  a  Swahili-
       speaking Kenyan had conducted the first  interview  because  it  was
       assumed that the appellant was also a Swahili-speaking  Kenyan.   Ms
       Fernqvist insisted that the islanders can all understand Swahili  in
       any event.  Alluding to Sprakab's claim that boasted  that  analysts
       spoke "to mother tongue level" the language of the  interview  which
       they were analysing, Mr Davison noted that EA 19 held himself out as
       speaking Swahili, Luhya and Luganda to mother tongue level, but  not
       Kibajuni.  Ms Fernqvist replied that he could analyse Bajuni, having
       worked among Bajuni refugees.   The  first  interview  was  actually
       conducted by interviewer 240, who does speak Bajuni at mother tongue
       level.  The analysis was then carried out by EA 249, and verified by
       linguist 03.  This method of working was, Miss  Fernqvist  asserted,
       in keeping with the resolution passed in 2009 at the annual  general
       meeting of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics  and
       Acoustics, which recognized the contribution to be made by:

         "Linguists and trained native speakers,  with  the  latter  working
         under the guidance and supervision of the former."

   96. Ms Fernqvist went on to describe how Sprakab kept abreast of changes
       in the languages with which  they  regularly  deal,  such  as  newly
       formed words.  She gave the example of northern Iraq, from which one
       of her analysts had recently returned with an update on the  changes
       going on there.  Would there not have been changes in Kibajuni since
       the breakdown of the Somali state in 1991?, asked  Mr  Davison.   Ms
       Fernqvist did not think there had  been  much  change,  the  islands
       being isolated, but she acknowledged that people leaving the islands
       would be likely to pick up words from elsewhere.

   97. In response to questions from  the  Vice-President,  Miss  Fernqvist
       said that Sprakab carried out around 4,000 analyses  per  year.  She
       was asked if she could  indicate  how  often  Sprakab  supported  an
       appellant's claims. She said that she did  not  have  statistics  to
       hand but her "feeling" was  that  Sprakab  supported  applicants  in
       about "60%" of the cases in which they were involved. She was  asked
       if she meant that Sprakab supported appellants more  often  that  it
       rejected appellants' claims and she  unequivocally  replied  in  the
       affirmative. She  acknowledged  that  it  was  quite  normal  for  a
       screening interview to be interrupted for a telephone interview with
       Sprakab, followed by a provisional analysis, but she insisted on the
       accuracy of the conclusion in the instant  case.   The  analyst  who
       conducted the second interview in February 2010 (EA 24) was born  on
       the Bajuni island of Chuvay and lived in  the  Bajuni  area  for  20
       years.  He spoke to the appellant in Bajuni, and was sure  that  she
       could not speak Bajuni.

   98. Miss Fernqvist went on to describe how a database of recordings  has
       been built up at Sprakab, with the language of each labelled for the
       use of the linguists, who  do  not  themselves  have  to  speak  the
       language on which they are  collaborating  with  the  analyst.   The
       recordings, she acknowledged, are not available for peer review, but
       she was  certain  that  the  identification  of  the  languages  and
       dialects on the database was accurate.  There could not be  anything
       wrong with the database.  If there were, Sprakab's  customers  would
       be dissatisfied.

The individual linguistic evidence in the present appeal

   Margaret Kumbuka

   99. We have summarised above the written  reports  prepared  before  the
       hearing. It was expected that we would hear oral evidence in support
       of the appellant's case from Margaret Kumbuka. Unfortunately, as  we
       were informed on the first day of the hearing, she had died a  short
       while previously. We therefore have her  evidence  only  in  written
       form.

  100. Margaret Kumbuka said in her report of 20 September  2008  that  she
       was born in Tanga in Tanzania. Her parents were born there and lived
       there. Her mother tongue is  Kiswahili  and  she  grew  up  speaking
       Kiswahili and Kizigua. She learned English at school  and  graduated
       as Bachelor of Education at the University of Dar Es Salaam in 1975.
       Her main subjects were English and Swahili. She built  a  career  in
       broadcasting and teaching and in 1999 became a "lector"  in  Swahili
       in the African Department at the  School  of  Oriental  and  African
       Studies at the University of London. She had a  particular  interest
       in teaching and studying Swahili.

  101. She described Kibajuni as a dialect of Swahili  and  said  that  she
       became familiar with the different forms of Kibajuni spoken in Kenya
       and Somalia because of contact with people  from  those  areas  that
       began in her childhood in the 1960s.

  102. She interviewed the appellant in July 2008. The  appellant  answered
       correctly several questions about  the  customs  and  traditions  of
       Bajuni people in Somalia.

  103. She then turned to the appellant's language.  During  the  interview
       the appellant used Kenyan Kibajuni rather than Somali Kibajuni words
       to for "fisherman", "keep quiet", "bird", "aeroplane",  "uncle"  and
       "auntie". Ms Kumbuka suggested that the appellant had learned  these
       words when she lived in Mombassa. The appellant  gave  Somali  words
       for "sea", "fish", "boat", "house", "food", "water", "hair",  "eggs"
       and "door".

  104. Ms Kumbuka then gave  three  examples  from  the  interview  of  the
       appellant using Somali Bajuni rather than Kenyan Bajuni  phrases  in
       answer to questions. Two of the three chosen phrases only  show  one
       different word between the two examples. However information   about
       the main work of the Bajuni people,  "Men  are  doing  the  work  of
       fishing and women pick shells" was given as "Vanaume  vafanya  kadhi
       ya utoniya na vanavake vachunda  kauri"  whereas,  according  to  Ms
       Kumbuka, a Kenyan Bajuni speaker would have said "Vanaume ni  vavuvi
       na vanaokota makombe". This is clearly quite a different phrase and,
       it might be thought, is not as easy to attribute  to  dishonesty  as
       simply using a single Somali Bajuni word rather than a Kenyan Bajuni
       word.

  105. She was satisfied that the appellant is a Somali Bajuni from Koyama.

  106. In her letter of 10 November 2010 Ms Kumbuka confirmed that opinion.
       The appellant showed a good knowledge of Somali Bajuni  culture  and
       used Somali rather then Kenya Bajuni words.

  107.  In  her  report  of  3  December  2008  she  was  critical  of  the
       proofreading  of  the  transcript  of   the   appellant's   recorded
       interview. She also said that the interviewer spoke "broken  Swahili
       with a very heavy Kikuyu accent." She thought it was "obvious"  that
       the appellant  had  avoided  Kibajuni  words  so  that  the  Swahili
       speaking interpreter could understand her.

  108. Ms Kumbuka criticised the quality of the English translation of  the
       taped interview and indeed the quality of the language that he used.
       There was also an "era" (error?) in the translation where there  was
       talk about the appellant's marriage.

   Analyst EA 19

  109. Analyst EA 19, whose name was disclosed to the panel  in  accordance
       with the agreed arrangement, but who otherwise  remained  anonymous,
       gave oral evidence.  He confirmed that he had  worked  among  Bajuni
       islanders both in Mogadishu and in the Jomvu camp near Mombassa, and
       was familiar with both the Kenyan Bajuni and Somali Bajuni dialects.
        He was sure that the appellant spoke coastal Swahili,  rather  than
       either of those dialects.  He described how he was tested by Sprakab
       before becoming an analyst, and how his analyses were  carried  out,
       requiring consultation with a linguist.  In respect of the interview
       conducted by interviewer 240 on 20  June  2007,  the  appellant  was
       speaking Swahili throughout, and  although  she  knew  something  of
       Bajuni life and culture, the Bajuni words  which  she  did  use  had
       evidently been learned rather than acquired naturally, and were  not
       used appropriately.

  110. During her interview with Margaret Kumbuka the appellant  was  asked
       to  translate  some  words  from  Swahili  into  Kibajuni,  and  she
       translated them into the Kenyan dialect of Kibajuni rather than  the
       Somali dialect.  Miss Kumbuka supposed that the appellant must  have
       acquired Kenyan Kibajuni while in Mombassa, but EA 19  scotched  the
       notion, saying that the police did not allow the Somali  Bajuni  who
       had taken refuge at Jomvu to go outside the camp.  He admitted  that
       the appellant had answered in Kibajuni five questions put to her  by
       Miss Kumbuka, but the answers were very short, and were  not  enough
       to show that the appellant was a Bajuni islander.

  111. Although her Bajuni had dramatically improved at  the  interview  in
       February 2010, she was still not using Bajuni  words  appropriately.
       Referring to the 'Knowledge Assessment' section  of  the  subsequent
       report, EA 19 gave further information about the words listed there,
       which the appellant had misused :  /jabiya/,  /ikoto/,  /mkuru/  and
       /vehundu/.

  112. In cross-examination, EA 19 admitted he had not been to  the  Bajuni
       islands himself, and  acknowledged  that  the  language  might  have
       changed since 1991.  He was unsure whether the language had  changed
       because of the presence of Marehan clansmen on the islands,  but  he
       did not think that the appellant was accommodating her  language  to
       that of  the  interviewer  in  the  first  interview,  or  that  the
       incidence  of  Bajuni  words  in  a  language   sample   which   was
       predominantly "Kenyan coastal Swahili" indicated that the  appellant
       exhibited the phenomenon of 'language mixing'.

  113. EA 19 confirmed to Ms Whipple  that  his  fellow-analyst  after  the
       interview on 2 February 2010 (EA 24) hailed from Chuvay,  an  island
       near the appellant's claimed birthplace of Koyama.  In  response  to
       questions from the Vice-President, he said that the  dialect  spoken
       in Jomvu camp was island Bajuni, although he and the  other  helpers
       spoke  Swahili.   Clarification  was  sought  about  certain  words,
       particularly /ikoto/, which among the islanders means a woman who is
       not a virgin but is  unmarried,  and  on  the  coast  means  a  hair
       extension.

   Linguist 01

  114. The next witness was linguist 01, who  told  us  he  had  been  with
       Sprakab  since  2004  and  had  presented  a  paper  to  the  annual
       conference of the IAFPA in 2008.  He was  familiar  with  linguistic
       analyses of Bajuni claimants, and  with  the  kind  of  traits  that
       should be found in Kibajuni speech, such as the unvoiced /bo/  found
       in the bilabial position.  He would check unusual features with  the
       analyst.  Margaret Kumbuka, he said, would not have been taken on by
       Sprakab, as she was not a qualified linguist, and could  not  be  an
       analyst either, coming from Tanzania and not from  the  Bajuni  area
       (Kenya and Somalia).

  115. In cross-examination, it was put to linguist 01  that  EA  19,  like
       Miss Kumbuka, had not been to the islands.  Yes, was the reply,  but
       he had been to Jomvu and Somalia.  01 admitted that he did not speak
       Swahili himself, and that if the analyst  had  made  a  mistake,  he
       would make the same mistake.  In response to questions from the Vice-
       President, 01 admitted that he depended on the analyst not just  for
       phonetic features but for lexical items and syntax in  the  language
       being analysed.  As  a  linguist,  however,  he  was  familiar  with
       recognising  the  distinctive  features  of  a  language  and  their
       modification.

   Linguist 04

  116. The last witness was linguist 04, who confirmed that, like  linguist
       01, he was familiar with the  features  of  Bajuni  which  had  been
       identified by the  analysts  as  distinguishing  that  dialect  from
       Swahili, and could compare  the  appellant's  speech  with  numerous
       other recordings built up by Sprakab.  He  was  confident  that  the
       analysts were right  in  pinpointing  features  of  the  appellant's
       speech which showed her not to be  a  Bajuni  islander.   The  Vice-
       President observed that in  the  report  on  15  February  2010  the
       absence of the devoiced plosive /bo/ did not feature, as it  had  in
       the report of 24 June 2007.  But 04 was able to point to many  other
       features of the appellant's speech which were not characteristic  of
       Bajuni.

Submissions

  117. In her closing submissions,  Ms  Whipple  highlighted  a  number  of
       inconsistencies and  implausibilities  in  the  appellant's  account
       which cast doubt upon her credibility, before turning to the Sprakab
       evidence.  She characterised this as  professional  and  of  a  high
       quality, in contrast to the reports provided  by  Margaret  Kumbuka.
       The interview in July 2008 had not been recorded,  and  so  was  not
       available for analysis, but the criticisms made  of  it  by  Sprakab
       were cogent.  The appellant did  know  some  Kibajuni,  but  it  was
       minimal, and Miss Kumbuka had to  find  an  excuse  for  the  Kenyan
       Swahili features which were so prominent in the appellant's  speech.
       The appellant also knew something of Bajuni life  and  culture,  but
       that  could  be  easily  researched,  and  Sprakab  had   shown   up
       inaccuracies in her grasp of that too.  While, as  the  Home  Office
       guidance itself made clear, the Sprakab analysis should never be the
       sole determinant of  a  nationality  question,  it  was  a  reliable
       pointer to the resolution of that question.

  118. The trouble was, said Mr Davison in his submissions, the Home Office
       and immigration judges did treat Sprakab analyses as  if  they  were
       determinative.  In the instant case, Sprakab had  started  from  the
       assumption that the appellant was not Bajuni,  and  by  interviewing
       her in Swahili, they made it very likely that she  would  adapt  her
       speech to that of the interviewer. Sprakab had  also  underestimated
       the effect that Marehan occupation of the  islands  would  have  had
       upon the Bajuni dialect, and had discounted language  change  as  an
       explanation for the absence from the appellant's  idiolect  of  some
       traditional  features  of  Kibajuni.   The  first  report   on   the
       appellant, written on 24 June 2007, was not of  a  suitable  quality
       for production before the  Tribunal,  and  two  more  attempts  were
       needed to get an analysis that the respondent was happy with.

  119. Mr Davison defended the quality of Margaret Kumbuka's  reports,  the
       second of which had picked up mistakes  in  the  transcript  of  the
       first Sprakab interview.  He reminded us that the  asylum  interview
       had been conducted in Kibajuni, which was also the language used  by
       the appellant before Immigration Judge Pugh.  The appellant had also
       given good evidence about Bajuni culture. While  acknowledging  that
       language analysis does have  a  role  in  status  determination,  Mr
       Davison insisted that it had to be of a high  standard,  as  in  the
       Sprakab report of 15 February 2010.  The Home Office ought  to  tell
       Sprakab more about the claimant when commissioning a report.  In the
       instant case, Sprakab were not informed initially that the appellant
       had lived in Kenya from 1993 to 1998.

Other evidence

  120. Before the hearing began,  we  were  aware  of  further  documentary
       evidence in relation to  the  issue  of  language  and  Kibajuni  in
       particular.

  121. "Guidelines  for  the  Use  of  Language  Analysis  in  Relation  to
       Questions of National Origin in Refugee Cases"  were  laid  down  in
       June 2004 by an international group of linguists.   These  emphasize
       such matters as the  need  for  language  analysis  to  be  done  by
       qualified linguists and for  the  data  on  which  the  analysis  is
       carried out to be useful  and  reliable.   Also  emphasized  is  the
       difficulty of gauging a person's origins  from  linguistic  evidence
       alone, since in many parts of the world multilingualism is the norm,
       and one speaker may produce a complex array  of  'language  mixing',
       'code switching' and 'style shifting'.

  122. Appearing on the UNHCR website 'Refworld' is some information on the
       Bajuni folk compiled by the Immigration and Refugee Board of  Canada
       in  November  2005,  which  states  that  a  Bajuni  can  completely
       understand someone speaking standard Swahili, but  that  a  standard
       Swahili speaker  might  have  difficulty  understanding  two  Bajuni
       speakers who are conversing in their own dialect.  The  Bajuni  folk
       themselves are said to number between 15,000 and 20,000  souls,  and
       to dwell on the islands and coastal strip stretching from Kismayu in
       Somalia to the Lamu archipelago in Kenya.

  123. As we have indicated, at the close of the hearing it became apparent
       that there was further material of  which  we  might  wish  to  take
       account.

Post hearing evidence

  124. At the close of the three-day hearing, there were three  matters  on
       which it was felt that more information would be useful.  We had not
       seen what (if anything) the Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions
       had to say about language analysis.  We had seen  Sprakab's  website
       saying  that  "Sprakab  Language   Analysis   is   commissioned   by
       immigration bodies and police authorities who wish  to  establish  a
       person's  language   background,   e.g.   to   support   an   asylum
       investigation."  We wanted to know whether Sprakab ever  worked  for
       anyone other than governmental bodies.  Thirdly,  mention  had  been
       made during the hearing of a recent report  on  the  Bajuni  by  the
       Country of Origin Information Centre in Norway ('Landinfo'), but  an
       English translation was not available. It was agreed that  the  Home
       Office would file and serve the relevant  material,  and  that  both
       representatives could send in written submissions based upon them.

   IDIs

  125. It turns out that there is no actual 'IDI' on language analysis, but
       rather 'Asylum Process Guidance' to UKBA caseworkers.  Neither  side
       wished to make submissions on this guidance, but we shall  reproduce
       section 4, entitled 'How the Direct Analysis  works',  for  what  it
       says about the Sprakab interview and report.

          "There is a telephone interview between the asylum  applicant  and
          the Sprakab analyst [as we have heard, the interviewer may not  be
          the analyst] (who will speak the language to be analysed at mother-
          tongue level).  This is recorded by Sprakab, and usually lasts 20-
          30 minutes. The applicant is asked a variety of questions, limited
          to obtaining information appropriate for  the  language  analysis.
          This  will  include  information  relating   to   linguistic   and
          geographic information, as  well  as  specific  knowledge  of  the
          applicant's supposed country or region of origin.
           A preliminary result will be communicated to UKBA  at  around  15
          minutes  after  the  end  of  the  interview  if   the   case   is
          straightforward.
           A more detailed analysis will then be conducted by  the  analyst,
          taking fully into account phonological, morphological and  lexical
          phenomena.
           If the analyst judges that the asylum seeker does not speak in  a
          manner  consistent  with  the  area  from  which  they  claim   to
          originate, the case will be  sent  to  a  second  analyst  with  a
          background from the area  which  the  asylum  seeker  is  said  to
          originate (sic).
           A language analysis report will be produced by a linguist working
          alongside the analyst.
           Sprakab will produce the  language  analysis  report  (translated
          into English), which includes details  of  the  analyst/linguist's
          credentials (for security reasons, only their number codes will be
          revealed) and three CD copies  of  the  interview.   For  security
          purposes, the analyst's voice will be altered on the CD, and  they
          will be identified in the written material by ID code rather  than
          by name.
           An electronic copy of the report  is  usually  provided  to  UKBA
          within 72 hours of the language analysis interview, but  the  hard
          copy and CDs may take a little longer to arrive."

  126. We should add that section 11 of the  Guidance  begins  "A  decision
       must not [emphasis in original] rely solely on the  direct  language
       analysis report or an applicant's  failure  or  refusal  to  undergo
       language analysis."

   Sprakab's clients

  127. As for Sprakab only working for governments, their position is  that
       "Sprakab will not act for a person/company if it is already  engaged
       to work for the government in that country, because it would in that
       case perceive there to be a conflict of interest."   The  respondent
       has made no comment on this, but Mr Davison submits that  this  goes
       to show that "they are not totally  impartial/independent."   We  do
       not think that follows.  The fact that 60% of the asylum  applicants
       interviewed by Sprakab are assessed as speaking the  language  which
       they claim to speak suggests  that  Sprakab  is  not  tailoring  its
       results to suit its clients.

   Landinfo report on the Bajuni Islands

  128. The Landinfo document, published on 16 February 2010, has  now  been
       translated by Sprakab, and describes itself as a 'Topical  Note'  on
       the Bajuni Islands.  Landinfo's information  comes  from  interviews
       with Bajuni islanders in Nairobi and  Mombassa  during  fact-finding
       trips in 2002, 2007 and  2008.   The  respondent's  comment  on  it,
       transmitted through the Treasury Solicitor, is brief.  The report is
       said  to  be  "consistent  with  existing  objective  evidence",  in
       particular confirming that there is a difference between the  Kenyan
       (or "coastal", as it was referred to  at  the  hearing)  and  Somali
       varieties of Kibajuni, and that the majority  of  Bajunis  do  speak
       Somali.  The latter point is said to tell against the appellant, who
       can only speak a few words of Somali.

  129. We think that, at the hearing, "coastal"  was  used  to  describe  a
       variety of Swahili spoken more widely along the coast of Kenya  than
       just by the Kenyan Bajuni, but the Landinfo report itself is  rather
       contradictory on this topic.  On the one hand, the Kenyan Bajuni who
       met with Landinfo in Mombassa in 2008 said that, although there  was
       a  dialect  difference  between  Kenyan  and  Somali  Kibajuni,  the
       difference was so small as to be imperceptible to  Swahili  speakers
       from other parts of East Africa.  On the other hand, Somali Kibajuni
       is  said  to   have   incorporated   "loanwords,   expressions   and
       pronunciations"  from  Italian  and  Somali,  while   the   relative
       isolation of the Somali Bajuni from  the  Kenyan  Bajuni  in  recent
       years, because of  the  security  situation,  has  led  to  "greater
       dialect differences than one might expect."

  130. Landinfo's information about the familiarity of Somali  Bajuni  with
       the Somali language is also somewhat  contradictory.   According  to
       interviews with Somali Bajunis in Mombassa in 2008, "the inhabitants
       of the Somali mainland have also traditionally been far more skilled
       in Somali, Italian and Arabic than the islanders,  who  have  had  a
       very limited linguistic repertoire."  That  is  certainly  what  one
       might have expected in the past, but the report goes on to say this.

          "According to several Bajuni representatives (interviews in  2002,
          2007 and 2008), the majority of the Somali Bajunis  speak  Somali.
          Older persons  may  have  poor  Somali  skills,  but  the  younger
          generation speaks Somali.  Even those with poor speaking skills in
          Somali are still able to understand it (interviews in  Nairobi  in
          2007).  This has to do with the fact that  the  island  population
          was  moved  to  the  mainland  in   the   mid-1970s.    The   main
          justification given by the authorities at that time was  the  need
          for development and schooling, and many children and young  people
          attended schools on the mainland where the instruction  was  given
          in Somali."

  131. It surprised us to learn that the familiarity of the islanders  with
       the Somali tongue did not result from the islands being  swamped  by
       majority clansmen after the fall of Siad Barre's regime in 1991, but
       from forced displacement to the  mainland  in  the  mid-1970s.   The
       report has more to say about this.

          "The Bajuni population on the Somali  Bajuni  islands  of  Koyama,
          Chula/Mdoa and Chovai  was  forced  to  migrate  to  the  mainland
          village of Kudai in 1975 (interviews in Nairobi 2002 and  Mombassa
          2008).  The name Kudai was later changed to Kulmis.  When most  of
          the local communities on the coast  were  attacked  by  the  local
          Somali clan militias in the late 1980s, many Bajunis sought refuge
          in the places they originally came from - the  islands.   Starting
          in 1997, a large number of Bajunis were repatriated to the islands
          under the auspices of UNHCR, but the  repatriation  programme  was
          halted when the security situation in the region  deteriorated  in
          June 1999.  Several hundred Bajunis also returned to  the  islands
          (UNCT 1999) when the refugee camps on  the  coast  of  Kenya  were
          closed in the late 1990s.  Somalis also live on the islands  today
          and, even though there are instances of marriages  between  Somali
          men and Bajuni women on the islands, it has been claimed that  the
          local Bajuni population is being exploited by  Somali  businessmen
          (interview with international aid organisation, Nairobi 2008)."

  132. The Treasury Solicitor  is  certainly  wrong  to  describe  this  as
       "consistent with existing objective evidence".  The principal source
       of information about the Bajuni in this jurisdiction  has  been  the
       report of the joint British, Danish and Dutch  fact-finding  mission
       which was in Nairobi from 17 to 24 September 2000 and  "met  with  a
       group of elders from the Bajuni community in  Nairobi."   From  them
       the delegation learned about the raids on the islands by Somali clan
       militias as the Barre regime collapsed in 1990-1991, and the  flight
       of most of the Bajuni islanders to Kenya during  1992.   The  Bajuni
       �migr�s who returned to the islands after the closure of  the  Jomvu
       camp in 1997 found that majority clansmen had seized their  property
       and that it was very difficult to make  a  living  on  the  islands,
       where they were still liable to attack by the militias.

  133. There is no mention at  all  in  the  2000  report  of  a  wholesale
       displacement of the island population to the mainland in 1975, and a
       return to the islands at the end of the  1980s  in  order  to  avoid
       attacks by the majority clans.  A footnote to  the  Landinfo  report
       says that the story of the  forced  migration  to  the  mainland  is
       supported by an Oxford House report on minorities in Somalia written
       by Abdi Abby and published in October 2005, but this actually  talks
       about the forced collectivisation of the Bajuni  fishing  operations
       in the mid-1970s, when the Marxist regime of Siad Barre  seized  the
       fishing boats and fishing  gear  of  the  islanders.   The  Landinfo
       report implies that many Bajuni did not go back to  the  islands  at
       all after the forced settlement on the  mainland,  with  the  result
       that "many Bajunis born after 1975  have  little  knowledge  of  the
       islands."

  134. If the Landinfo report is correct, it is unlikely that the appellant
       would have stayed on the island of Koyama from when she was born  in
       1975 until she went to a refugee camp in Kenya at  the  age  of  18.
       The 1975 migration is not the only respect  in  which  the  Landinfo
       report differs from the  received  wisdom  about  the  Bajuni.   The
       description of those Bajuni  who  live  on  the  islands  now  being
       "exploited by Somali businessmen" seems rather mild compared to  the
       impression of rape and pillage by marauding  militiamen  created  by
       the Anglo-Dutch-Danish report.  That report, on the other hand, also
       gives the impression that the Bajuni folk stop short at  the  border
       with Kenya.  "The Bajuni elders", we read, "stated that  the  Bajuni
       have no close links with the people in Kenya  who  live  immediately
       below the Somalia-Kenya border on the coast and islands." The elders
       also informed the delegation that "their language is very  different
       to the Swahili dialect spoken in  the  areas  of  Kenya  immediately
       below the Kenya-Somalia border, including the islands that  continue
       from the Somali  border  down  along  the  coast  towards  Mombassa,
       although there are some common words."  But that  is  precisely  the
       region inhabited by the  Kenyan  Bajuni,  who  speak  a  variety  of
       Kibajuni rather than Swahili (or even 'coastal' Swahili).

  135. In his submissions on the report, Mr Davison does not mention  these
       problems, but complains that only a translation of  the  report  has
       been provided, not the original, and that the  translation  has  not
       been "signed by the translator to certify that  the  translation  is
       accurate",  as  was  required  by  rule  52(1)  of  the  Asylum  and
       Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  This means that, under
       rule 52(3) the AIT would have been under no  duty  to  consider  the
       report at all.  Mr Davidson  did  not  draw  our  attention  to  any
       equivalent provisions in the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008. In any event, he finds  passages  in  the  report  which
       assist his client, such as the "very limited linguistic  repertoire"
       enjoyed by the islanders as opposed to  the  Bajuni  living  on  the
       mainland, and  the  confirmation  of  what  the  appellant  said  at
       interview about the two villages, the Koranic  school  and  the  old
       buildings on the island of Koyama, and about her membership  of  the
       Naufali sub-clan (which appears as 'Nofaly' in the report).

   ILPA mailing

  136. Before we could deal with this further evidence we heard of more. In
       March 2010 the monthly mailing of the Immigration Law  Practitioners
       Association to its members included three brief 'reports' on  Bajuni
       matters, all dated February 2010, by Professor  D.  Nurse,  Emeritus
       Professor of Linguistics at  St  John's  University,  Canada  and  a
       specialist in Swahili dialectology.  He has visited Somalia for only
       a week, but has lived for six months in the Bajuni villages of North-
       Eastern Kenya, and describes the coasts and islands stretching  from
       Kismayu in Somalia to Lamu in Kenya as home to a Bajuni  folk  whose
       language and culture are virtually homogenous.

  137. In the first of his reports, Professor Nurse presents  an  'overview
       of Sprakab linguistic analyses of Bajuni refugee claims  2004-2010',
       during which period  he  has  read  some  50  Sprakab  reports.   He
       criticises the brevity of these Sprakab analyses and  the  certainty
       of the conclusions  reached,  emphasizing  the  fluidity  of  Bajuni
       language and society amid the upheavals of  recent  years,  and  the
       'language mixing' between Kibajuni and Swahili which many individual
       Bajunis now display.  In the second  report,  'Overview  of  Sprakab
       telephone interviews of Bajuni refugee claimants',  Professor  Nurse
       says that he has listened to over 20 recordings of such  interviews,
       and makes sharp criticism of such features as the  acoustic  quality
       of the telephone link, the format of the questions, and the  brevity
       of the interview.  He makes the point that the interviewer's use  of
       Swahili, the language of prestige and power, "virtually removes  any
       possibility" of the interviewee replying in Kibajuni, "the  language
       of an impoverished and disempowered minority."  No  conclusions  are
       contained in this second report, but the first  concludes  with  the
       view that it would be unwise to use a Sprakab report as a basis  for
       any legal decision on whether an applicant is or  is  not  a  Somali
       Bajuni.

  138. Third comes a 'Review of  the  Bajuni  sections  of  the  report  on
       minority groups in Somalia, by a joint  British,  Danish  and  Dutch
       fact-finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya, 17 to  24  September  2000'.
       Professor Nurse takes issue with what the  Bajuni  elders  told  the
       mission, in particular about most Bajuni being able  to  speak  some
       Somali and about the difference between the  dialects  spoken  north
       and south of the border between Kenya and Somalia.  He  regards  the
       elders as out of touch with the language situation on  the  islands.
       The refugee camps in Kenya were "porous", and so  exposed  were  the
       Bajuni to speakers of  ordinary  Swahili  that,  on  return  to  the
       islands after the camps  closed,  many  young  Bajuni  spoke  mainly
       Swahili.

  139. Not surprisingly,  Mr  Davison  finds  support  for  his  client  in
       Professor Nurse's reports, which show that she might well be able to
       speak both Bajuni and Swahili while not being able to speak  Somali.
       The  criticisms  of  Sprakab  telephone  interviews  and  subsequent
       reports made by the Professor could equally well have been  made  of
       the Sprakab report in  the  instant  case  following  the  telephone
       interview on 20 June 2007.  But Mr Davison acknowledges that  better
       quality reports - "suitably detailed, precise, sourced and  compiled
       by qualified experts" - may have a part to play  in  an  immigration
       context, bearing in mind that they can establish what language(s) or
       dialect(s) an appellant speaks, but cannot establish nationality.

  140. Ms Whipple, on the other hand, submits that the Tribunal  ought  not
       to admit the Nurse  reports  at  all.   She  makes  the  point  that
       Professor Nurse "was not present at the hearing, has not  heard  the
       extensive evidence already given, and has not seen the documents  in
       this case.  He is simply not qualified to give evidence, as  matters
       currently stand, on the matters raised in this appeal."  Ms  Whipple
       appends a rebuttal of the  Professor's  criticisms  by  one  of  the
       Sprakab linguists who gave evidence before us, but contends that  it
       would be unfair of the Tribunal simply to read the  rival  documents
       and come to conclusions on their weight and cogency 'on the papers'.
        "Either Professor Nurse's evidence is in", she insists, "as part of
       the evidence in the appeal, in which case he must be called to  give
       evidence, or it is not."

  141. We do not think it would be right to  shut  our  eyes  to  Professor
       Nurse's views, once we became aware of them, and we  had  to  afford
       the parties an opportunity to comment  upon  them.   But  we  cannot
       treat Professor Nurse as an expert witness in  this  appeal.   There
       are numerous points of  factual  dispute  which  would  need  to  be
       addressed by  way  of  live  evidence  and  cross-examination.   For
       example, Professor Nurse says that young Bajunis  from  Somalia  who
       have lived in refugee camps such as Jomvu now speak Swahili as  well
       as, or even in preference to, Kibajuni.  The porous  nature  of  the
       camps allowed intercourse with  Swahili-speaking  Kenyans.   On  the
       contrary, analyst EA 19 told us that Jomvu camp,  where  he  worked,
       was kept sealed  off  from  Kenyan  society,  and  that  the  Bajuni
       refugees were not given the opportunity of  mingling  with  ordinary
       Kenyans.  We cannot prefer the former view to  the  latter,  without
       hearing directly from Professor Nurse as we have heard from EA 19.

  142. The problem  of  post-hearing  evidence  is  illustrated  even  more
       vividly by the surprising account in the Landinfo report  about  the
       wholesale  displacement  of  the  Bajuni  islanders  to  the  Somali
       mainland in 1975, which is quite contrary  to  the  received  notion
       that they lived on the  islands  relatively  undisturbed  until,  as
       Professor Nurse puts it, "in 1991 ethnic Somalis  flooded  onto  the
       islands, bringing chaos, violence, rape and death with  them."   The
       latter view is enshrined in the  Anglo-Dutch-Danish  report  of  the
       fact-finding mission in  September  2000,  but  in  truth  the  only
       evidence which the delegates had for it came from the Bajuni  elders
       whom they met in Nairobi.  The information in  the  Landinfo  report
       similarly comes from Bajuni people whom the Norwegians met in Kenya,
       though perhaps from a greater number, since there were  three  trips
       in all to Kenya (in 2002, 2007 and  2008).   The  parties  have  not
       addressed us on this  discrepancy,  which  we  can  neither  resolve
       entirely satisfactorily nor ignore  but  which  forms  part  of  our
       overall assessment of the appellant's claim.

Findings and Conclusion: the appellant

  143. We are very aware of the difficulties faced by the Bajuni people. We
       accept that the appellant says that she had been the victim  of  the
       kind of persecution that Bajunis have experienced  and  continue  to
       experience. If we believe  the  appellant  then  the  appeal  should
       succeed. We have also reminded ourselves  of  the  low  standard  of
       proof applicable to these proceedings and that, sadly, there  is  an
       inherent plausibility about the appellant's story: that is  to  say,
       the events she has described are of the  sort  experienced  by  many
       Island Bajunis.

  144. Nevertheless we disbelieve the appellant and we dismiss the appeal.

  145. There are several reasons for this finding. Some of them are on  the
       periphery of our decision and have not been given much weight.  Even
       so we do find it  incongruous  that  a  woman  living  in  the  dire
       circumstances claimed by this appellant would have been able to have
       secreted sufficient gold to have financed her  trip  to  the  United
       Kingdom and to have benefited from the gift of a sheepskin coat.

  146. We also disbelieve  that  appellant's  claim  that  the  explanation
       recorded at interview for not knowing about the history of her clan,
       namely her grandfather's death, was the  result  of  mistranslation.
       There is no obvious reason for an apparently  competent  interpreter
       to become inept when dealing with this particular answer. We  accept
       that the appellant gave some sketchy details about her clan  history
       but clan history is a defining  element  of  Somali  culture  and  a
       Somali must understand his or her clan history in order to  function
       in society. We find it far more likely that attributing ignorance to
       her grandfather's death is an attempt to head off questions that the
       appellant might find hard to answer because she is not  telling  the
       truth, than a reason for her being ignorant of  something  that  she
       would know.

  147. We have also considered the evidence in the Landinfo report.  It  is
       not contradicted by the Anglo-Dutch-Danish report but  rather  draws
       its information from a wider source. We find it  extremely  unlikely
       that the claim that the Bajuni islands were depopulated by the Barre
       regime is made up. It  follows  that  it  makes  no  sense  for  the
       appellant not to have mentioned anywhere in her evidence her removal
       from the islands whilst in  her  infancy,  her  growing  up  on  the
       mainland and her return to the islands. This is a further  indicator
       that she has not told us the truth.

  148. We do not believe either her accounts of the fates of her relatives,
       or her explanations for the  differences  between  her  most  recent
       account and earlier ones, or for her failure to mention earlier  the
       fate of the other aunt.

  149. We do find the appellant's use of the phrase "Vanaume ni  vavuvi  na
       vanaokota makombe" (see paragraph 123) to be of  some  significance.
       It has  not  been  explained  properly  and  is  a  pointer  in  the
       appellant's  favour.  But  it  is  greatly  outweighed  by  evidence
       counting against her.

  150. One of the reasons for considering that the Immigration Judge  might
       have made an error of law was said to be in her failure to  consider
       the evidence that the appellant appeared to have 'given evidence  in
       Kibajuni'. We suspect that the position before the Immigration Judge
       was that  it  was  before  us:  that  is  to  say  that  a  Kibajuni
       interpreter was used. Similarly, the appellant  was  interviewed  in
       Kibajuni.

  151. Kibajuni is a form of Swahili. The appellant's ability to deal  with
       questions in Kibajuni is not really the issue. The question  is  how
       well she understands Kibajuni, and the way she  speaks  it  herself.
       These are issues on which we are dependent upon expert evidence.  We
       have no basis for any proper assessment of  the  general  linguistic
       features of her oral evidence.

  152. We do, however, attach considerable weight to  deficiencies  in  the
       appellant's  linguistic  knowledge  disclosed  in  her  answers   to
       questions in cross-examination. The appellant did not know the  word
       for water store /jabiya/. She did not understand  the  role  of  the
       village elder /mkuru/. She did not know  the  word  for  a  sexually
       experienced woman /ikoto/  but,  significantly,  mistook  it  for  a
       similar sounding Kenyan word; and she did not know a  word  used  to
       describe a skin colour and therefore  ethnic  group  /vehundu/.  The
       appellant admitted that she had been asked about ordinary words. She
       did not suggest that the words were not ones that  she  should  have
       been expected to recognise. Rather she  attributed  her  failure  to
       understand them to being under pressure.  We  do  not  believe  that
       "pressure" caused the appellant to forget the  meaning  of  ordinary
       words. We find that she was not familiar with the words because  she
       has not lived in the Bajuni islands. That conclusion is also, as  it
       happens, entirely consistent with the  Sprakab  evidence,  which  we
       accept as reliable.

  153. We conclude that the appellant is not truthful and not  Bajuni,  and
       shall dismiss her appeal.

Findings and conclusion: Sprakab

  154. We are satisfied that Sprakab is a bona fide  organisation  that  is
       linked  to  international  linguistic  organisations.  Its   general
       manager, Pia Fernqvist, has an academic reputation  to  enhance  and
       protect and we are quite satisfied that it has devised  and  refined
       a system for analysing language that  requires  interaction  between
       several employees. It is thus, to an extent, self checking  and  its
       mechanisms minimise the opportunities for one person's  incompetence
       or indifference leading to a false result.

  155. We find it relevant that the manager makes no attempt  at  anonymity
       for herself. We see  no  way  of  avoiding  a  conclusion  that  the
       anonymity of  some  Sprakab  employees  could  theoretically  impact
       adversely  on  Sprakab's  reliability.  For  example  an   anonymous
       employee could deservedly have a poor reputation that his  anonymity
       suppressed: but we regard this as a  theoretical  rather  than  real
       objection. Ms Fernqvist cares about her and Sprakab's reputation and
       so cares about whom  it  employs.  Much  more  importantly,  no  one
       person's opinion is decisive; with the result  that  incompetent  or
       corrupt employees could reasonably be expected to draw attention  to
       themselves by taking positions very different from their colleagues.
       Further the opinions produced by Sprakab are reasoned and  explained
       and can be checked and criticised without knowing  the  identity  of
       each person involved in the decision-making process.

  156. We reject the criticism that Sprakab is not  independent.  Presently
       it only works for government agencies. This  is  not  immediately  a
       sign of objectivity but we  remind  ourselves  that  applicants  and
       decision makers have different  functions.  The  applicant  wants  a
       result and some applicants will seek to achieve it by  deception.  A
       government based  decision-maker,  at  least  in  a  United  Kingdom
       context, is  charged  with  making  a  right  decision.  It  has  an
       inquisitorial role that applicants do not. Clearly Sprakab could not
       give a report to  a  government  agency  in  a  case  where  it  had
       previously given a report to assist an applicant. If it did make its
       services available to all comers it could find that it was  neutered
       by a swift and dishonest applicant who, in effect, commissioned  not
       a Sprakab report but Sprakab's silence. In our experience  there  is
       no competing organisation to which a government  agency  could  turn
       for a report  and  against  this  background  Sprakab's  fear  of  a
       conflict of interests makes more sense.

  157. We think it inherently  unlikely  that  a  government  agency  would
       instruct Sprakab in a straightforward case where  an  applicant  had
       made a good impression yet we are told,  and  accept,  that  Sprakab
       gives a report that assists an applicant in most  of  the  cases  in
       which it gives advice. We do not find any merit  in  the  suggestion
       that it is inherently biased against applicants. One  the  contrary,
       in most contested cases it supports them.

  158. We might have taken a different view if we understood  that  Sprakab
       would not give a report in cases where it was instructed jointly  by
       an applicant and an official decision maker but  there  was  nothing
       before us to suggest that this would be the case.

  159. Sprakab does not claim to be infallible. It offers  four  categories
       of opinion (see paragraphs 89-90) and this opinion evidence must  be
       evaluated with the  other  evidence  in  the  appeal.  The  kind  of
       linguistic analysis offered by Sprakab is  a  serious  step  towards
       independent and verifiable opinion but it does not claim to have the
       reliability of, for  example,  fingerprint  evidence.  It  may  that
       linguistic analysis of the kind used  by  Sprakab  is  a  developing
       discipline and Sprakab will become subject to more peer  review.  It
       would certainly be in accordance with our understanding  of  Sprakab
       that it will constantly seek to refine and improve its methods.  The
       evidence before us shows that Sprakab provides  an  honest,  serious
       and useful guide to establishing the location where a person learned
       to speak.

  160. The biggest weakness we see in the Sprakab system is that it depends
       at its core on an alleged expert in the language saying, for example
       "I do not think people who come from there talk like that".  However
       that opinion has to be explained. Reasons for holding it are  given.
       Patterns of speech, for example, are recorded in ways  that  trained
       linguists can understand, reproduce and check. Sprakab is  sensitive
       to the changes in language use and notes them and keeps  in  contact
       with those of a like minded interest. Further no final conclusion is
       reached just on one person's opinion.

  161. Sprakab's methods contrast with those of Margaret  Kumbuka  who,  we
       accept, was acting honestly and who had an  academic  reputation  to
       cherish. However her reputation was not as a linguist. She  did  not
       record her main interview and so, unlike  the  Sprakab  report,  her
       opinion could not be checked by any other person. Ms  Kumbuka  noted
       that the appellant used some Bajuni words but Sprakab  went  further
       and noted that the appellant appeared to be  putting  on  an  accent
       (see paragraph  138).   Ms  Kumbuka  did  not  have  the  degree  of
       familiarity with the language to note such things. Sprakab did. Many
       of us who have tried to amuse ourselves and others  by  assuming  an
       accent for the purpose of telling an  anecdote  (for  example)  will
       understand exactly how the assumed accent can so  easily  slip  away
       and let the natural accent  reveal  itself.  Unusual  words  can  be
       learned. Distinctive speech patterns are very much  harder  to  copy
       and even harder to abandon.

  162. We do not think that Sprakab made up this fault by the appellant but
       identified it because she could not keep up a pretence.

  163. Ms Kumbuka speculated that the appellant had  learned  phrases  from
       mixing with Kenyans but Sprakab indicated that the  appellant  would
       not have had much contact with Kenyans if she had  lived  where  she
       claimed to have lived.

  164. Taken as a  whole  we  find  Sprakab's  approach  to  be  altogether
       superior to that adopted by  Ms  Kumbuka  and  we  regard  Sprakab's
       conclusions as much more reliable than hers.

  165. Professor Nurse criticises Sprakab's  methods  in  relation  to  the
       cases he has examined, but for two reasons it does not appear to  us
       that these criticisms are sufficient to cause doubt about  Sprakab's
       process or its expertise as a whole. In  the  first  place  although
       Professor Nurse found that  the  interviews  were  sometimes  brief,
       sometimes over unsatisfactory telephone lines,  and  sometimes  used
       questions of a form or in a language he did not approve, there is no
       proper basis for saying that in those cases,  or  because  of  those
       alleged defects, the opinion given by Sprakab  was  in  fact  wrong.
       Some cases will  be  clearer  than  others  and  will  require  less
       investigation before an opinion is reached.

  166. Secondly, Professor Nurse's criticisms  do  not  purport  to  be  an
       impartial survey of Sprakab reports and conclusions as a  whole.  He
       says that the 50 reports forming  the  basis  of  his  'Overview  of
       Sprakab linguistic analyses of Bajuni refugee claims 2004-2010'  all
       included a conclusion that  the  applicant  'comes  not  from  their
       alleged place but from some other place'. His  'Overview'  therefore
       relates to negative reports only. We do not know in what  proportion
       of claimed Bajuni cases Sprakab supports the applicant, but it seems
       to us that any valuable criticism of Sprakab's methods  as  a  whole
       would need to take into account its positive as well as its negative
       reports. Of course, it might be the case that all Sprakab's positive
       reports were reliable and all its negative reports  unreliable,  but
       that would seem inherently unlikely.

  167. It might be said (although it was not said in  the  present  appeal)
       that Sprakab reports should be ignored or treated as of less  weight
       because they do not comply  with  Practice  Directions  relating  to
       expert evidence. We do not think that would be right. In  the  first
       place the reports do indicate, within the limits of the anonymity we
       have held to be justifiable, the identity and qualification  of  the
       writers. Secondly,  unlike  many  "expert  reports",  they  come  in
       essence from an organisation rather than an individual,  and  it  is
       the characteristics and methods of  the  organisation  that  are  of
       importance in this context. Thirdly, they are typically prepared for
       a decision-maker and not for an appeal, and so it is not appropriate
       to impose on them rules relating to evidence  prepared  specifically
       for use in litigation.

  168. It seems to us that we have been given no  substantive  reasons  for
       distrusting Sprakab's reports either in this case or in general.  In
       our judgement, because of Sprakab's underlying library of  data  and
       the process by which it produces its reports, Sprakab evidence is of
       high quality and its opinions  are  entitled  to  very  considerable
       weight.

  169. This is particularly so when there  is  available  such  a  detailed
       report as that of 15 February 2010 in the  present  case;  but  even
       where less detail is available Sprakab's reasoned opinion should  be
       regarded as carrying weight because it comes from  a  reputable  and
       apparently reliable body with the characteristics and methodology we
       have described. Any evidence opposing the Sprakab evidence will need
       to deal with the reasons Sprakab has given  for  its  view;  and  it
       seems to us highly unlikely that an opposing report based purely  on
       anecdotal reasoning or personal opinion will give a proper basis for
       rejecting the Sprakab opinion.

General guidance on linguistic analysis evidence

  170. We close this determination with three matters of  general  guidance
       in relation to appeals based on linguistic analysis in  general  and
       Sprakab reports in particular.

  171. First, we note that it is said that a  decision  as  to  a  person's
       background or origin  should  not  be  based  solely  on  linguistic
       analysis. We have heard and  seen  nothing  enabling  us  either  to
       endorse or doubt that advice. But where there is clear, detailed and
       reasoned linguistic analysis leading  to  an  opinion  expressed  in
       terms of certainty or near-certainty it seems to us that little more
       will be required to justify a conclusion on whether an applicant  or
       appellant has the history claimed.

  172. Secondly, the conclusions we have reached about Sprakab's reports do
       not, of course, mean that Sprakab or any other linguistic analyst is
       infallible.  A  decision-maker  or  judge  must  be  alive  to   the
       possibility of  error,  whether  or  not  the  particular  level  of
       certainty expressed by the report leads  one  to  expect  it.  Where
       there is linguistic evidence in a particular case  it  is  important
       that all parties have a proper opportunity to submit it  for  expert
       assessment, and it is equally important that  all  the  evidence  be
       taken into account in deciding the questions in issue  according  to
       the appropriate standard of proof.

  173. The parties must have an opportunity  to  challenge  any  linguistic
       assessment opposing them. That means that a sound recording  of  any
       interview of or discussion with an appellant that forms the basis of
       such analysis must be made available to the other party in good time
       before any substantive appeal hearing. In some of the early cases in
       which the Secretary of State relied on Sprakab reports the  Tribunal
       had  to  direct  that  the  CD  be   served   on   the   appellant's
       representatives. We are glad  to  know  that  such  service  is  now
       routine. But it seems to us that the principles apply to both sides.
       In the present case we have not taken any  adverse  account  of  the
       fact that the appellant's  conversation  with  Ms  Kumbuka  was  not
       recorded. But it should have been, and  the  recording  should  have
       been made available to the  respondent.  We  would  expect  for  the
       future that where linguistic analysis is in issue, no  party  should
       seek to rely on an analysis based on  examples  of  the  appellant's
       speech that all parties have not had the opportunity to analyse.

  174. Thirdly, we have given our reasons above for acceding  to  Sprakab's
       request for anonymity for its linguists  and  analysts,  subject  to
       details being given of their background  and  qualifications.  Those
       reasons are of general applicability and we would  expect  the  same
       decision as to anonymity to be made in any  case  in  which  Sprakab
       evidence was tendered, unless there was some very  good  reason  for
       departing from this practice.

Conclusion

  175. For the reasons we have given we have no  hesitation  in  concluding
       that the appellant is not an island Bajuni. Her claims have no basis
       in credible evidence. Her appeal is dismissed on all grounds.



                                                                    Signed

                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                       Vice President of the Upper Tribunal,
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)





