
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Kalidas (agreed facts - best practice) [2012] UKUT 00327(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow on 9th August 2012             |Issued on:                 |
|                                                |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           ZAFARANI RAJAN KALIDAS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr T E Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Parties should assist the First-tier Tribunal at Case Management  Review
hearings (CMRs)  to  produce  written  confirmation  of  issues  agreed  and
concessions made.

(2) If credibility is not in issue, it will often be unnecessary  to  submit
a further statement by an appellant, or call her to give evidence.  If  this
approach is taken, the judge should be told why.

(3) Any further statement should not be a rehash of what  has  already  been
said.  It should be directed to the remaining live issues.

(4) Any skeleton argument should contain not just general  law.   It  should
be directed to the live issues.

(5) A judge  who  accepts  and  records  an  agreement  is  best  placed  to
understand its scope, and should consider reserving the case to herself.

(6) Representatives are jointly responsible for  drawing  attention  of  the
hearing judge to the agreement reached,  and  the  nature  of  the  decision
still required.

(7)  Judges  look   behind   factual   concessions   only   in   exceptional
circumstances.  If the scope of a concession  is  unclear,  or  if  evidence
develops in  such  a  way  that  its  extent  and  correctness  need  to  be
revisited, the  judge  must  draw  that  to  attention  of  representatives.
Adjournment may become necessary.



                           DECISION and DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania.  She  sought  asylum,  claiming
    that when her father heard she had a child out of wedlock in the UK, he
    threatened to kill her and the child.

 2.  The  respondent  refused  the  claim  mainly  because  sufficiency  of
    protection was available to the appellant in Tanzania, or alternatively
    she could relocate.

 3. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid at  a
    Case Management  Review  hearing  (CMR)  on  16th  January  2012.   The
    appellant was represented by  Mr  Ruddy  and  the  respondent  by  Miss
    McCallum, Presenting Officer.  The judge's brief  handwritten  note  of
    the hearing includes the following:

         Home  Office  accept  threatened   by   father.    Narrow   issues.
         Sufficiency of protection.  Internal relocation.

 4. For the substantive hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant's
    solicitors provided a skeleton argument.  It does not deal with  either
    sufficiency of protection or internal relocation.

 5. The appellant's statement for that hearing runs to  twelve  pages.   At
    page 7, she says she would not be safe  from  her  father  anywhere  in
    Tanzania.  At page 8, she says that the police  are  corrupt,  and  her
    father has money.  There is little  else  touching  on  sufficiency  of
    protection or internal relocation.

 6. The appellant provided a statement from her sister.  It deals with  the
    risk from the appellant's father and brothers, but again touches hardly
    at all on sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

 7. The substantive hearing took place  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dennis on 1st February 2012.  The appellant was represented by Mr Ruddy
    and the respondent by Mrs  Shahid,  Presenting  Officer.   The  judge's
    determination, dated 14th February 2012, records that there was cross-
    examination of the appellant and her  sister,  and  that  the  hearing,
    including submissions, lasted just under two and half hours.

 8. Giving extended reasons, the judge did not find the  evidence  for  the
    appellant credible.  His  determination  runs  to  45  paragraphs  over
    twelve pages.  Only paragraph 38 (internal relocation,  12  lines)  and
    paragraph 39 (sufficiency of  protection,  7  lines)  deal  with  those
    issues.  Although the judge rejects the appellant's  case  under  these
    alternatives, he treats them as plainly hypothetical.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    grounds  which  (as  observed  in  the   grant   of   permission)   are
    unnecessarily lengthy and  argumentative.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted because of  Ground  1  only.   This  refers  to  the  agreement
    mentioned at the CMR, and complains  that  without  reference  to  that
    matter the Judge went on to assess credibility:

         One of the purposes of the CMR ... is to identify what  is  capable
         of agreement between the parties and ... focus the issues  ...  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have completely  ignored  this
         very important matter.

10. At the hearing before us, Mr Ruddy did not have his note  of  the  CMR.
    We were able to identify Judge Reid's note on the file.  The concession
    made or agreement reached at the  CMR  was  not  otherwise  reduced  to
    writing by parties, either then or later.

11. Mr Ruddy told us that on 1 February 2012 there was a brief "call  over"
    of cases at the beginning of  the  hearing  day,  when  representatives
    mentioned that there was some agreement on the issues.   That  was  not
    mentioned again until final submissions.

12. The evidence from  the  appellant  was  challenged  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at considerable length.  Mr Ruddy made no intervention  during
    cross-examination.  That was because he believed that  the  questioning
    went not to core credibility, but to the  geographical  extent  of  the
    threat from the appellant's father and  the  practicality  of  internal
    relocation.  Mr Ruddy had a typed transcript of the  cross-examination,
    which he thought confirmed that questions did not  go  to  whether  the
    appellant's father ever expressed hostility to her having had a  child,
    or ever threatened to kill her.

13. We asked Mr Ruddy why the appellant was called to give  evidence.   He
    explained that this was because her witness statement dealt  also  with
    the matters remaining in issue, and to an extent  they  might  turn  on
    credibility.

14. Mr Ruddy accepted our observations that it presents immense difficulty
    for a judge if he is not told clearly what  aspects  of  evidence  have
    been agreed, and what is still in issue; and also if a  judge  is  told
    from another source that must accept "half  a  story",  yet  critically
    examine the rest.  We pointed out that  the  appellant's  statement  is
    extensive, yet deals only briefly with what had become the live issues.
     Mr Ruddy explained that he had been trying to put forward as complete
    information as possible, and that nothing in the statement was intended
    to change the position agreed at the CMR.

15. Mr Ruddy also accepted that a judge is not always conclusively bound by
    an agreement or concession.  He submitted that a judge who is  inclined
    to reconsider such a matter must put representatives  on  notice.   Any
    error lay in not giving representatives a fair opportunity to deal with
    the judge's developing adverse view of credibility.

16. It was argued that although the determination deals with sufficiency of
    protection and internal relocation, on an esto basis, there  is  not  a
    proper and full treatment.  The judge's assessment was clouded  by  his
    earlier adverse assessment of credibility.

17. Mr Ruddy acknowledged that no submissions were made on  the  extent  to
    which shortcomings or corruption of the Tanzanian police  might  extend
    to facilitation or toleration of "honour killing".

18. Mr Matthews told us that from the record  available  to  him  the  Home
    Office's presentation at the hearing was not as  to  the  point  as  it
    might have been.  Although the  Home  Office  had  not  intended  their
    approach to be  seen  as  a  general  attack  on  credibility,  it  was
    understandable that the judge might have understood it in that way.  He
    accepted that it might be difficult for the appellant now  to  perceive
    that she had a fair hearing, not having been put  on  notice  that  her
    entire credibility was back in doubt.  The judge might have crossed the
    line of failing to put an appellant on fair  notice  of  matters  which
    were live in his mind, although parties thought  they  were  no  longer
    issues.  Apart from a brief reference at paragraph  31,  there  was  no
    indication that he had done so.

19. Mr Matthews' final submission was that paragraphs 38 and  39,  although
    brief, were adequate on the decisive  issues,  and  that  no  more  had
    needed to be said.

20. In reply, Mr Ruddy made it clear that no  criticism  was  made  of  the
    judge's conduct of the hearing.  He had  not  felt  that  anything  was
    developing at the time in an unfair way.  The outcome was unfair  as  a
    matter of law, but that arose cumulatively.  Representatives,  the  CMR
    judge, and the hearing judge, all contributed to the case going  wrong.



21. We advised parties of our decision that there had been error of law.

22. At paragraph 31 the judge records that he mentioned  "very  forcefully"
    that he was not bound by the respondent's acceptance  of  a  "purported
    letter" from the appellant's father.  However, there were communication
    between the appellant and her father not only by  letter  but  also  by
    telephone and through her sister.  The judge's  warning  was  correctly
    issued, but it did not go as far as to alert  representatives  that  no
    agreement on fact and credibility remained effective.

23. Error began among the CMR representatives and the CMR judge.  There was
    no common written record.  Scope was  left  for  confusion  over  where
    agreement ended and dispute began.  Through a further series  of  minor
    errors by the representatives and  the  hearing  judge,  all  with  the
    effect of not drawing matters of agreement to attention as  clearly  as
    they should have been, there was unfairness.

24. The unfairness is not cured by the brief treatment of issues which  had
    come to be seen as highly hypothetical alternatives, but  which  should
    have been the essence of the case.

25. No strong criticism attaches to anyone involved.   Mr  Ruddy  presented
    his submission in a  commendably  measured  way.   A  series  of  small
    omissions and unfortunate developments led to considerable wasted  time
    and effort.  The overall outcome is such that the determination must be
    set aside.

26. Representatives agreed  that  the  appropriate  course  was  a  further
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  based  on  a  joint  minute
    between the parties setting out exactly which  facts  are  agreed.  The
    appellant's solicitor was within fourteen days of the hearing to  draft
    a joint minute setting  out  precisely  what  was  agreed  between  the
    parties, to be finalised between the parties within another seven  days
    and forwarded to us for incorporation in directions, remitting the case
    for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on the basis of accepted
    fact, to be resolved on the issues of  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation only.

27. CMRs and agreement of facts are efficient  devices  for  focussing  the
    issues before the First-tier Tribunal, which can  save  much  time  and
    effort.  Based on the agreement, any oral evidence ought to  have  been
    brief and to  the  point.   What  the  case  principally  required  was
    specification of background materials on sufficiency of protection  and
    availability of internal relocation in a  case  of  threatened  "honour
    killing" in Tanzania.  A  witness  statement  or  a  skeleton  argument
    focussed on the correct issues would have alerted  the  hearing  judge.
    As matters turned out, there  was  a  lengthy  hearing  and  a  lengthy
    determination resolving in detail matters which ought not to have  been
    in dispute at all, while the real issues were given short shrift.  That
    was such an unfair outcome that the determination has to be  set  aside
    and the decision reached again.  There has been  unnecessary  procedure
    in both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

28. This case involves no novelty of law, but it is an instructive  example
    of how far matters can go wrong if correct procedures are not followed.
     The following comments are of general application.

29. Parties should consider at as early a stage as possible, and preferably
    in advance of any CMR, what agreement can be reached on  the  scope  of
    the issues and what concessions can be made.  They should bear in  mind
    the purposes of CMRs,  set  out  in  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions, paragraph 7. They should assist the First-tier Tribunal  to
    produce in terms of PD 7.8:

         ... written confirmation of:-

         (a) any issues that have been agreed at the CMR  hearing  as  being
         relevant to the determination of the appeal; and

         (b) any concessions made at the CMR hearing by a party.

30. If credibility is not in issue, it will often be unnecessary to  submit
    a further statement from an appellant, or to call her to give evidence.
     If this approach is taken, the hearing judge should be told  why  this
    approach is taken.

31. Any further statement should not be a rehash of what has  already  been
    said.  It should be directed to the remaining live issues.

32.  If  an  appellant  produces  a  skeleton  argument  or  other  written
    submission (which is  often  desirable)  it  should  not  contain  just
    expressions of general law which might apply to any  case.   It  should
    deal with the live issues in the actual case.

33. A judge who accepts and records concession or agreement  on  the  facts
    should consider whether to treat the case as part-heard, and reserve to
    herself for further hearing.  She is  best  placed  to  understand  the
    exact scope of the agreement.   There  may  be  future  difficulty  for
    another judge who is faced with partial agreement on evidence,  if  the
    challenge to the rest raises questions about the whole.

34. Representatives have a joint responsibility to draw  the  attention  of
    the judge at the outset of the substantive hearing  to  the  extent  of
    agreement reached, and the nature of the decision still required.

35. Judges, unless in exceptional circumstances, do not look behind factual
    concessions.  Such  exceptional  circumstances  may  arise  where   the
    concession is partial or unclear, and evidence develops in such  a  way
    that  a  judge  considers  that  the  extent  and  correctness  of  the
    concession must be revisited.  If so, she must draw that immediately to
    attention of representatives so that they have an  opportunity  to  ask
    such further questions,  lead  such  further  evidence  and  make  such
    further submissions as required.  An adjournment may become necessary.

36. The nature of the error in the present case is such that no finding  of
    the First-tier Tribunal can stand.  Under Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    7.2(a) the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The members of
    the First-tier Tribunal chosen  to  reconsider  the  case  are  not  to
    include Judge Reid or Judge Dennis.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  is  to
    reach a fresh decision based on the issues of sufficiency of protection
    and internal relocation, taking as its starting point the joint  minute
    between the parties, signed on 23 August 2012.

37. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

[pic]
14 August 2012
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

