












R (on the application of FT) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
("rolling review"; challenging leave granted) [2017] UKUT 00331(IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of FT
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                       Before Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms M Knorr, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilson
Solicitors LLP, on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 09 June 2017.

   1. The intrinsic undesirability of and  the  strong  general  presumption
      against allowing a "rolling review"  in  judicial  review  proceedings
      whereby the Upper Tribunal admits material evidence that has not  been
      considered by the primary decision  maker  are  important  factors  in
      considering  an  application  to  amend   grounds   to   challenge   a
      supplementary or new decision (see R (Caroopen & Myrie) v SSHD  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 1307). However, the decision whether to allow  amendments  of
      the grounds of challenge is a case management decision taking  account
      of all relevant considerations.


   2. In applying the policy set out in the Competent Authority Guidance and
      the Discretionary Leave Guidance, the fact of  the  respondent  having
      "mishandled" the case and the impact of that upon the  applicant,  are
      relevant/material considerations in determining the duration of  leave
      to be granted to a Victim of Trafficking.


   3. Where the respondent has  regard  to  an  earlier  disengagement  from
      treatment in considering the  duration  of  leave  to  be  granted,  a
      relevant consideration is whether that  disengagement  from  treatment
      was because of a failure to provide support as a  VOT  because  of  an
      earlier incorrect "conclusive grounds decision".


      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted


   1. This judicial review application concerns the lawfulness of the
      duration of leave granted to the applicant, a recognised Victim of
      Trafficking (VOT).


Background and procedural history

   2. These proceedings have a long and protracted  history.  The  essential
      facts giving rise to the applicant's eventual recognition as a VOT are
      not in dispute. He is a citizen of China born on 26 July 1980. He  and
      his younger sister lived with their parents who  fought,  often  about
      money. The applicant was frequently beaten by his parents with  a  rod
      or  leather  belt.  His  mother,  with  whom  the  applicant   had   a
      particularly fraught relationship, died  in  the  year  that  he  left
      primary school. His father drank to excess  and  suffered  from  liver
      disease. After an unhappy time at school the applicant  obtained  work
      as a manual labourer. During the course  of  this  employment  he  had
      quarrels with one of the workers and  was  subsequently  assaulted  by
      police officers acquainted with  the  worker.  The  applicant's  uncle
      borrowed a  significant  sum  of  money  from  people  traffickers  to
      facilitate  his  departure  from  China  sometime  in  2007  and   his
      clandestine entry into the United Kingdom in August 2007.


   3. The applicant remained under the control of the  traffickers  and  was
      compelled to work, under threat of violence and without  remuneration,
      in a 'cannabis house' where he was locked in and held in debt bondage.
      On one occasion, having asked to leave, he was threatened with a knife
      and a gun and his arm was cut causing extensive bleeding and leaving a
      scar.

   4. On 23 November  2007  the  applicant  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of
      cultivating cannabis. On the day of his arrest he gave a statement  to
      the  duty  solicitor  disclosing  indicators  of  trafficking.   These
      included the borrowing of �17,000 from the traffickers, the absence of
      any wage for his work, and concern  about  his  indebtedness  and  the
      problems he believed may be  visited  on  his  family  in  default  of
      repayment. He was later charged  with  that  offence  and  he  pleaded
      guilty on 24 November 2007. He  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  20
      months imprisonment on 31 January 2008.


   5. During an interview with immigration officers on  14  March  2008  the
      applicant claimed asylum. He was not questioned about the arrangements
      for his travel to the UK, the money owed to the traffickers, or how he
      came to  be  working  in  the  cannabis  house.  Trafficking  was  not
      considered as part of his asylum claim. He was taken into  immigration
      detention on 23 September 2008 following completion of  his  sentence,
      and his asylum claim was refused on 11 October 2008. The applicant did
      not appeal that decision. A deportation order was made against him  on
      12 November 2008.


   6. The applicant remained in immigration detention  for  nearly  4  years
      before being released into NASS accommodation on 20 September 2012. He
      was placed under curfew and electronically tagged. These  restrictions
      were only lifted on 31 March 2016 following  the  threat  of  judicial
      review action. On 15 August 2013 the applicant  was  referred  by  the
      Salvation Army into the National  Referral  Mechanism  (NRM)  for  the
      purpose of identifying him as a potential VOT. A positive  "reasonable
      grounds" decision was made on  22  August  2013.  A  civil  claim  for
      damages challenging the lawfulness of the  applicant's  detention  and
      the failure to identify him as a VOT was issued on 29 September  2013.
      Those proceedings, which remain outstanding, have been stayed  pending
      the outcome of this litigation.


   7. Written representations were provided on behalf of  the  applicant  in
      support of the awaited "conclusive grounds" decision. These  included,
      inter alia, a statement from the applicant (1  November  2013)  and  a
      medico-legal report (14 November 2013) prepared by Mary  Robertson,  a
      Chartered and Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Head of Service  at
      the Traumatic Stress  Clinic,  Camden  and  Islington  NHS  Foundation
      Trust. Her medico-legal report diagnosed  the  applicant  with  severe
      Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), a Major Depressive Disorder  in
      the severe range, and anxiety in the moderately severe range.


   8. The respondent made negative  "conclusive  grounds"  decisions  on  13
      January 2014 and 3 March 2014 finding that the  applicant  was  not  a
      VOT. This brought about the end of outreach and financial support that
      had been provided to him between 23 December 2013 and 23 January  2014
      following the initial "reasonable grounds" decision.  The  "conclusive
      grounds" decisions were challenged by way  of  judicial  review  which
      ultimately settled  by  consent.  On  02  July  2014,  the  respondent
      accepted that the applicant was  a  VOT  but  declined  to  grant  him
      Discretionary Leave (DL) and decided that  his  deportation  would  be
      pursued. This decision was maintained on 17 September  2014  following
      further submissions by the applicant's representatives that included a
      letter from a counsellor at Room to  Heal  dated  08  September  2014,
      confirming that the applicant attended a lengthy assessment,  that  he
      was severely isolated and had great difficulties trusting people,  and
      that he would be well  suited  to  the  kind  of  therapeutic  program
      provided by the organisation. No steps were taken by the respondent to
      reinstate the applicant's support following her acceptance that he was
      a VOT.


   9. The applicant challenged the  decisions  dated  2  July  2014  and  17
      September 2014 by way of judicial review. He also made a fresh  asylum
      and human rights  claim  on  5  May  2015.  On  12  May  2015  further
      representations were made seeking  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  in
      reliance on the respondent's trafficking policy. These representations
      were accompanied by a letter indicating that the applicant was due  to
      attend an appointment at the Refugee Therapy Centre (RTC),  which  had
      offered him counselling, a China country expert report prepared by  Dr
      Jackie Sheehan and documents confirming that an application  had  been
      made to the Criminal Cases  Review  Commission  (CCRC)  regarding  his
      conviction. On 15 July  2015,  following  a  grant  of  permission  to
      proceed with the judicial review,  the  respondent  issued  a  further
      decision maintaining her position.

  10. The judicial review proceeded to a full hearing. On 3  February  2016,
      the eve of the 3rd day of that hearing, the  respondent  withdrew  her
      decisions of 2 July 2014, 17 September 2014  and  15  July  2015.  She
      accepted that her decision of 15 July 2015  was  made  without  having
      regard to all materially  relevant  considerations  and  undertook  to
      review all matters relating to the applicant's case  and  to  issue  a
      fresh decision.


  11. A fresh decision was made on 22 April 2016 granting the  applicant  DL
      for 6 months (this was formally granted on 18 May 2016 valid until  18
      November 2016), and revoking the deportation order. The decision noted
      however that  the  applicant  remained  liable  to  deportation.  This
      decision read, in material part,

          Due to your personal circumstances, specifically in respect of you
          [sic]  health,  it  is  considered  that  a  period  of  leave  is
          appropriate in your case. It has been  agreed  that  you  will  be
          granted 6 months temporary residence, which will allow you  access
          to medical treatment and public funds. If there are any changes to
          your situation your leave may be curtailed or extended,  depending
          on the specific nature of such changes ... The decision  to  grant
          you discretionary leave has been taken in  light  of  the  medical
          evidence that has been supplied in respect of your case. In making
          any further application, the Secretary of State  would  expect  to
          see evidence that you have access to treatment. The  Secretary  of
          State would also expect that any  further  application  will  also
          include an up-to-date medical assessment.


      The decision of 22 April  2016  constitutes  the  1st  decision  under
      challenge in these proceedings.


  12. The applicant's representatives responded by stating that the grant of
      6 months DL was inconsistent with the respondent's Competent Authority
      Guidance (which provides that leave would normally be  granted  for  a
      minimum of 12 months and normally up to 30 months), that the applicant
      was already accessing treatment at the RTC, and that he required  more
      stability than afforded by the grant. The GLD responded  stating  that
      the 6-month grant of leave was designed  to  allow  the  applicant  to
      "start" treatment and that  he  could  apply  for  an  extension  once
      treatment   had   commenced.   A   response   from   the   applicant's
      representatives on the same day highlighted  that  the  applicant  had
      been accessing counselling treatment since May 2015 which continued to
      date, that he  could  not  access  further  specialist  trauma-focused
      treatment until he was in receipt of a more settled immigration status
      (in reliance on Ms Robertson's report),  and  that  6  months  DL  was
      insufficient for this purpose.  The  applicant  issued  a  Pre-Action-
      Protocol Letter on 28 June 2016 and issued this judicial review  claim
      on 21 July 2016. Accompanying the Pre-Action-Protocol Letter was a 2nd
      report from Ms Robertson dated 3 June 2016. Permission to proceed with
      the judicial review was granted at  an  oral  renewal  hearing  on  20
      December 2016.

  13. Prior to the expiry of his 6  months  DL  the  applicant  applied  for
      further leave. On 3 February 2017, in response  to  this  application,
      the respondent considered the totality  of  the  submissions  made  on
      behalf of the applicant. The respondent explained why she believed the
      earlier grant of 6 months DL was lawful with reference to the evidence
      to hand at the relevant date. She  then  considered  the  2nd  medical
      report provided by Ms Robertson, further statements from the applicant
      dated  16  November  2016  and   13   December   2016,   and   further
      correspondence from the RTC. On  the  basis  that  there  had  been  a
      "material  change  in  circumstances",  including   a   reference   to
      preliminary steps taken by  the  applicant  to  commence  trauma-based
      therapy  with  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation  (HBF),  the  respondent
      considered it  appropriate,  in  line  with  her  Competent  Authority
      Guidance, to grant the applicant 24 months DL. She declined  to  grant
      him ILR maintaining that the  applicant's  case  did  not  present  as
      having "particularly exceptional compelling or compassionate  reasons"
      in reference to her Discretionary Leave Policy. The  respondent  found
      there was "... nothing materially different in this claim compared  to
      others  commonly  seen  by  the  Secretary  of  State"  and  that  the
      applicant's circumstances "... are not unusual at all and nor can they
      in any way be distinguished from the other cases to the extent  it  is
      necessary to deviate from a standard  grant  of  DL."  The  respondent
      additionally  confirmed  that  the  applicant   remained   liable   to
      deportation under section  3(5)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  The
      decision of  3  February  2017  constitutes  the  2nd  decision  under
      challenge.


  14. The applicant's conviction of 31 January 2008 was overturned on appeal
      on 13 February 2017. He made representations on 21 February 2017 and 2
      March 2017 raising  concerns  with  the  approach  taken  in  the  2nd
      decision and requesting that  the  respondent  grant  him  ILR.  These
      representations were accompanied by a report  (1  March  2017)  by  Dr
      Eileen Walsh, Head of Therapies and a Consultant Clinical Psychologist
      at the HBF. The respondent responded to those  representations  on  21
      March 2017. She accepted that, in making her  decision  to  grant  the
      applicant 6 months leave on 22 April  2016,  she  failed  to  consider
      evidence from the RTC. She maintained however  that  the  grant  of  6
      months leave was nevertheless lawful and that the  applicant  now  had
      the benefit of the full 30 months DL. The respondent did  not  dispute
      that the applicant had been diagnosed  with  PTSD  and  with  a  Major
      Depressive Disorder. There was no challenge within the decision to the
      standing or expertise  of  Ms  Robertson  or  Dr  Walsh  or  to  their
      conclusions. In refusing to grant ILR the respondent set out extensive
      extracts from Dr Walsh's report and, with reference to  her  Competent
      Authority Guidance and her  Discretionary  Leave  Guidance,  concluded
      that the applicant's mental health was not so serious as to warrant  a
      grant of ILR exceptionally. She stated,


          To be granted ILR, a case needs to meet a high  threshold  of  not
          just being unusual but [sic] can be distinguished from other cases
          to a high degree. Having considered  your  client's  case  in  the
          round, and allowing for his mental health  diagnosis,  it  is  not
          considered that this makes his case unusual. Unfortunately, mental
          health issues and the consequent need  for  treatment  will  often
          occur in trafficking cases. The fact that  your  client  has  been
          diagnosed with such does not, in of itself, make  it  possible  to
          distinguish his from other cases in the scope of this policy to  a
          high degree.


  15. The respondent noted the reluctance by the HBF to treat the  applicant
      whilst in receipt of only 2 years DL but she did not consider that the
      points raised by Dr  Walsh  were  sufficient  'in  of  themselves'  to
      warrant a grant of ILR. It was noted that the  applicant  had  yet  to
      commence substantive treatment and it was unclear and  speculative  to
      assume that he would work  with  the  HBF  for  the  duration  of  any
      treatment. This conclusion was supported by reference to  the  absence
      of any evidence that  the  applicant  had  engaged  with  the  therapy
      offered by Room to Heal for more than one  session  or  that  anything
      arose from an appointment with his GP detailed in a solicitor's letter
      dated 24 April 2015. The respondent  concluded  that  the  applicant's
      "previous failure to engage" was a "relevant  factor"  in  considering
      whether to grant him ILR. Noting Dr Walsh's report that the  applicant
      would be unable to access specialist trauma-focused treatment  without
      having sufficient duration of leave to  complete  it,  the  respondent
      concluded that this was, "ultimately ... A matter for your client  and
      HBF to discuss further." At paragraph 30 the respondent stated,


          Consideration has been had to the points raised  with  respect  to
          the handling of your client's case. It is the Secretary of State's
          position that this does not present as a  relevant  factor  as  to
          whether your client should be given ILR exceptionally.


      The decision of 21 March  2017  constitutes  the  3rd  decision  under
      challenge.


  16. On 26 April 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to the
      applicant to amend his grounds in order to challenge the decisions  of
      February and March 2017. This was however subject to  any  application
      being made by the respondent within 10 days of the  order  to  set  it
      aside. In so doing Judge Jordan stated, "... It is  not  clear  to  me
      whether the amendments render the  existing  proceedings  academic  in
      which case a conventional response is to refuse relief or whether  the
      existing proceedings ... remain a practical vehicle for the resolution
      of the  issues  remaining  between  the  parties.  Whilst  the  former
      approach would permit fresh proceedings to be initiated  to  challenge
      the later decisions, it may well result in the  incidence  of  further
      costs." No formal application was made by the respondent  within  that
      10 day period although replacement Detailed Grounds  of  Defence  were
      received within that time in which the Tribunal were  invited  to  set
      aside the grant permitting the applicant to amend his grounds  on  the
      basis that the judicial review was now academic and in  light  of  the
      general prohibition against 'rolling review'.

Basis of the legal challenge

  17. Although there has been an evolution in the scope of the challenge  to
      the 3 decisions, the core criticisms have not shifted to any  material
      degree.  The  grounds  essentially  contend  that  the  applicant  was
      entitled to a grant of ILR and that in refusing to issue him ILR or  a
      period of leave greater than  that  actually  granted  the  respondent
      acted other than in accordance with the principles established in  her
      guidance, that she failed to take into account relevant considerations
      and gave weight to legally irrelevant  matters,  and  that  she  acted
      perversely. The applicant additionally contends that the inadequacy of
      the periods  of  leave  granted  constitute  breaches  of  his  rights
      protected by articles 3 and 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights (ECHR).


      The 1st ground
  18. The first detailed ground contends that the respondent failed to  take
      into account, when considering the appropriate duration of leave,  her
      own mishandling of the applicant's case. Such mishandling,  which  was
      not disputed, aggravated  the  applicant's  mental  illness,  severely
      undermined   his   recovery,   exacerbated   his   vulnerability    to
      exploitation, and  shattered  his  sense  of  trust  and  safety.  The
      applicant  relies  extensively  on  the  medicolegal  report  from  Ms
      Robertson which causally links the deterioration in his mental  health
      to the respondent's acts and omissions.


      The 2nd ground
  19. Secondly, the applicant contends that the respondent  failed  to  take
      into account the full circumstances surrounding the discontinuance  of
      his therapy with Room to Heal, and  that  she  acted  unreasonably  in
      attaching weight to his perceived failure to engage with treatment. It
      is argued that no account was taken of the  explanations  offered  for
      the discontinuance of earlier treatment, which related to the withdraw
      of  the  applicant's  financial   support   following   the   unlawful
      "conclusive grounds" decision, the nature of that particular treatment
      (group therapy in which the applicant felt  vulnerable  and  exposed),
      the applicant's continuous commitment to his therapy sessions  at  the
      RTC  and  his  stated  commitment  to  trauma-based  therapy  and  his
      attendance at HBF.


      The 3rd ,4th and 5th grounds
  20.  The  third  ground  contends  that  the  refusal  to  grant  ILR   is
      inconsistent with the purpose of the Competent Authority Guidance  and
      that the respondent's assessment of and  conclusions  on  the  medical
      evidence, to the effect that the applicant was unable  to  access  the
      specialist therapy he requires until granted a  sufficient  period  of
      stability, was unreasonable. Given that the applicant requires lengthy
      and specialist treatment in relation to his  trauma,  and  given  that
      such treatment can only occur if the applicant has a sense  of  safety
      and stability in respect of his immigration  status,  the  refusal  to
      grant ILR was inconsistent with the  purpose  behind  the  trafficking
      policy  which  was  intended  to  reflect  the  U.K.'s   international
      obligations under the European Convention on  Trafficking.  Allied  to
      this are the applicant's fourth and fifth grounds contending that  the
      respondent failed to  take  into  account  the  applicant's  need  for
      stability in order to progress with  social  recovery,  and  that  she
      failed to take into account that the grant of limited leave is  likely
      to further undermine his recovery and mental health.


      The 6th ground
  21. The applicant's sixth ground contends that the refusal  to  grant  ILR
      constitutes a breach of his article 3 and article 8 ECHR rights and is
      therefore contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.  It  is
      argued  that  the  refusal  to  grant  ILR   constitutes   a   serious
      interference with the applicant's mental integrity  and  private  life
      and that such interference reaches the high  article  3  threshold  of
      degrading treatment and  is  disproportionate  under  article  8.  The
      applicant places much reliance on the Administrative Court decision in
      Y v SSHD [2013] EWHC 2127.


      The 7th ground
  22. The applicant finally contends that the respondent failed to take into
      account relevant matters other than the  applicant's  treatment  needs
      such as his ill-treatment in China, the risk of  further  trafficking,
      his  vulnerability  to  exploitation,  his  increased   suicide   risk
      associated with his fears and predicated on the decline in his  mental
      health, and the likelihood that he would face destitution on return.


  23. By way of relief the applicant seeks an order requiring the respondent
      to exercise her discretion to grant him ILR, alternatively,  an  order
      requiring her to reconsider the duration of leave in  accordance  with
      her obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998, her relevant policies
      and all material factors.

Whether it appropriate to set aside the decision allowing the  applicant  to
amend his grounds

  24. It is apparent from our summary of the history of this matter that the
      1st decision has now been superseded by  the  subsequent  grant  of  2
      years DL. At this juncture it is appropriate to deal with the "rolling
      review" submissions advanced by Mr Malik and his submission that these
      proceedings are rendered academic by the grant of 2 years  DL.  In  so
      doing we remind ourselves of the terms in which Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Jordan granted the applicant permission to amend his grounds.


  25. Mr Malik submits that the initial challenge  to  the  decision  of  22
      April 2016 is now academic given the grant  of  2  years  DL  and  the
      respondent's  confirmation  that  the  applicant  is  not  liable  for
      automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act 2007 or the Immigration
      Act 1971 following the overturning of his conviction. Mr Malik further
      submits that it would be inappropriate to use the current  proceedings
      as a vehicle to challenge the decisions of  3  February  2017  and  21
      March 2017. He relies on a number of  authorities  that  consider  the
      effect of further decisions made in the course  of  existing  judicial
      review proceedings which the claimants then seek to  challenge.  These
      include R (Tesfay and Ors) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 415, R  (Naziri  and
      Ors) v SSHD (JR -scope -  evidence)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  437  (IAC),  R
      (Rathakrishnan) v SSHD [2011] EWHC 1406, R (Bhatti) V Bury MBC  [2013]
      EWHC 3093 (Admin), R (Spahiu and Another) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department (Judicial review - amendment - principles) IJR  [2016]
      UKUT 230 (IAC) and R (Caroopen and Myrie) v  Secretary  of  State  for
      Justice [2016] EWCA Civ 1307. The 2nd and 3rd decisions were  said  to
      be different in character to the 1st decision and,  in  light  of  the
      general undesirability of permitting  an  applicant  to  sidestep  the
      usual filtration process  in  which  initial  arguability  has  to  be
      considered, we should set aside the amendments  challenging  the  more
      recent decisions.


  26. For her part Ms Knorr relies on many of the same authorities  as  well
      as R (Turgut) v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ 22  and  R  (Hussain)  v  Justice
      Secretary [2016] EWCA Civ 1111. She  submits  that  the  2nd  and  3rd
      decisions were to the same effect as the 1st  decision  and  that  the
      core challenge to all three decisions has remained the adequacy of the
      period of leave granted and the respondent's failure to  take  account
      of  relevant  considerations,  including  her   mishandling   of   the
      applicant's status as a VOT. The applicant indicated from  the  outset
      his belief that he was entitled to ILR (although we detect a shift  in
      emphasis in respect of the relief sought - the applicant was seeking a
      longer period of leave "... such  as  ILR"  in  his  original  grounds
      whilst the amended grounds insist  that  the  only  rational  decision
      compatible with the applicant's ECHR rights is a grant of ILR) and has
      consistently  submitted  in  respect  of  all  3  decisions  that  the
      respondent failed to take  into  account  relevant  considerations  in
      determining the appropriate grant of leave.


  27. We have no hesitation in refusing the respondent's application to  set
      aside  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan.  We  readily
      acknowledge  the  intrinsic  undesirability   that   judicial   review
      proceedings be transacted in circumstances where material evidence  on
      which an applicant seeks to  rely  has  not  been  considered  by  the
      primary decision maker, and that there is a strong general prohibition
      in  contemporary  litigation  against  rolling  review  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in judicial review proceedings (R (Naziri and Ors)).  In  the
      present application the respondent has however already considered  the
      further material and has made further decisions.  The  respondent  has
      not withdrawn her 1st decision. The present  situation  constitutes  a
      "new materials" type case as described by Lord  Justice  Underhill  in
      Caroopen (at [32]), a situation  that  has  the  benefit  of  detailed
      consideration by the Court of Appeal in Turgut.

  28. The applicant has consistently maintained that he is  entitled,  under
      the relevant policies, to a grant of leave of adequate  duration  such
      as to reflect his need for stability before he can commence specialist
      medical treatment and to enable him to undertake that  treatment,  and
      to reflect his particular  personal  circumstances  (his  considerable
      vulnerability if returned to China and, in particular, the impact upon
      him of the respondent's 'mishandling' of his claim to be a  VOT.)  The
      material issues in respect of the lawfulness of all 3  decisions  have
      remained essentially the same and  his  targets  have  not  materially
      shifted. We note that the applicant has formulated his reasons  as  to
      why the 2nd and 3rd decision are unlawful and that the respondent  has
      had sufficient opportunity to formulate  her  response.  We  note  the
      protracted litigation history in this matter,  the  significant  costs
      that  have  been  incurred,   and   the   applicant's   vulnerability.
      Ultimately, as acknowledged  by  both  Mr  Malik  and  Ms  Knorr,  the
      decision whether to set aside  the  grant  to  amend  the  grounds  of
      challenge is a case management decision taking account of all relevant
      considerations (see R (Hussain) v Justice Secretary, at [20] to [22]).
      For the reasons  stated  above  we  satisfied  it  is  appropriate  to
      maintain the amendments to challenge the 2nd and 3rd decisions.

The respondent's handling of the applicant's trafficking claim

  29. A key element of the legal challenge concerns  the  relevance  of  the
      manner in which the respondent handled the applicant's VOT  case.  The
      applicant essentially contends that the respondent failed to  identify
      him as a VOT in circumstances when he should have been so  identified,
      that she detained him for just short of 4 years when  he  should  have
      been identified as a VOT, that she made a number of unlawful decisions
      relating to his status as a VOT, that she failed  to  initially  issue
      him with any leave as a VOT in circumstances where he was entitled  to
      such leave  in  accordance  with  respondent's  policy,  that  he  was
      unlawfully subjected to a curfew and electronic tagging, and that  she
      failed to provide appropriate support to which he was entitled.  These
      factors, it is argued, should have been considered by  the  respondent
      when determining the duration of leave granted to  the  applicant  but
      were not.


  30. The respondent does not dispute the factual basis underlying the above
      assertions. Although the applicant currently has  a  civil  claim  for
      damages in respect of  the  lawfulness  of  his  detention  and  other
      related matters, the fact that he was detained for almost 4 years, and
      the fact that he was  released  with  an  electronic  tag  and  curfew
      condition in excess of 3 years, is not denied (it is not our place  to
      consider the lawfulness of his near four-year  detention).  Given  the
      central importance placed by the applicant on the respondent's conduct
      in determining the lawfulness of the duration of leave granted, it  is
      opportune to now consider that conduct, which we summarise below.


  31. A letter from the applicant headed "allegation", which was sent to the
      respondent sometime in 2009, set out the core elements of his claim to
      be a VOT. This letter was not acted upon. The  applicant  remained  in
      immigration detention  for  just  short  of  4  years.  After  leaving
      immigration detention he was subject to the restrictive NASS regime in
      which he was provided with vouchers rather  than  cash.  He  was  also
      electronically tagged and subject to a curfew. This persisted for some
      3 � years. We note that the Court in R (Gedi) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      409 found that the imposition of a  curfew  condition  and  electronic
      tagging, in a situation similar to that the applicant, to be unlawful.



  32. After  the  "reasonable  grounds"  decision  of  22  August  2013  the
      respondent should  have  referred  the  applicant  for  support  as  a
      potential VOT (which would include safe and appropriate accommodation,
      cash  payments,  access  to  a   trafficking   support   worker,   and
      counselling). The respondent failed to provide the applicant with  the
      appropriate support and he only  started  receiving  some  support  in
      December 2013, which only lasted about a month.  The  respondent  made
      two negative "conclusive grounds" decisions on 13 January 2014  and  3
      March  2014,  both  of  which  were  unlawful  and  were  subsequently
      withdrawn, and the applicant was finally recognised conclusively as  a
      VOT on 2 July 2014. Significantly, no steps were  ever  taken  by  the
      respondent to reinstate the applicant's support despite  the  reversal
      of the "conclusive grounds" decision. We  note  the  various  requests
      made by the applicant's legal representatives for  the  respondent  to
      comply with her obligations to support the applicant as a  VOT,  which
      met with little or no response (this include  correspondence  dated  5
      May 2015, 12 May 2015, 5 June 2015, 19 August 2015, 2  March  2016,  9
      March 2016, 14 March 2016 and 28 June 2016). The respondent unlawfully
      failed to provide to the applicant any grant of leave, decisions which
      were successfully challenged by  way  of  judicial  review  and  which
      eventually led to the grant of 6 months leave on 22 April 2016.

The medical evidence

  33. The applicant's grounds rely heavily on the medical evidence  provided
      to the respondent. The following is a summary of that evidence.


   Medico-legal report by Ms Robertson, 14 November 2013

  34. The applicant met the full diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD
      in  the  severe  range.  His  symptoms  included  intrusion  and   re-
      experiencing events in the form of frequent recurrent  nightmares  and
      intrusive memories,  particularly  in  respect  of  his  time  in  the
      cannabis house,  avoidance  of  stimuli  associated  with  trauma  and
      numbing (such as forcing himself to sleep to avoid  bad  thoughts  and
      loss of interest in activities), and persistent symptoms of  increased
      arousal and hypervigilance (such as getting irritable and angry easily
      and difficulty in concentrating).


  35. The applicant additionally met the  full  diagnostic  criteria  for  a
      Major Depressive Disorder  in  the  severe  range.  Symptoms  included
      depressed mood, diminished interest or pleasure in activities,  weight
      loss, insomnia, loss of energy, feelings of  worthlessness  or  guilt,
      and diminished ability to concentrate. He  also  presented  with  high
      levels of anxiety, best understood within  the  context  of  the  PTSD
      diagnosis and ongoing fear and uncertainty regarding his future.


  36. The multiple, severe, and complex problems presented by the  applicant
      resulted from his traumatic  experiences,  including  his  trafficking
      experiences. His symptoms, which had  a  significant  and  detrimental
      impact on his day-to-day functioning, were unlikely to improve without
      evidence-based psychological treatment and support.

  37. The applicant's period in immigration detention led to a deterioration
      in his mental health and significantly  exacerbated  his  symptoms  of
      depression and anxiety. The uncertainty relating to the period of  his
      detention and the witnessing of other detainees with similar histories
      being   released   contributed   to   his   sense   of   helplessness,
      disempowerment and despair. His experience of helplessness and loss of
      control  was  likely  to  have  triggered  and  exacerbated  his  PTSD
      symptoms, and the failure to recognise and act upon his being a victim
      of  trafficking  was  very  likely  to  have  resulted  in  a  further
      shattering of his sense of trust and safety. An  earlier  release  and
      public acknowledgement of his suffering and  exploitation  would  have
      helped towards restoring some sense of meaning and  moral  order.  His
      prolonged  detention  exacerbated  his  difficulties  trusting   other
      people, especially those in authority, which is likely  to  impact  on
      his  interpersonal  relationships  in  the  future  and  his   overall
      recovery.


  38. Removal to China would have a significant and negative impact  on  the
      applicant's  mental  health.  His  risk  of  suicide  would   increase
      significantly as he believes he would be in extreme  danger  from  his
      traffickers. Removal  would  increase  feelings  of  helplessness  and
      hopelessness and would exacerbate his  depression  and  PTSD.  On  his
      account he  would  face  a  lack  of  social  support  in  China.  His
      difficulty in trusting people and building new relationships,  coupled
      with his poor mental health, would make it difficult for the applicant
      to seek help and support in China. If removed he would be at  risk  of
      homelessness  and  destitution,  and  would  not  have  the  emotional
      resources to  cope  with  that  sort  of  situation  making  him  more
      vulnerable to further abuse and exploitation, particularly  given  his
      mental health problems and his difficulty in asserting his rights  and
      seeking help.


  39.  For  individuals   with   the   applicant's   complex   psychological
      presentation the expert recommended  a  service  specialising  in  the
      treatment of complex trauma presentations which may require  at  least
      40 sessions of treatment. She recommended evidence-based psychological
      treatment which would include stabilisation and ensuring  a  sense  of
      safety prior to engaging in trauma-focused treatment. Only  once  this
      has been established could he engage in trauma focused treatment aimed
      at reducing his symptoms of PTSD. Given  the  chronic  nature  of  the
      applicant's experiences, including  having  experienced  trauma  as  a
      minor,  Ms  Robertson  recommended  that  he  be   offered   long-term
      psychological therapy in a specialist service.  She  did  not  believe
      that he would be  able  to  engage  in  trauma  focused  psychological
      treatment whilst still in a situation  of  uncertainty  regarding  his
      future. This would prevent him from establishing the required sense of
      safety necessary for  treatment  and  would  trigger  trauma  memories
      maintaining and exacerbating his PTSD.

Letter from Room to Heal councillor, Mr Caglar, dated 8 September 2014

  40. The applicant attended  a  lengthy  assessment  process  comprising  4
      sessions between 30 January and 27 February 2014. It was clear that he
      was severely isolated and had great difficulty trusting other  people.
      He was assessed as being  well  suited  to  the  kind  of  therapeutic
      program offered at the organisation and this was indicated to him. The
      applicant had however found it very difficult to access Room  to  Heal
      services since the assessment, ostensibly because of a lack of funding
      to enable him to travel but also probably  because  of  his  traumatic
      history and the lack of trust that had ensued from this.

Refugee Therapy Centre (RTC) letter, 28th of April 2015

  41. This brief letter indicated that the organisation  would  be  glad  to
      work with the applicant therapeutically and would invite  him  for  an
      assessment appointment when a vacancy arose. The letter further  noted
      that  the  organisation's  policy  was  that  their  councillors   and
      psychotherapists did not provide reports for external agencies in  any
      circumstances.

Statement from the applicant dated 26 November 2015, and  a  statement  from
Nina Rathbone Pullen, solicitor of Wilson solicitors LLP, dated 30  November
2015

  42. In his statement the applicant maintained that  he  started  attending
      sessions at the RTC which lasted 1 hour every Friday afternoon.  These
      were one-to-one sessions with a councillor. The sessions,  which  were
      very good and positively affected  his  mood,  were  ongoing.  In  her
      statement Ms Rathbone-Pullen confirmed that she made efforts to obtain
      a letter from the RTC to confirm that the  applicant  attended  weekly
      one-to-one  specialist  counselling  sessions.  This  information  was
      confirmed to her over the telephone by the RTC.

2nd medicolegal report from Mary Robertson, dated 3 June 2016

  43. Ms Robertson described in some detail the  benefits  received  by  the
      applicant from his weekly therapy sessions at the RTC. These were very
      important to him and played a significant role  in  helping  him  cope
      with his difficulties and managing his feelings of  hopelessness.  The
      applicant had built a trusting relationship with his therapist.


  44. The applicant was again assessed as suffering from PTSD in the  severe
      range. There had been a slight  reduction  in  the  frequency  of  his
      daytime intrusive memories, and he also felt more able to  manage  his
      distress when he had these memories by distracting himself with  other
      things. He experienced symptoms well in excess of those required for a
      diagnosis of PTSD, and his symptoms caused  him  significant  distress
      and impairment in all areas of functioning.


  45. The applicant still met the  full  diagnostic  criteria  for  a  Major
      Depressive Disorder, which was now reduced to  the  moderately  severe
      range. He also presented with high levels of anxiety in the moderately
      severe range. This was a slight reduction in severity comparison  with
      the conclusions of Ms Robertson's 2013 report.

  46. Despite the  slight  reduction  in  some  of  his  PTSD  symptoms  the
      applicant  continued  to  have  frequent  and  distressing  nightmares
      causing significant impairment to  his  sleep  and  there  was  little
      change in his symptoms of avoidance. He continued to have difficulties
      relating to increased arousal and presented as much  angrier  than  in
      the previous assessment. In the expert's  view  this  anger  had  been
      exacerbated by  the  prolonged  period  of  detention  and  electronic
      tagging and his associated sense of injustice, and the long  delay  in
      investigating his trafficking claim and in resolving  his  immigration
      status. There had been no  significant  clinical  improvement  in  his
      symptoms since the last assessment. The  applicant  still  experienced
      symptoms at clinically significant levels which  interfered  with  his
      day-to-day functioning and overall quality of life. His symptoms  were
      severe, complex and chronic.

  47. A decision to return the applicant to China would shatter any sense of
      hope for a better future and would exacerbate his sense of failure and
      associated helplessness. Several factors were  identified  as  placing
      him at increased risk of suicide. His removal to China  would  have  a
      severe detrimental impact on his mental health and would increase  his
      sense of hopelessness and despair. Given  his  difficulty  in  forming
      relationships and feelings  of  isolation,  together  with  his  other
      mental health difficulties, he would encounter difficulty  in  seeking
      help  and  support,  if  this  was  available,   causing   significant
      deterioration in his already fragile mental health.  An  inability  to
      take the necessary steps to provide for his basic  needs  would  place
      him at increased risk of destitution and homelessness  and  he  lacked
      the emotional resources to cope with such a situation.  A  significant
      worsening of his mental health symptoms  would  render  him  extremely
      vulnerable and at risk of suicide.

  48. In the expert's opinion 6 months DL was inadequate for  the  applicant
      to start the recovery process. Based on  her  clinical  experience  of
      patients with similar presentations the  applicant  would  require  at
      least 40 sessions of treatment (up to 2 years of treatment)  within  a
      service specialising in the treatment of complex trauma presentations.
      Without this treatment his PTSD was  very  unlikely  to  improve.  The
      counselling he receives from the RTC is supportive and present focused
      but is not focused  on  recovery  from  PTSD,  although  Ms  Robertson
      believes that the RTC treatment is nevertheless extremely important as
      stabilising treatment in the interim.

  49. The applicant would be unable to engage  in  trauma-focused  treatment
      with 6 months DL  as  this  was  insufficient  time  to  complete  the
      treatment and would not provide him with the necessary sense of safety
      required before this type of treatment could commence. He  required  a
      secure form of leave such as refugee status or ILR. Any short grant of
      leave would still carry the risk of return and would be a  barrier  to
      his feeling sufficiently secure and stable to engage in  the  required
      treatment. Clinicians would not commence trauma focused treatment with
      the applicant as it would be clinically contra indicated to embark  on
      a course of  treatment  without  any  guarantee  that  this  could  be
      completed.  Trauma  focused  treatment   involves   "re-living"   past
      traumatic events which the patient has been trying to avoid. This  can
      result in increased levels of distress and an increase in symptoms and
      is therefore contra indicated in patients  who  are  currently  facing
      highly  stressful  situations  such  as   the   threat   of   removal.
      Interrupting treatment midway through the process of  trauma-  focused
      therapy would potentially leave the  applicant  in  a  psychologically
      aroused and vulnerable state and for  this  reason  he  would  not  be
      offered  such  treatment  while  facing  this  level  of   uncertainty
      regarding his future.

  50. Given the chronicity and severity of the applicant's condition, it  is
      highly  unlikely  that  he  will  recover  without   the   recommended
      treatment.  Without  this  treatment  he  is  likely   to   experience
      significant difficulties in all areas of his functioning including his
      relationships, and his occupational and social functioning.

  51. In the expert's opinion the applicant's mental  health  needs  were  a
      consequence both of his experiences as a victim of trafficking and the
      lengthy period of detention and  electronic  tagging.  The  electronic
      tagging between September 2012 and March 2016  was,  in  the  expert's
      view, extremely detrimental to  the  applicant's  mental  health.  The
      experience of tagging further reinforced his  feelings  of  shame  and
      negative beliefs about himself which  exacerbated  his  mental  health
      difficulties. The lengthy period of electronic tagging was one of  the
      main reasons for the applicant's increased  anger  as  this  left  him
      feeling imprisoned and aggravated his low self-esteem.

Report  of  Dr  Eileen  Walsh,  qualified  clinical  psychologist,  Head  of
Therapies at the HBF, 1 March 2017

  52. When the report was composed the applicant had been seen  by  the  HBF
      for  6  psychological  assessments  and  stabilisation  sessions.  The
      therapy team planned to offer him trauma-focused treatment for PTSD as
      soon as his social circumstances were stable enough for this treatment
      to be appropriate. Dr Walsh also found  that  the  applicant  met  the
      diagnostic criteria for PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder relating to
      his experiences, and that his  symptoms  for  both  were  chronic  and
      severe.


  53. Dr Walsh agreed with Ms Robertson's opinion  that  the  applicant  was
      likely to need long-term treatment, of at least 2 years duration,  and
      that while active  trauma-focused  psychological  treatment  may  take
      between 2 and 3 years the applicant was highly likely to  continue  to
      need social care support for a longer  period  of  time  in  order  to
      facilitate rebuilding his  life.  Whilst  he  could  in  theory  start
      treatment while his leave to remain is short-term and  unstable,  this
      would not be clinically recommended and nor would it be likely  to  be
      effective particularly during the latter part of his two-year grant of
      leave to remain. It is highly likely  that  progression  of  treatment
      will be detrimentally affected by his  leave  gradually  reducing.  Dr
      Walsh would not expect the applicant  to  be  able  to  continue  with
      trauma-focused treatment with his leave gradually expiring and he  was
      unlikely to be able to engage in other aspects of his recovery  within
      a timeframe limited to 2  years.  Any  attempts  to  develop  personal
      friendships and or a partner relationship will be severely affected by
      the possibility that he would be unable to pursue these  relationships
      if removed after 2 years. This aspect  of  his  recovery  was  of  key
      importance given the impact of his very extended adverse  experiences,
      and was at least as important as the psychological treatment.


  54. The commencement of specialist trauma-focused treatment without having
      leave of sufficient duration  was  not  recommended  in  the  clinical
      guidelines, and  would  not  be  professionally  ethical.  Whilst  the
      applicant could be offered stabilisation work to manage  his  symptoms
      and help with coping with his very difficult circumstances,  Dr  Walsh
      would not be willing to commence a course of trauma-focused  treatment
      with this uncertainty. While the  applicant  will  be  offered  coping
      strategies, and HBF would liaise with his GP and other NHS services in
      relation to his mental health needs, he would not be  able  to  obtain
      the only evidence-based treatment for his main mental health problem.

Relevant legal framework


      The source of the respondent's power to grant leave  to  remain  stems
      from the Immigration Act 1971. Section 3(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971 reads:



           (1)     Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where
           a person is not a British citizen-
           (a)     he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave
           to do so in accordance with the provisions of,  or  made  under,
           this Act;
           (b)     he may be given leave to enter the United  Kingdom  (or,
           when already there, leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom)
           either for a limited or for an indefinite period;

  55. Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 states:


           The power under this Act to give or refuse leave  to  enter  the
           United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration  officers,  and
           the power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  or  to
           vary  any  leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards
           duration or conditions) or to cancel  any  leave  under  section
           3C(3A), shall be exercised by the Secretary of State;

  56. Article 11(2) of  Council  Directive  2011/306/EU  on  Preventing  and
      Combating Trafficking in  Human  Beings  and  Protecting  its  Victims
      imposes a freestanding  duty  to  provide  a  trafficked  person  with
      assistance and support as soon as the  competent  authorities  have  a
      "reasonable grounds" indication for believing that the person might be
      a VOT. R (Galdikas) v SSHD  [2016]  EWHC  942  (Admin)  confirms  that
      consideration  of  an  application  for  DL  in  compliance  with  the
      Directive includes consideration of the duty to provide support  under
      Article 11(2).

  57. The Council of Europe Convention  on  Action  against  Trafficking  in
      Human Being (ECAT) is an unincorporated treaty and cannot be relied on
      directly  by  the  applicant  (see  R  (Galdikas)  at  [66][1]).   The
      respondent's trafficking guidance  has  however  specifically  adopted
      parts of ECAT and, to this extent, the Convention and its  Explanatory
      Note remain of relevance. Article 14 of ECAT states:


           1. Each Party  shall  issue  a  renewable  residence  permit  to
           victims, in one or other of the two following situations  or  in
           both:
           a)  the  competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay   is
           necessary owing to their personal situation;
           b)  the  competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay   is
           necessary  for  the  purpose  of  their  cooperation  with   the
           competent authorities in investigation or criminal proceedings.

  58. Paragraph 181 of the Explanatory  Note  identifies  factors  rendering
      unsatisfactory the immediate return of  victims  to  their  countries.
      These include a fear of reprisals by the traffickers,  either  against
      the victims themselves or against family or friends in the country  of
      origin.  Paragraph  184  indicates   that   the   personal   situation
      requirement takes in a range of situations, depending on whether it is
      the victim safety, state of health, family  situation  or  some  other
      factor which has to be taken into account.


  59. The respondent's policy, 'Victims of  Slavery  -  Competent  Authority
      Guidance', version 3.0, 21 March 2016, implements parts of  the  ECAT.
      This policy reads, in material part:

           When is discretionary leave to remain relevant?
           Someone will not normally qualify for a grant  of  leave  solely
           because  they  have  been  identified  as  a  victim  of   human
           trafficking or  slavery,  servitude  and  forced  or  compulsory
           labour -  there  must  be  compelling  reasons  based  on  their
           individual circumstances to justify  a  grant  of  discretionary
           leave, where they do not qualify for other leave  on  any  other
           basis such as asylum or humanitarian protection.


           Criteria for granting Discretionary Leave to Remain
           A grant of discretionary leave  will  be  considered  where  the
           Competent Authority has conclusively identified (with a positive
           conclusive grounds decision) that an individual is a  victim  of
           trafficking (within the meaning of Article 4 of the  Council  of
           Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings)
           and either:
           they have particularly compelling personal  circumstances  which
           justify a grant of discretionary leave to allow them  to  remain
           in the UK for a temporary period of time
           ...
           Each case must be considered on its  individual  merits  and  in
           full compliance with the UK's  obligations  under  EU  Directive
           2011/36 on preventing and combating trafficking and the  Council
           of Europe Convention on  Action  against  Trafficking  in  Human
           Beings.


           Personal circumstances
           When a victim receives a positive conclusive  grounds  decision,
           it may be appropriate to grant a  victim  of  modern  slavery  a
           period of discretionary leave to  remain  in  the  UK  if  their
           personal circumstances are compelling, in line with  Article  14
           of  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention   on   Action   against
           Trafficking in Human Beings. This must  be  considered  in  line
           with the discretionary leave policy.
           Personal circumstances might mean for example, to allow them  to
           finish a course of medical treatment that would not  be  readily
           available if they were to return home. Such leave would normally
           be granted for the duration of the course of treatment or up  to
           30 months, whichever is shorter.


           Period of discretionary leave grants
           The period of leave will depend on the individual facts  of  the
           case and should be for the  amount  of  time  required,  without
           further grants of discretionary leave being  necessary  in  most
           cases. However, leave should normally be granted for  a  minimum
           of 12 months, and normally no  more  than  30  months.  However,
           shorter or longer periods may be granted if  the  facts  of  the
           case justify it  in  accordance  with  the  discretionary  leave
           guidance.
           Once the leave expires, a further period of leave may be granted
           subject to  the  following  process  (see  Process  for  further
           applications for discretionary leave), whether by formal request
           from the police or via an application form from  the  individual
           victim as appropriate and paying the fee as  specified  in  this
           guidance. Where they continue  to  meet  the  relevant  criteria
           under the policy further leave may be granted.
           Where someone is granted  an  initial  period  of  discretionary
           leave this does  not  necessarily  mean  they  are  entitled  to
           further leave or settlement.
           Further details on granting or refusing discretionary leave  and
           the duration of leave can be found in  the  discretionary  leave
           guidance.


           Requests for indefinite leave to remain
           There is no requirement under the European Convention  to  issue
           indefinite leave to remain (ILR) to confirmed  victims  and  the
           threshold for a grant of ILR outside the Immigration Rules is  a
           high one.
           Any request for ILR from a  person  who  has  had  a  conclusive
           grounds decision from the NRM should be considered in line  with
           the approach to ILR set out in the discretionary leave guidance.
           Every case will be considered on its merits.

  60. The respondent's Asylum Policy Instructions on Discretionary Leave (DL
      Guidance), 18 August 2015, reads, in material part:

           5.3 Non-standard grant periods: longer periods of stay
           There may be cases where a longer period of leave is  considered
           appropriate, either because it is in the  best  interests  of  a
           child (and any countervailing  considerations  do  not  outweigh
           those best interests), or because there are  other  particularly
           exceptional compelling or compassionate reasons to  grant  leave
           for a longer period (or ILR). In cases  not  involving  children
           (as  the  main  applicant  or  as  dependants),  there  must  be
           sufficient  evidence  to   demonstrate   that   the   individual
           circumstances of the case  are  not  just  unusual  but  can  be
           distinguished to a high degree from other cases  to  the  extent
           that it is necessary to deviate from  a  standard  grant  of  DL
           under this policy.

           5.4 Modern Slavery cases (including trafficking)
           Where a person qualifies for DL under the criteria  relating  to
           personal circumstances, helping police with enquires or pursuing
           compensation the period of leave to be granted  will  depend  on
           the  individual  facts  of  the  case  and  should  normally  be
           sufficient to cover the amount of time it  is  anticipated  they
           will need to remain in the UK. However, leave should normally be
           granted for a minimum of 12 months, and normally not  more  than
           30 months (2.5 years). A further period of leave may be  granted
           if required and appropriate.

DISCUSSION

  61. Our summary at [5] to [10] and [29] to [54] of the procedural  history
      and the medical evidence, unchallenged by the respondent,  compels  us
      to  three   inescapable   conclusions.   Firstly,   there   has   been
      'mishandling' by the respondent. She does not deny this in any of  her
      decisions, in her responses to the Pre-Action-Protocol Letters, or her
      Detailed Grounds of Defence. As Mr Malik stated during the  course  of
      his submissions, "no one disagrees that the applicant should have been
      recognised as a victim of trafficking at an early stage." He  accepted
      there were problems with the way in which  the  applicant's  case  was
      dealt with. The failure to provide assistance and support to VOTs when
      such a request has been made is contrary to Article  11  of  Directive
      2011/36/EU, Article 12 of ECAT,  and  the  aims  of  the  NRM  (see  R
      (Galdikas) at [44] and R(Atamewan) v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR, at [37]).


  62. Secondly, that the respondent's actions and omissions that constituted
      her mishandling of the applicant's case contributed to the severity of
      the applicant's  mental  health  condition  by  aggravating  his  pre-
      existing PTSD and his Major Depressive Disorder.


  63. Thirdly, all the medical evidence flows in one direction. It  has  not
      been challenged. Mr Malik had "no particular submissions" to  make  in
      respect of the medical evidence and said  "it  is  what  it  is."  The
      medical evidence indicates in clear terms that the applicant  requires
      specialist trauma-focused treatment and  that  such  treatment  cannot
      effectively or ethically be initiated until he feels that he is  in  a
      stable and secure position.

  64. Our assessment of the legal framework set out at [55] to [61] leads us
      to the following conclusions. There is no entitlement to  a  grant  of
      ILR in either  the  Directive  or  ECAT.  Sections  3  and  4  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 give a broad  discretion  to  the  respondent  to
      decide whether to grant leave to remain and, if so, for how long  (see
      IT (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 787, at [15],  per  Pill  LJ,
      and R (Alladin) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1334, at [53], per  Floyd  LJ).
      The terms of the Competent Authority  Guidance,  in  particular  those
      detailed under the headings 'Criteria for granting Discretionary Leave
      to Remain', 'Personal Circumstances' and the 'Period of  discretionary
      leave grants'  indicate  a  relatively  wide  degree  of  flexibility,
      although the range of decisions reached by the respondent must  be  in
      full compliance with the U.K.'s obligations under  the  Directive  and
      the relevant Articles of ECAT. We note that in determining whether  to
      grant a period of DL an individual's personal  circumstances  must  be
      compelling and that the period of leave will depend on the  individual
      facts of the case. There is no challenge to the  policy  which  states
      that the period of leave granted should be  for  the  amount  of  time
      required, without further  grants  of  DL  being  necessary  "in  most
      cases."  There  is  therefore  a  degree  of  flexibility  within  the
      Competent Authority Guidance, and by reference  to  the  Discretionary
      Leave Guidance, entitling the respondent  to  bestow  a  grant  of  DL
      greater than 30 months depending on the individual facts of the case.


  65. The Discretionary Leave Guidance, which is to be applied in respect of
      a request for ILR, establishes a  high  threshold  for  such  a  grant
      outside the immigration rules. Paragraph 5.3 of the Guidance indicates
      that ILR or a longer period of DL will be appropriate where there  are
      particularly exceptional compelling or compassionate reasons, and that
      there must be sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  the  individual
      circumstances  of  the  case  are  not  just  unusual   but   can   be
      distinguished to a high degree from other cases.  Both  the  Competent
      Authority Guidance and the Discretionary Leave Guidance refer  to  the
      individual facts or circumstances of the case, suggesting that a range
      of factors may be relevant and which will be determined on a  case  by
      case basis.


   The 1st ground
  66. With these conclusions firmly in mind we proceed to consider  the  1st
      ground of challenge. In her response, dated 19 July 2016, to the  Pre-
      Action-Protocol Letter dated 28 June 2016,  the  respondent  indicated
      that, "Consideration has been given to your  claim  that  your  client
      should be  granted  a  longer  period  of  discretionary  leave  as  a
      consequence of your client's previous treatment by  the  Secretary  of
      State. This point is rejected. It is not considered that this  factor,
      in of itself, presents as sufficient cause  to  extend  the  grant  of
      discretionary leave." This response suggests that the manner in  which
      the respondent dealt with the applicant's status as a VOT was at least
      a relevant factor, although not one that was sufficient on its own  to
      warrant an extended grant of DL. It is however apparent from paragraph
      30 of the 3rd decision under challenge that  the  respondent  did  not
      consider her handling of the applicant's  case  as  being  a  relevant
      factor at all. The respondent's position between her  response  of  19
      July 2016 and her decision of 21 March 2017 appears to have shifted.


  67. In his written and oral submissions Mr Malik submits that, whilst  the
      applicant may have been the subject  of  a  historic  wrong,  this  is
      irrelevant for the  purpose  of  determining  the  duration  of  leave
      granted. It is not the Tribunal's role to express its  displeasure  at
      maladministration by issuing to the applicant a  period  of  leave  to
      which he is not entitled. In support of his contention Mr Malik relies
      on the authorities of R  (S)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  546  and  TN
      (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40.


  68. In R(S) the Court of Appeal considered R (Rashid) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 744, which concerned a rejection of a person's asylum  claim  when
      that person met the requirements for a grant of  leave  in  accordance
      with a policy that was unknown to the relevant caseworker but which he
      or she should have been aware of. The policy had been withdrawn  owing
      to a material change of  circumstances  when  its  existence  came  to
      light. On application for judicial review the  Court  of  Appeal  held
      that the applicant was entitled to unconditional leave  to  remain  on
      the basis that there had been an 'abuse  of  power'  as  a  result  of
      'conspicuous unfairness' and that the Court could  intervene  to  give
      such relief as was properly  and  appropriately  open  to  it.  It  is
      relevant to note that Mr Rashid was not entitled to any grant of leave
      by virtue of any applicable policy when the Court  of  Appeal  granted
      its relief.


  69. The reasoning in Rashid met criticism in R(S). Carnwath LJ  found  the
      reasoning to be not "altogether convincing". The 'abuse of power'  was
      not a special or extreme category of illegality but rather a  'general
      concept' underlying other 'particular forms' [40]. At [41] Carnwath LJ
      noted  that  the  Court's  proper  sphere  was  illegality   and   not
      maladministration. It was the unlawfulness, not the cause of it, which
      justified the Court's intervention and  provided  the  basis  for  the
      remedy. At [46] Carnwath LJ noted that the Court itself had  no  power
      to grant ILR. Nor did it have power to direct the Secretary  of  State
      to grant ILR. The power and the discretion rested with  the  Secretary
      of State. It was however open to the Court to determine that a legally
      material factor in the exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion
      was the correction of injustice. Further,  in  an  extreme  case,  the
      Court could hold that the unfairness was so obvious, and the remedy so
      plain, that there was only one way in which  the  Secretary  of  State
      could reasonably exercise his  discretion.  On  its  particular  facts
      (which concerned the Secretary of State's fettering of  discretion  by
      deferring consideration of a whole class of  applicants  for  no  good
      reason and without consideration of the effects on the applicants) the
      decision in R(S) was remitted to the Secretary  of  State  to  be  re-
      determined  in  light  of  the  Court  judgement,  with  the  expected
      consequence that the claimant would be granted ILR. We once again note
      that the claimant in R(S) was not entitled to any grant  of  leave  by
      virtue of any policy in existence at the date the challenged  decision
      was made.


  70. In TN (Afghanistan) the Supreme Court overturned Rashid  holding  that
      it was not proper for a Court  to  require  the  respondent  to  grant
      unconditional leave to an individual who would not be entitled to such
      relief under current policy (or who did not have a  current  right  to
      remain in the UK on other grounds, such as article 8)  as  a  form  of
      relief for an earlier error or breach of obligation [at 72].


  71.  The authorities relied on by Mr Malik, including R (S)  and  TN,  all
      relate to instances where individuals sought ILR in order  to  correct
      an historic injustice in circumstances where there  existed  no  other
      relevant basis making provision for a grant  of  leave  to  remain  to
      those individuals. That is not the case on the present  facts.  Unlike
      the individuals in the aforementioned authorities the  applicant  does
      fall within a policy that enables the respondent to grant him a period
      of leave, that  being  the  Competent  Authority  Guidance.  That  the
      applicant met the terms of the policy allowing for a grant of leave to
      remain is readily apparent from the two periods of DL already  granted
      to him. The present case is not one  where  the  injustice  has  "lost
      current significance due to the passage of time" (see TN at  [58]  and
      [59]).


  72.  We  have  considered  the  Competent  Authority  Guidance   and   the
      Discretionary Leave Guidance (see [60] and [61] above). Nothing in the
      wording of either Guidance expressly excludes the respondent's conduct
      from being taken into account when assessing 'the individual facts  of
      the case', and the impact on  the  applicant  of  that  conduct,  from
      constituting a relevant consideration. We are satisfied that this is a
      case where the respondent's conduct has "causative relevance"  to  the
      applicant's entitlement to leave to remain (TN, at [52] and  [53])  by
      reference to the causative link, contained in the unchallenged medical
      evidence, between her mishandling of his case and the exacerbation  of
      his mental health symptoms.


  73. Given that the respondent refused to take into account her own conduct
      in determining the duration of the leave  granted,  we  are  satisfied
      that she failed to take into account a relevant consideration. Had she
      fully considered her own conduct and the impact of her conduct on  the
      applicant's mental health, she may have concluded that  the  applicant
      was either  entitled,  in  compliance  with  her  Competent  Authority
      Guidance and her Discretionary Leave Guidance, to a grant of leave  in
      excess of 30 months, or that the very high threshold needed to warrant
      a grant of ILR was  met.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  we  note  in
      particular the unchallenged expert opinion by Ms  Robertson  that  the
      applicant's symptoms were most  likely  aggravated  by  his  prolonged
      period of immigration  detention,  the  imposition  of  a  curfew  and
      electronic tagging, the restrictions of the NASS regime and long delay
      in investigating his trafficking claim. Ms  Robertson  concluded  that
      being subject to electronic tagging between September 2012  and  March
      2016 was extremely detrimental to the applicant's mental  health.  The
      experience of being tagged and subjected to a curfew  each  night  was
      similar to being in detention and further reinforced his  feelings  of
      shame and which exacerbated his mental health  difficulties.  We  find
      that the 1st ground is made out  as  the  respondent  failed  to  take
      account of a relevant matter in determining the duration of leave.


   The second ground
  74. We now consider the 2nd  of  the  applicant's  grounds.  Part  of  the
      respondent's justification for refusing to issue  the  applicant  ILR,
      contained in her 3rd decision, was that it was considered unclear  and
      speculative to assume that the applicant would work with HBF  for  the
      duration of any treatment. This, in turn was premised on  the  absence
      of any reason provided by the applicant  for  his  failure  to  pursue
      therapy with Room to Heal, as disclosed in the letter of  8  September
      2014, and the absence of anything arising from a referral in a  letter
      written to Dr Theymozhi by the applicant's representatives on 24 April
      2015.  The  respondent  therefore  considered  that  the   applicant's
      "previous failure to engage presents as  a  relevant  factor  for  the
      purposes of this consideration and  that  it  is  reasonable  to  give
      weight  to  them."  The  applicant  contends  that  this  approach  is
      unreasonable and that, in  reaching  her  conclusion,  the  respondent
      failed to take into account the explanations provided in the  evidence
      before her as to why there had been no  lasting  engagement  with  the
      treatment offered by Room to Heal.


  75. We find little merit in the challenge, to the limited extent  that  it
      is advanced, that  this  aspect  of  the  respondent's  reasoning  was
      perverse  in  the  Wednesbury  sense.  An  individual's   history   of
      engagement  with  medical  treatment  is  rationally  relevant  to  an
      assessment as to  whether  that  individual  will  engage  in  further
      medical treatment, and therefore relevant to the  assessment  of  what
      period of leave ought to be granted to enable that  medical  treatment
      to be undertaken. Within the parameters of a rationality challenge, we
      do not find that the respondent has acted unreasonably.


  76. We are however satisfied that the  conclusion  that  no  reasons  were
      provided for the applicant's failure to engage in treatment offered by
      Room to Heal failed to take into account  material  evidence.  Despite
      replicating the relevant part of the Room to Heal letter  in  her  3rd
      decision, the respondent has not engaged with  the  reasons  proffered
      within that letter for the appellant's  reluctance  to  continue  that
      specific treatment. As can be seen  from  [40]  above,  the  applicant
      found it difficult to access the services offered by the  organisation
      ostensibly because of a lack of funding to enable  him  to  travel  to
      their offices, but also as a result of his traumatic history  and  the
      lack of trust that ensued from this.


  77. The unchallenged history in the evidence presented to  the  respondent
      indicated that his support as a VOT, including cash support, had  been
      cut off as a result of the respondent's unlawful  "conclusive  grounds
      decision". This supported the assertions relating to lack of funds. In
      his statement of 12 May 2015 the applicant describes the  difficulties
      he encountered in trying to get to Room to  Heal  without  money,  and
      that he felt exposed within the group therapy. In Ms  Robertson's  2nd
      medico-legal report (at 10.8) she recounted how the applicant said  he
      had not felt safe or comfortable at Room to Heal  as  there  were  too
      many strangers. He started going there very  soon  after  his  release
      from detention when he was still very unwell and when he did not trust
      anyone and had little sense of safety.


  78.  Nor  are  we  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  given   adequate
      consideration to the subsequent evidence from the RTC indicating  that
      the applicant  has  hardly  missed  a  session,  the  applicant's  own
      evidence, contained in his statements of 20 July 2016 and 13  December
      2016, that he wants to have the trauma-focused therapy, and Dr Walsh's
      evidence that the applicant attended the HBF on at least  6  occasions
      between  December  2016  and  1  March  2017.  This   evidence,   when
      holistically considered, undermines the respondent's assertion that no
      reasons were provided, and is capable  of  undermining  her  assertion
      that the likelihood of the applicant working with HBF for the duration
      of any treatment was speculative. It is, at the very least, a  further
      consideration that ought to have been taken into account. The  failure
      by  the  respondent  to  take  into  account  the  full  circumstances
      surrounding the earlier disengagement  with  treatment  constitutes  a
      failure to  take  into  account  relevant  considerations.  Had  those
      circumstances been taken into account the respondent may have  reached
      a different  conclusion  both  in  respect  to  the  period  of  leave
      ultimately granted to the applicant, and in respect of the request for
      ILR. To this extent we find that the 2nd ground is made out.


   The 3rd, 4th and 5th grounds
  79. We consider it appropriate to consider the applicants 3rd 4th and  5th
      grounds together. These grounds overlap to a  significant  extent  and
      are intrinsically interrelated. Properly and  holistically  considered
      the grounds can be summarised as follows: in  refusing  to  grant  the
      applicant ILR the respondent has failed to take  adequate  account  of
      his broader need for stability to achieve recovery, has failed to take
      into account the conclusions of the medical evidence  as  to  (i)  why
      trauma-focused  therapy  would  not  be  offered  without   sufficient
      stability in the applicant's life, (ii) the  anticipated  duration  of
      that therapy once it is commenced, and (iii) the continuing impact  on
      the applicant's mental health of his  unresolved  immigration  status,
      and has acted in contravention  of  the  purpose  of  her  policy  and
      without  adequate  engagement  with  the   medical   evidence.   These
      criticisms can be categorised as a failure to take  into  account  all
      material considerations, a failure to give legally adequate reasons in
      the context of the specific evidence  before  her,  and  acting  in  a
      perverse manner.


  80. In her written submissions Ms Knorr argues  that,  on  the  particular
      facts of this case, the only decision open to the respondent, which is
      consistent with the purpose of the respondent's policy,  is  to  grant
      ILR. We note once again the absence of any  obligation  in  ECAT,  the
      Directive, or the Guidance, requiring a Competent Authority  to  issue
      permanent residence. The Competent Authority Guidance reflects Article
      14 of ECAT which allows for the grant of a renewable residence  permit
      to VOTs in circumstances where the Competent Authority considers  that
      their stay is necessary owing to their personal situation,  which  can
      include their medical needs. Mr Malik submits that  the  reference  to
      the word "stay" in Article 14(1)(a) connotes  a  temporary  period  of
      leave being granted.  This  is,  to  some  degree,  supported  by  the
      reference in Article 14 to a "renewable residence  permit"  which  may
      suggest that the issuance of a residence  permit  granting  indefinite
      leave was not envisaged  in  the  Convention.  Paragraph  187  of  the
      Explanatory Note' indicates that the Convention leaves the  length  of
      the residence permit to the party's discretion, but that  the  parties
      must set a length compatible with the provision's purpose. We did  not
      however hear detailed submissions on this point and  we  do  not  find
      that Article 14 in any way prevents a grant of ILR. In any event, such
      a grant is anticipated in  the  exceptional  circumstances  identified
      within  the  Competent  Authority  Guidance,  by  reference   to   the
      Discretionary Leave Guidance.


  81. In all three decisions the respondent explained  that  the  compelling
      circumstances justifying a grant of DL arose from the applicant's need
      for medical treatment. In her 2nd decision  she  considered  there  to
      have been a material change in circumstance as a course  of  treatment
      had been identified for the applicant of specific duration and he  had
      taken preliminary steps to commence  this  treatment  by  way  of  his
      engagements with the HBF. It was on this basis that the  grant  of  24
      months was made. It is therefore clear, and not in dispute,  that  the
      compelling reason identified and relied on by the  respondent  related
      to the specialist medical treatment offered by HBF, and that the leave
      was granted in order for  the  applicant  to  pursue  that  specialist
      trauma-focused therapy.


  82. We have  already  noted  that  the  medical  evidence  flowed  in  one
      direction. The respondent did not identify any basis  for  challenging
      the opinions and conclusions of the medical  experts.  The  consistent
      view of both highly qualified medical experts was  that  a  period  of
      stability was required before the applicant would be able to  commence
      the specialist trauma-based therapy, and that such stability was  also
      necessary to aid a full recovery. We consider, in particular, the view
      of Dr Walsh that the trauma-focused psychological treatment could take
      between  2  and  3  years  to  complete,  and  that  it  was   neither
      professionally ethical, nor recommended in the clinical  guide  lines,
      for the applicant  to  commence  specialist  trauma-focused  treatment
      without having sufficient duration of leave to complete it.


  83. In her 3rd decision, whilst not disputing the medical  diagnosis,  the
      respondent did not consider that this  was  sufficient  of  itself  to
      render the applicant's  case  so  exceptional,  by  reference  to  her
      Competent Authority Guidance and  her  Discretionary  Leave  Guidance,
      such as to warrant a grant of ILR. In  so  concluding  the  respondent
      indicated that she considered the applicant's case in  the  round  and
      that she made allowance for his mental  health  diagnosis,  and  noted
      that mental health issues and the consequent need for treatment  would
      often occur in trafficking cases.


  84. We readily accept that diagnoses of PTSD and depression are likely  to
      occur in a large number of  trafficking  cases.  We  accept  that  the
      threshold for a grant of ILR, or a period of leave greater  than  that
      identified in the relevant guidance, is a very high one, and we  again
      note the terms of the Competent Authority Guidance that "leave  should
      normally be granted for a minimum of 12 months, and normally  no  more
      than 30 months", and the terms of the Discretionary Leave Policy  that
      "there must be sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the  individual
      circumstances of the case are not just usual but can be  distinguished
      to a high degree from other cases to the extent that it  is  necessary
      to deviate from  a  standard  grant  of  DL  under  this  policy."  We
      additionally accept that the respondent has a relatively  high  degree
      of flexibility within the terms of the applicable policy guidance when
      considering the duration of any period of leave granted. We  note  the
      extensive citation of the medical evidence in the respondent's 2nd and
      3rd decisions. We are additionally mindful of the authorities cited to
      us supporting the principle that decisions must be 'intelligible  'and
      'adequate' such as to enable the reader to understand why  the  matter
      was decided as it was, and the absence of an  obligation  to  identify
      every material consideration in a  written  decision.  The  respondent
      must however determine the  period  leave  to  be  granted  by  taking
      account of the particular facts of each case, and her decision must be
      in compliance with the overall purpose of the polices, and  consistent
      with the principal  reason  given  by  her  for  granting  leave.  Our
      analysis makes clear that the grants of DL both in April 2016  and  in
      February 2017 were to  enable  the  applicant  to  receive  specialist
      trauma-focused therapy. Having decided that the need and offer of this
      specialist treatment amounted to a  compelling  reason  sufficient  to
      warrant a grant of DL, the respondent must also have been  aware  that
      the period of leave granted, on the basis of all the medical evidence,
      was insufficient to enable the applicant to commence that treatment.


  85. Despite  her  extensive  quoting  from  the  medical  reports  we  are
      satisfied that the decisions do not adequately engage with the central
      elements of the medical evidence. Other than by reference to the  high
      threshold for grants of leave beyond 30 months,  as  detailed  in  the
      Competent Authority Guidance, the respondent's reasoning is, at  best,
      opaque. At paragraph 31 of her 3rd decision she does not consider that
      the points raised by Dr Walsh concerning the difficulties treating the
      applicant are sufficient "in of themselves" to warrant a grant of  ILR
      exceptionally  outside   the   respondent's   published   policy.   No
      consideration is given to the possibility of a grant of limited  leave
      beyond  24  months.  The  only  other  explanation  offered  for  this
      conclusion is the applicant's previous  failure  to  engage  with  the
      services offered by Room to Heal. However, for the  reasons  given  at
      [75] to [79] of our decision, we have found that this  aspect  of  her
      reasoning is unlawful. At paragraph 36 the respondent considers that 2
      years DL is sufficient to enable the applicant to commence  work  with
      the HBF, and at paragraph 37 she states that the question whether  the
      applicant would be able to access specialist trauma-focused  treatment
      was ultimately a matter for him  and  HBF  to  discuss  further.  This
      seemingly fails to appreciate that the need for stability is not  just
      to enable the commencement of  medical  treatment,  but  to  aid  full
      recovery. By restricting her consideration  to  the  actual  treatment
      recommended for the applicant, and by not  considering  the  need  for
      stability  as  a  factor  relevant  for  aiding  full  recovery,   the
      respondent has failed to take into  account  a  relevant  matter  when
      determining duration of leave.


  86. The medical basis advanced by  both  Dr  Walsh  and  Ms  Robertson  to
      support a grant  of  leave  of  sufficient  duration  to  provide  the
      applicant with the requisite degree of stability has been  established
      on strong grounds. The specialist trauma-focused therapy  required  by
      the applicant which constituted the basis for the grant of 2 years DL,
      cannot be achieved within that period, and it  would  breach  clinical
      guidelines and be medically unethical to commence  that  treatment  in
      the meantime. We  are  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent,  despite
      replicating at length extracts from the reports of both  Ms  Robertson
      and Dr Walsh, has in fact adequately engaged with the core conclusions
      of the medical evidence. In our judgement the respondent has failed to
      provide adequate reasons for refusing to grant ILR and for refusing to
      grant a period of DL in excess of 2 years in light of  the  clear  and
      unchallenged medical evidence. This  can  also  be  categorised  as  a
      failure to take into account relevant considerations.


  87. We do not however find that this  is  such  an  exceptional  case,  as
      understood  in  R  (S),  that  the  respondent  would  be  necessarily
      compelled to grant the applicant either ILR  or  a  period  of  DL  in
      excess of that identified in her  guidance.  We  note  the  very  high
      threshold for a grant of ILR under the  Discretionary  Leave  Guidance
      and the  wide  degree  of  flexibility  within  that  policy  and  her
      Trafficking policy. We note Ms Robertson's  view  that  the  applicant
      requires a secure form of leave such as refugee  status  or  ILR.  The
      respondent cannot however be held captive to the  conclusions  of  the
      medical experts as  this  would  effectively  fetter  her  discretion,
      although in exercising her discretion she has to take into account and
      accord  appropriate  weight   to   those   expert   and   unchallenged
      conclusions. Ms Robertson's reports, read holistically, do not  assert
      that only a grant of permanent residence would  suffice  to  establish
      the  requisite  degree  of  stability  before   trauma-based   medical
      treatment could commence. We have considered with particular care  the
      most recent medico-legal report, that prepared by Dr Walsh. She is the
      clinician at the organisation that will undertake the proposed  trauma
      focused specialist therapy. Nowhere in her report  does  she  indicate
      that a grant of ILR is necessary in order to establish  the  stability
      required  in  order  to  commence  specialist  treatment  and  to  aid
      recovery.


   The 6th ground
  88. The applicant contends that the refusal  to  grant  ILR  breaches  his
      article 3 and 8 rights as it constitutes a very  serious  interference
      with his mental integrity and private life. In determining whether the
      challenged decisions are contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998 we adopt the principles enunciated in a line of cases including R
      (on the application of Nasseri) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2009] UKHL 23, Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (no. 2) [2013] SC
      38 & 39, [2014] AC 700, and R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v Secretary of
      State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  UKSC  60,  [2015]  AC  945,
      encapsulated in Lord Underhill's consideration  in  Caroopen  &  Myrie
      [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, where he stated at [73]  that,  "...  where  the
      issue raised by a judicial review challenge is whether there has  been
      a breach of Convention rights, the  Court  cannot  confine  itself  to
      asking whether the decision-making  process  was  defective  but  must
      decide whether the decision was right."


  89. The applicant places significant reliance on  Y  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC
      2127. Y, an Afghan national, arrived  in  the  UK  in  2008  aged  16.
      Although his asylum appeal was dismissed in the same year, in  2010  a
      judge allowed a subsequent appeal on the basis that Y's removal  would
      breach his article 8 rights as he was suffering from a serious  mental
      condition  that  developed  whilst  in  the  UK  and  which   required
      continuing treatment. He was granted 3  years  DL.  The  Secretary  of
      State's  DL  policy  at  the  time  entailed  two   reviews   of   Y's
      circumstances before he would be entitled,  after  6  years,  to  ILR.
      Although initially diagnosed with severe PTSD  Y  ultimately  received
      the additional diagnoses of Conversion  Disorder  with  Seizures,  the
      symptoms of which included serious headaches, delusional behaviour and
      violent seizures, and Major Depressive Disorder. The  refusal  of  his
      applications for ILR outside of the policy and  the  grants  of  time-
      limited DL caused a number  of  serious  reactions  involving  bizarre
      behaviour, self-harm and seizures and played  a  significant  part  in
      triggering his mental disability. His Honour Judge Anthony Thornton QC
      concluded that Y's mental illness was so serious that the  refusal  to
      waive the DL policy by granting ILR was contrary  to  article  3  ECHR
      because of the direct link between that decision and the breakdown  of
      Y's  mental  health  and  social   well-being,   the   risk   of   the
      intensification  of  that  breakdown,  and  his  inability  or  likely
      inability to embark upon essential treatment therapy which had a  good
      chance of producing substantial improvements. The  Deputy  High  Court
      Judge additionally concluded, with respect to article 8 ECHR, that the
      Secretary of State  failed  to  properly  analyse  Y's  mental  health
      reports and the link between Y's lack  of  ILR  and  his  feelings  of
      insecurity and his inability to be treated.  As  such  she  failed  to
      appreciate that a refusal of ILR would have a direct  and  potentially
      lasting  impact  on  Y's  continued  suffering  and  on   the   future
      degradation of his private life. This impact could not  be  outweighed
      by the need to maintain the  U.K.'s  immigration  laws  or  any  other
      countervailing interest of the state given that  Y  had  already  been
      held  to  be  entitled  to  article  8  protection  and  because   his
      circumstances were now even more unusual.  An  additional  factor  was
      that the departure from the Secretary of State's published DL policies
      was no more than nominal.


  90. It can be readily discerned from the above  analysis  that  there  are
      material  differences  between  Y's  circumstances  and  that  of  the
      applicant in the present case. Y's mental health condition  was  of  a
      particularly serious and complex nature  with  extremely  debilitating
      symptoms. The medical evidence concluded that Y's fear  of  return  to
      Afghanistan  caused,  and  would  continue  to   cause,   his   mental
      disability. There was a clearly established link between his  previous
      time-limited status in the UK and the breakdown of his mental  health.
      No such direct causative link has  been  established  in  the  medical
      evidence in the present case. In her 2013 report  Ms  Robertson  noted
      that the applicant's "unresolved immigration status is maintaining and
      exacerbating his difficulties". In her June 2016 report she  confirmed
      that the delay in  resolving  his  application  for  long  term  leave
      continued to undermine his mental health. The medical reports  do  not
      suggest that the refusal to  grant  ILR  has  caused  the  applicant's
      mental illness. In Y's case a judge had  already  concluded  that  his
      removal would breach article 8. There is no such judicial decision  in
      the present case. Further, although the ultimate decision to  grant  Y
      ILR depended on 2 further  reviews,  he  was  on  a  path  that  could
      ultimately lead to settlement under the DL policy  applicable  at  the
      time. As was noted by the Deputy High Court Judge (at [59]), "A  final
      piece of this complex jigsaw is the fact that  the  request  for  ILR,
      when considered in February 2012 was, in all likelihood, no more  than
      a request to accelerate and bring forward the grant of ILR  from  June
      2014 to February 2012." The present applicant cannot benefit from  any
      underlying policy that could lead to a grant of ILR.


  91. The applicant is not being denied access to counselling or other forms
      of coping therapy. At the date of the most recent challenged  decision
      there was little evidence to indicate that he was at any real risk  of
      suicide or self-harm. Whilst  his  medical  condition  is  severe  and
      chronic, we do not find that it has reached the level  of  seriousness
      as that displayed by Y, and  we  note  a  slight  improvement  in  his
      condition, albeit that there has been no overall significant  clinical
      improvement  in  his  symptoms.   The   issue   of   the   applicant's
      accommodation is being undertaken by other legal  representatives  and
      he can now obtain benefits to which he is entitled.  We  do  not  find
      that the refusal to grant ILR is having a sufficiently serious  impact
      on the applicant's mental health such as to reach the  high  threshold
      of article 3.

  92. In considering the article 8 implications of the challenged  decisions
      we note from the medical  evidence  that  the  refusal  to  grant  the
      applicant a period of leave of  sufficient  duration  to  provide  the
      requisite stability to enable him to undertake specialist  trauma  and
      aid his recovery  has  left  him  in  an  anxious  condition  and  has
      contributed to the maintenance and exacerbation of  his  symptoms.  We
      have read the applicant's statements in which he describes  his  daily
      routine, the aimlessness he feels, the difficulties he has encountered
      with his finances, and the anxiety he feels concerning his immigration
      status. Whilst we accept that an  inability  to  undertake  specialist
      trauma therapy does, to some degree, have an impact on the applicant's
      private life, we are not satisfied that the  adverse  consequences  of
      the refusal to grant him ILR are of a sufficiently serious nature such
      as to constitute an interference with his  mental  integrity  and  his
      private life rights in general. As mentioned, the applicant does  have
      access to forms of support and coping strategies both with the RTC and
      with the HBF, and he is entitled to the appropriate support  from  the
      NHS. Even if we are wrong in this  assessment,  we  note,  unlike  the
      position with Y, that the respondent's decisions  in  respect  of  the
      grant of leave  have  not  triggered  the  applicant's  mental  health
      condition, that he has no underlying  entitlement  to  ILR,  that  the
      departure from the relevant policies could  not  be  characterised  as
      'nominal' (see Y), and the  strong  public  interest  factors  in  the
      maintenance of immigration control (see  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).  These  factors,  when  properly
      considered in conjunction with  the  seriousness  of  the  applicant's
      mental health condition,  do  not  render  the  respondent's  decision
      disproportionate.  We therefore find that the sixth ground is not made
      out.

The 7th ground
  93. The applicant contends that the challenged decisions  only  take  into
      account the applicant's need for treatment and fail to consider  other
      relevant matters in determining the duration of leave granted to  him.
      The Competent Authority Guidance specifies that a period of DL may  be
      appropriate if a person's personal circumstances are  compelling.  She
      describes, by way of example, a situation where  a  person  should  be
      allowed to finish a course of medical  treatment  that  would  not  be
      readily available in their  own  country.   The  Guidance  is  however
      flexible and the need for medical treatment may not always be the only
      relevant factor. This is consistent with paragraphs 181 and 184 of the
      ECAT Explanatory Note.


  94. Ms Robertson's medico-legal reports note that removal to  China  would
      have a  significant  detrimental  impact  on  the  applicant's  mental
      health, that he does not have a social support network,  that  he  has
      difficulty in trusting people, building new relationships and  seeking
      help, and that he would be at risk of homelessness and destitution and
      vulnerable to further exploitation and abuse. It appears to us however
      that these  factors  all  stem  from  the  applicant's  mental  health
      condition and his need for treatment. His potential vulnerability  and
      inability to seek help or place trust in  others,  and  his  potential
      destitution, all flow from  the  consequences  of  his  mental  health
      condition. With recovery he would be  much  better  placed  to  obtain
      employment, as he did in the past, and  establish  relationships  with
      others. In circumstances where the respondent  has  decided  that  the
      applicant should be granted a period of discretionary leave that would
      facilitate his recovery, we are not persuaded that the respondent  has
      acted unlawfully by failing to  expressly  consider  these  additional
      factors.


  95.  The  applicant  has  additionally  expressed  a  continuing  fear  of
      reprisals by his traffickers. Under the terms of the withdrawal of the
      respondent's decisions of 02 July 2014, 17 September 2014 and 15  July
      2015 she should have considered the applicant's fresh protection claim
      at the same time as determining the duration of leave granted  to  him
      under the relevant policies. She failed to  do  so  and  only  made  a
      decision refusing his fresh protection  claim  on  28  February  2017.
      Although  Ms  Knorr  argues  that  this  decision   contains   several
      significant failings it is a decision that attracts a right of appeal.
      An appeal has been lodged and will be the subject  of  a  full  merits
      consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  an  adequate  alternative
      remedy. In any event, the judicial review  grounds  did  not  seek  to
      challenge the lawfulness of this decision. Given that  the  respondent
      expressed  her  view  as  to  the  applicant's  fear  from  those  who
      trafficked him, it is irresistibly clear that this  is  not  a  factor
      that would have been held  in  the  applicant's  favour  if  expressly
      considered by the respondent. We consequently find that the 7th ground
      of challenge is not made out on the particular facts of this case.


   Conclusion
  96. We are satisfied, for the reasons given, that all  3  decisions  under
      challenge were unlawfully made as the respondent failed to  take  into
      account  relevant  considerations  and  failed  to  provide   adequate
      reasons. We have only a little more to say  in  relation  to  the  1st
      decision. By her own explanation the respondent's grant of 6 months DL
      was to enable the applicant to undertake the  specialist  trauma-based
      therapy identified in Dr Robertson's first  report.  Yet  this  report
      made clear that such treatment may require at least 40 sessions with a
      service specialising in complex trauma  presentations,  and  that  the
      applicant would be unable to engage in such treatment whilst still  in
      a  situation  of  uncertainty   regarding   his   future.   In   these
      circumstances it is extremely difficult to discern how the  respondent
      could rationally conclude that 6 months was an appropriate duration.

  97. The respondent is required  to  make  a  lawful  decision  as  to  the
      appropriate duration of leave. We are not satisfied that this is  such
      an extreme case, where the  refusal  to  grant  ILR  is  so  obviously
      unlawful and the remedy so plain, that the only rational decision open
      to the respondent is  a  grant  of  ILR.  The  duration  of  leave  is
      ultimately a matter for the respondent, but her decision must lawfully
      reflect  the  matters  identified  in  this  judgment  including   the
      protracted  history  of  this  litigation,   the   applicant's   clear
      vulnerability,  the  unchallenged  recommendations  in   the   medical
      evidence and her own conduct.



Order


   1. The judicial review application is granted


   2. The respondent is ordered to reconsider the duration of leave  granted
      to the applicant taking account of  the  factors  identified  in  this
      judgment



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the applicant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:         30 June 2017









-----------------------
[1] Ms Knorr referred us to a recent decision of the European Court of
Human Rights, Chowdhury v Greece (Application no. 21884/15) suggesting that
the approach in  R (Galdikas) may need to be revised, but she accepted that
this was not relevant for our consideration

