
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 SR (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334
                                                                       (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2018                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SR
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent

   1. If a parent ('P') is unable to demonstrate he / she has been taking an
      active role in a child's upbringing for the purposes of E-LTRPT.2.4 of
      the Immigration Rules, P may still be able to  demonstrate  a  genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child  for  the
      purposes of section 117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').  The determination of both matters turns on
      the particular facts of the case.


   2. The question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect  a  child
      to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act
      does not necessarily require a consideration of whether the child will
      in fact or practice leave the UK.  Rather, it poses a  straightforward
      question: would it be reasonable "to expect" the child  to  leave  the
      UK?

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:     Mr Caswell, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Introduction

   1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') to allow the respondent's ('SR') Article 8
      appeal, the FTT having found that he played  an  active  role  in  his
      child's upbringing such that he met the relevant requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


   2. I have anonymised SR's name because this decision refers to his child,
      in particular family proceedings relating to that child.


Background and procedural history

   3. SR is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United Kingdom ('UK')  in
      December 2011 with a student visa valid until May  2013.   An  in-time
      application to extend that leave was granted to 18 July 2014.  SR then
      made an in-time application to remain as a spouse of a settled person,
      but this was refused in a decision  dated  24  September  2014.   This
      decision was appealed to the FTT.  It is unnecessary to refer  to  the
      FTT's decision dated 7 April 2015 in any detail because in a  decision
      dated 30 March 2016, the Upper Tribunal found  that  it  contained  an
      error of law and remitted the matter to the FTT.


   4. SR now has a British citizen child born in the UK in July 2015  ('A').
      He accepts that his relationship with A's mother, with whom A resides,
      broke down in March 2017.  The main issue before the  second  FTT  was
      therefore whether SR played an active role in A's upbringing  and  not
      whether SR's relationship with her mother was genuine and  subsisting.
       The FTT found in SR's favour and the SSHD has appealed  against  that
      decision with permission having been granted by FTT Judge Andrew on 16
      March 2018.

FTT decision

   5. At [10] the FTT considered the main issue in dispute to be whether  SR
      is "taking and intending to continue to take, an active  role  in  the
      child's upbringing".  Having heard oral evidence from SR, the FTT made
      the following relevant findings at [11] to [14]:


   i) SR has been granted contact with A pursuant to a court order  made  in
      September 2017 - this prescribed: one hour  supervised  contact  at  a
      contact centre in month one i.e. September 2017; two hours  supervised
      contact at a contact centre in month  two  i.e.  October  2017;  three
      hours unsupervised contact with a handover by family members in  month
      three i.e. November 2017 and; any other contact to be  agreed  between
      the parties.  The court also formalised that A  shall  live  with  her
      mother.


  ii) As at the date of the FTT hearing on 30 January 2018 SR  had  not  had
      any direct contact with A pursuant to the court order.

 iii) SR did little to challenge the mother's failure to facilitate  contact
      in November or December 2017,  after  she  returned  from  holiday  in
      October 2017.  However, he was in regular contact with the mother  and
      asked about A.


  iv) The difficulties in contact taking  place  are  as  a  result  of  the
      mother's failure to comply with the court order.


   6. The FTT judge found  at  [14]  that  "overall"  she  was  "just  about
      satisfied on the balance of probabilities [SR] had done all he can  do
      to demonstrate he is taking and intends to continue to play an  active
      role in the child's upbringing".  The FTT therefore concluded that the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met  and  the  appeal  was
      allowed on the basis of Article 8.

Legal framework

Immigration Rules

   7. There was no dispute as to the applicable  Immigration  Rules.   These
      were set out in a skeleton argument prepared for the FTT on behalf  of
      SR.   The  relevant  provisions  are  to  be  found  at  Appendix  FM.
      Paragraph R-LTRPT1.1 provides:

               "R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to  be  met  for  limited  or
               indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner are-
                 (a) the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
                 (b) the applicant must have made a  valid  application  for
                 limited or indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  parent  or
                 partner; and either
                 (c) (i) the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under
                 Section S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain;  and  (ii)  the
                 applicant meets all of the requirements of Section  ELTRPT:
                 Eligibility for leave to remain as a parent, or
                 (d) (i) the applicant must not fall for  refusal  under  S-
                 LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and  (ii)  the  applicant
                 meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-
                  LTRPT.3.1.; and (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies."


       8.  E-LTRPT.2.1. to 2.4. provide as follows:


                 "Relationship requirements
                 E-ECPT.2.1. The applicant must be aged 18 years or over.
                 E-ECPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-
                 (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application;
                 (b) living in the UK; and
                 (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK.
                 E-ECPT.2.3. Either -
                 (a) the applicant must have  sole  parental  responsibility
           for the child; or
                 (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally  lives
           must be-
                 (i) a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
                 (ii) not the partner of the applicant; and
                 (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for entry
                 clearance as a partner under this Appendix.
                 E -ECPT.2.4. (a) The applicant must provide  evidence  that
                 they have either- (i) sole parental responsibility for  the
                 child, or that the child normally lives with them; or
                 (ii) access rights to the child; and
                 (b) The applicant  must  provide  evidence  that  they  are
                 taking, and intend to continue to, take an active  role  in
                 the child's upbringing."

   9. Paragraph EX.1 states:


                 "This paragraph applies if
                 (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a child who-
                 (aa) is under the age of 18 years;
                 (bb) is in the UK
                 (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                 continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding
                 the date of application;
                 and
                 (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                 leave the UK..."

  10. The Immigration Directorate Instruction on Family Migration:  Appendix
      FM Section 1.0b, Family Life (as a  Partner  or  Parent)  and  Private
      Life: 10-year Routes, dated 22 February 2018 ('the 2018 IDI') sets out
      the applicable guidance on  what  the  SSHD  considers  to  amount  to
      genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  for  the  purposes  of
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph EX.1  as
      follows:


                 "Is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?


                 Where the application is being considered  under  paragraph
                 EX.1.(a) in  respect  of  the  10-year  partner  or  parent
                 routes, the decision maker must first  decide  whether  the
                 applicant  has   a   "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship" with the child.


                 The phrase 'parental relationship' goes beyond  the  strict
                definition of parent
                 set out  in  paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  to
                encompass situations in
                 which the applicant is playing a genuinely parental role in
                a child's
                 life, whether that is recognised as a matter of law or not.




                 The applicant must have a  subsisting  role  in  personally
                 providing at least some element of direct parental care  to
                 the child. This will be  particularly  relevant  where  the
                 child is the child of the applicant's partner or where  the
                 parent is not living with the child.  This  means  that  an
                 applicant living with a child of their partner and taking a
                 step-parent role in the child's life could have a  "genuine
                 and subsisting parental relationship" with  them,  even  if
                 they had not formally adopted the child and  if  the  other
                 biological parent played some part in the child's life.


                 In considering whether the applicant  has  a  "genuine  and
                 subsisting parental relationship" the following factors are
                 likely to be relevant:


                 Does the applicant have a parental  relationship  with  the
                child
                 . what is the  relationship  -  biological,  adopted,  step
                 child, legal guardian? Are they the child's primary carer?
                 . is the applicant willing  and  able  to  look  after  the
           child?
                 . are they physically able to care for the child?


                 Is it a genuine and subsisting relationship?
                 . does the child live with the person?
                 . if not, where does the applicant live in relation to  the
           child?
                 . how regularly do they see one another?
                 . are there any relevant court orders governing  access  to
           the child?
                 . is there any evidence provided within the application  as
                 to the views of the child, other family members  or  social
                 workers or other relevant professionals?
                 .  to  what  extent  is  the  applicant  making  an  active
                 contribution to the child's life?


                 Factors which might prompt closer scrutiny include:
                 . the person has little or no contact  with  the  child  or
           contact is irregular
                 . any contact is only recent in nature
                 . support is only financial in nature; there is no  contact
                 or emotional support
                 . the child is largely independent of the person."

      11. In JA (meaning of "access rights") India  [2015]  UKUT  225  (IAC)
          the Upper Tribunal concluded at [12] that "taking an  active  role
          in a child's upbringing" in E-LTRPT.2.4(b) need not depend upon  a
          parent and a child having regular face to face access.  The  Upper
          Tribunal observed at [13] that the fact that, in  entry  clearance
          cases, "direct" access is likely to be, at best,  sporadic  whilst
          parent and  child  live  in  different  countries  and  "indirect"
          contact likely to be the norm  does  not  in  itself  exclude  the
          possibility of the absent parent taking "an  active  role  in  the
          child's upbringing", and if it did, then E-ECPT  2.4  would  be  a
          pointless provision.

      12. Having said that, the Upper Tribunal went on to  observe  at  [14]
          that a parent who has only "indirect" access  rights  to  a  child
          and who is not involved in either the  day  to  day  care  of  the
          child or in making important decisions regarding the child's  life
          may find it difficult to prove that he/she is  "taking  an  active
          role  in  the  child's  upbringing".    JA's  appeal  was  allowed
          because there was a clear concession limited to the facts of  that
          case  that   the   relevant   parent   played   an   active   role
          notwithstanding the limitations of any direct contact.


  13. In R (RK) v SSHD (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016]  UKUT
      31 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  approached  the  question  of  whether  a
      person has a parental relationship (which of course must be considered
      in the context of the entire phrase "genuine and  subsisting  parental
      relationship") with a child at [42]:


                 "Whether a person is in a "parental  relationship"  with  a
                 child  must,  necessarily,   depend   on   the   individual
                 circumstances. Those circumstances will include  what  role
                 they actually play in caring for and  making  decisions  in
                 relation to  the  child.  That  is  likely  to  be  a  most
                 significant factor. However, it will also  include  whether
                 that relationship arises because of their legal obligations
                 as a parent or in lieu of a parent under a court  order  or
                 other legal obligation. I accept that it is  not  necessary
                 for an individual to have "parental responsibility" in  law
                 for there to  exist  a  "parental  relationship,"  although
                 whether or not that is the case will be a relevant  factor.
                 What is important is that the individual can establish that
                 they have taken on the role that a "parent"  usually  plays
                 in the life of their child."


  14. In SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA 1967 (Civ), the Court  of  Appeal
      considered the  position  of  a  parent  with  limited,  "non-caring",
      contact with a  child  in  the  context  of  deportation.   The  Court
      concluded that VC's case fell at the first hurdle because it  was  not
      possible on the facts as they were at the time of the decision to hold
      that he had a "genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship".   The
      Court of Appeal also accepted the submission that for paragraph 399(a)
      to apply the  parent  must  have  a  "subsisting  role  in  personally
      providing at least some element of direct parental care to the child".
        The Court found that the phrase in paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) requiring
      that "there is no other family member who is  able  to  care  for  the
      child in the UK" strongly indicates that the focus  of  the  exception
      established in paragraph 399(a) is upon the loss, by deportation, of a
      parent who is providing, or is able to provide, care  for  the  child.
      SR is not of course subject to deportation proceedings.


  15. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002
      Act') was inserted by amendment in July 2014,  at  the  same  time  as
      corresponding new Immigration Rules were promulgated. Part 5A and  the
      new Rules  are  designed  to  structure  consideration  by  the  SSHD,
      tribunals and courts of claims based on Article 8 in cases  concerning
      entry into or removal from the UK.  Part 5A provides in relevant  part
      as follows:

                 "PART 5A
                 ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS
                 117A Application of this Part
                 (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
                 to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                 Acts-
                 (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                 family life under Article 8, and
                 (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                 Human Rights Act 1998.
                 (2) In considering the public interest question, the court
                 or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                 (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                 117B, and
                 (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                 criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.
                 (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
                 the question of whether an interference with a person's
                 right to respect for private and family life is justified
                 under Article 8(2).


                 117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable
           in all cases
                 (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
                 the public interest.
                 (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who  can
                 speak English-
                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
                 (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-
                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
                 (4) Little weight should be given to-
                 (a) a private life, or
                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  that
                 is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
                 the United Kingdom unlawfully.
                 (5) Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                 established by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                 immigration status is precarious.
                 (6)  In  the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                 deportation, the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
                 person's removal where-
                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom.


                 117C  Article  8:  additional   considerations   in   cases
                 involving foreign criminals
                 (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in  the  public
           interest.
                 (2) The more serious the offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                 criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                 of the criminal.
                 (3) In the case of a foreign criminal  ("C")  who  has  not
                 been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                 more, the public interest requires C's  deportation  unless
                 Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
                 (4) Exception 1 applies where-
                 (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
           most of C's life,
                 (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in  the  United
           Kingdom, and
                 (c) there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                 integration into the country to which C is proposed  to  be
                 deported.
                 (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and
                 subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
                 genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship   with   a
                 qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on  the
                 partner or child would be unduly harsh.
                 (6) In  the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                 sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                 years, the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
                 there are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
                 those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
                 (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be
                 taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                 a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the  extent
                 that the  reason  for  the  decision  was  the  offence  or
                 offences for which the criminal has been convicted.


                 117D Interpretation of this Part
                 (1) In this Part-
                 "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
                 Human Rights;
                 "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of
                 18 and who-
                 (a) is a British citizen, or
                 (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                 of seven years or more;
                 "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
                 (a) is a British citizen, or
                 (b) who is  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                 meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of
                 that Act).
                 (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
                 (a) who is not a British citizen,
                 (b) who has been convicted in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
           offence, and
                 (c) who-
                 (i) has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
           least 12 months,
                 (ii) has been convicted  of  an  offence  that  has  caused
           serious harm, or
                 (iii) is a persistent offender."

Hearing

  16. Mrs Petterson, on behalf of the SSHD, submitted that the FTT erred  in
      law in finding that SR was taking an active  role  in  A's  upbringing
      when notwithstanding the court order, the evidence clearly established
      there had been  no  recent  contact  other  than  text  communications
      between the parents.


  17. Mr Caswell, on behalf of SR, did not seek to rely upon a  respondent's
      notice but submitted that the finding that SR  was  taking  an  active
      role in A's upbringing was open to the FTT in light of  the  September
      2017 court order,  the  text  messages  demonstrating  SR's  continued
      interest in his child and SR's own evidence to that effect.


  18. After hearing from both representatives,  I  indicated  that  the  FTT
      finding that SR took an active role in A's upbringing  was  irrational
      and inadequately reasoned.  Both representatives agreed that I  should
      go on to remake the decision in light of the updated  417-page  bundle
      of evidence.


  19. Mr Caswell referred  to  the  bundle  and  highlighted  the  important
      documents within it.  Mr Caswell pointed out that since the hearing SR
      has had fortnightly direct  contact  with  A.   This  commenced  at  a
      contact centre on 3 February  2018  and  lasted  an  hour.   This  has
      progressed to fortnightly visits of three  hours'  duration.   In  his
      witness statement SR indicated that contact is progressing well and he
      has expressed a desire to visit A for longer but  her  mother  is  not
      agreeing to this.


  20. Mrs Petterson confirmed that this evidence was not in dispute and  she
      therefore did not wish to  cross-examine  SR.   There  were  no  other
      witnesses and I then heard submissions from both parties.


  21. Mrs Petterson described the contact as limited.   She  submitted  that
      the evidence of direct contact with A on a fortnightly basis and  with
      her mother by text was not of a nature and  frequency  to  support  SR
      taking an active role in A's upbringing.   Mrs Petterson  relied  upon
      an older version of the 2018 IDI referred to above  (provided  to  the
      FTT) to support her submission  that  direct  contact  in  itself  was
      insufficient and it was necessary to assess the nature and  extent  of
      the role SR took in A's upbringing in order to determine whether it is
      "active" for the purposes of E-LTRPT-2.  In relation to Article 8, Mrs
      Petterson submitted that there was no  requirement  to  undertake  any
      assessment outside the Immigration Rules.


  22. Mr Caswell invited  me  to  find  that  the  fortnightly  visits  were
      sufficient for there to be an active role.   He  submitted  that  this
      together with SR's  level  of  persistence  and  genuine  wish  to  be
      involved in A's life supported  him  having  an  active  role  in  her
      upbringing.  He asked me to note that SR wanted more contact  but  the
      mother has refused to permit any more.


  23. In the  alternative,  Mr  Caswell  submitted  that  if  the  necessary
      threshold had not yet been met, it would  inevitably  be  met  in  the
      future.  As such, SR and A should be given a practical opportunity  to
      enable their relationship to continue and  flourish,  and  the  appeal
      should therefore be allowed under Article 8.


  24. Regrettably, neither representative directed me to a single  authority
      in support of any of their submissions.  Unhelpfully, Mr  Caswell  did
      not have a copy of the relevant Immigration Rules or the relevant IDIs
      and his submissions focussed upon the findings of fact he  invited  me
      to make.  When I pointed out that I would need to apply my findings of
      fact to the applicable legal framework, he indicated that he was happy
      for me to do so.  I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION

Error of law

      25. It is undisputed that a parent entitled to contact with, or as  E-
          LTRPT.2.4(a)(ii) puts it "access  rights"  to,  his  /  her  child
          pursuant to a court  order  may  not  necessarily  be  taking  "an
          active role in the child's upbringing"  for  the  purposes  of  E-
          LTRPT.2.4(b).  As noted in JA it is  not  uncommon  for  a  parent
          with a "spend time with" order  (i.e.  "direct"  access)  to  lose
          touch with a child entirely whilst a  parent  with  an  "otherwise
          spend time with" (i.e. "indirect" access)  order  may  use  it  to
          take an active role in the child's life.   E-LTRPT.2.4  recognises
          this and requires a parent who has direct access with a child  for
          the purposes of (a) to additionally, "provide evidence  that  they
          are taking, and intend to continue to take, an active role in  the
          child's upbringing" pursuant to (b).  In order  for  a  parent  to
          meet the requirements of (b), all the particular facts  will  need
          to be considered in the round, including inter alia: the age,  and
          if appropriate the wishes and feelings of the  child;  the  nature
          and extent of direct  and  indirect  contact  between  parent  and
          child;  its   duration;   whether   the   parent   has   "parental
          responsibility" and; the nature and extent of the role  played  in
          decision-making for the child and his / her upbringing.


  26. It is also not disputed that the FTT was entitled to find  that  there
      was adequate evidence to support the conclusion  that  SR  had  direct
      access to A pursuant to court order.  Rather, Mrs Petterson, on behalf
      of the SSHD focused her attention upon the finding that SR was playing
      an active role in A's upbringing.  I am satisfied that the  FTT  judge
      reached a conclusion that was  not  reasonably  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence available.  SR may have held a genuine intention  to  have  a
      relationship with A but as at the date of hearing there was in fact no
      such relationship and no meaningful direct or indirect  contact  (save
      for the purposes of court reports).  Significantly and in  any  event,
      there was simply no evidence to  support  a  conclusion  that  SR  was
      taking an "active role in the child's upbringing".  I was not taken to
      any evidence available to the FTT that the mother involved SR  in  any
      of the important decisions  relevant  to  A's  upbringing.   The  text
      messages between the parents dealt with more mundane  issues  such  as
      gifts.  As the FTT noted at [14] the  text  messages  showed  that  SR
      regularly asked about his child and wanted to know what she was doing.
       That is not by any standard sufficient to establish that SR  took  an
      active role in A's upbringing and in finding otherwise,  the  FTT  has
      acted  irrationally  or  alternatively  failed  to  provide   adequate
      reasons.


Remaking the decision


Immigration Rules

  27. It is not in dispute that SR meets the requirements of  R-LTRPT.1.1(a)
      and (b).  The disputed matters turn entirely upon (d).  This  requires
      SR  to  meet:   (i)   the   'suitability'   requirements;   (ii)   the
      'relationship' requirements, and; (iii) EX.1.   There  is  no  dispute
      that SR meets the 'suitability' requirements.


  28.  In  order   to   meet   the   'relationship'   requirements   of   R-
      LTRPT.1.1(d)(ii), it is necessary to  meet  2.2  to  2.4  of  E-LTRPT.
      There is no dispute that the requirements in 2.2 are met because A  is
      under 18, living in the UK and a British citizen.  The  only  disputed
      issue for the purposes of the 'relationship' requirements  is  whether
      SR has been taking and intends to continue to take an active  role  in
      A's upbringing.  Having considered all the available  evidence  before
      me, I am not satisfied that SR meets this  requirement  when  all  the
      circumstances are considered in the round.


  29. First,  although  SR  has  demonstrated  commitment  to  securing  and
      maintaining contact with A, it remains limited in nature  and  extent.
      Contact is limited to three hours on a fortnightly basis.  SR  is  not
      involved in A's day to day care.  A is only three  years  old  and  as
      such contact is taken up with playing and entertaining her.  There  is
      very little other contact of an indirect kind  such  as  phone  calls.
      The current arrangement is of recent vintage and  has  only  been  on-
      going for a period of some six months.  Prior to this, SR had not seen
      A since March  2017,  save  for  the  purposes  of  preparing  CAFCASS
      reports.  A was not even two years old then and is now only three.


  30. Secondly, there appears to be no prospect in the foreseeable future of
      the nature and extent of  the  contact  increasing.   A's  mother  has
      demonstrated that she is very reluctant to agree to contact at all far
      less an increase in contact.   The  hearing  that  led  to  the  child
      arrangements order in September 2017 was contested.  Although  contact
      was supposed to  commence  straight  away,  it  did  not  begin  until
      February 2018.  The evidence demonstrates that  the  mother  has  been
      opposed to contact in principle and reluctant to comply with the order
      requiring contact in the past.  SR has  also  made  it  clear  in  his
      witness statement that the  mother  is  opposed  to  any  increase  in
      contact.


  31. Thirdly, although SR has "parental responsibility", there is no  clear
      and cogent evidence that  he  plays  an  active  role  in  making  any
      important decisions regarding A.  The test is not  whether  SR  and  A
      have contact which they both enjoy.  Mr Caswell did not take me to any
      evidence in the text messages or otherwise  to  support  a  conclusion
      that SR plays any role in A's upbringing beyond simply seeing her  for
      three  hours  on  a  fortnightly  basis.   The  Rules  do  not  define
      upbringing.  The Oxford dictionary definition: "the  way  in  which  a
      child is cared for and taught how to behave while it  is  growing  up"
      and the general sense in which the term is used, requires at  least  a
      certain amount of important decision-making as to the way in which the
      child is cared for.  SR's witness statement confirms that he visits A,
      has a loving relationship with her and gives her gifts.  His assertion
      that he is "involved in her life and well-being" is not particularised
      beyond these matters.  His assertion that he "shall continue  to  play
      an active part in [her] life" fails to  explain  how  he  has  already
      taken an active role in  her  upbringing.   There  is  no  independent
      evidence in the form of a social worker's  report  or  otherwise  that
      describes the role SR  has  taken  in  A's  upbringing.   The  CAFCASS
      reports and contact centre reports focus on whether contact is in  A's
      best interests and how  it  has  progressed.    The  limited  evidence
      before me supports the finding that it is A's  mother  who  is  solely
      responsible for making every important decision in A's life.   SR  has
      not been invited and has not actually played  any  role  in  important
      decision-making regarding A and has not played any active role in  her
      upbringing, for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.


  32. SR is unable to meet the 'relationship' requirements of  the  relevant
      Immigration Rules.  There is therefore no need for  me  to  go  on  to
      address EX.1.  However, the wording of EX.1. mirrors that  in  section
      117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which I consider  in  detail  below,  when  I
      address Article 8.

Article 8

      33. Section 117B(6) sets out three requirements which,  if  met,  have
          the  effect  that  "the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
          person's removal":

                 (1) the person "is not liable to deportation";

                 (2) "the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child"; and

                 (3) "it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                 leave the United Kingdom".

      34.  The  first  strand  is  met  -  clearly  SR  is  not  liable   to
          deportation. There is no doubt that A is  a  qualifying  child  as
          she is a British citizen under the age of 18 (see section  117D(1)
          of the 2002 Act).   The  second  strand  requires  SR  to  have  a
          genuine and subsisting parental relationship with A,  to  which  I
          now turn.

      35. The assessment of whether  there  is  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
          parental relationship"  for  the  purposes  of  EX.1  and  section
          117B(6)(a) is different in form and substance to whether a  parent
          has taken an "active role" in the  child's  "upbringing"  for  the
          purposes of R-LTRPT1.1.  It is possible  to  have  a  genuine  and
          subsisting parental relationship with  a  child,  particularly  in
          cases where contact has only recently resumed on a limited  basis,
          but for that relationship not to include  the  parent  playing  an
          active role in the child's upbringing.  The fact that SR  has  not
          been involved in making important decisions in A's life  does  not
          necessarily  mean  that  he  has  not  developed  a  genuine   and
          subsisting parental relationship.  The nature and extent  of  that
          relationship requires a consideration of all the factors  referred
          to in RK at [42].   The  child's  age  is  also  likely  to  be  a
          relevant factor.

      36. In SSHD v  VC  at  [42]  Macfarlane  LJ  accepted  the  submission
          (recorded at [27]) that the requirement to establish whether  "the
          person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
          child" albeit for another part of the  Immigration  Rules,  namely
          399(a), contains four elements: "(a) a  relationship  between  the
          child and the foreign criminal; (b) which  is  'parental',  rather
          than of some other kind; (c) the relationship must  be  'genuine';
          and (d) the relationship must be 'subsisting' (in the  sense  that
          it exists or has a real existence)" and that simply  to  establish
          biological parentage is insufficient - there  must  be  a  genuine
          existing parental relationship.   As  Macfarlane  LJ  observed  at
          [42] "each  of  those  words  denotes  a  separate  and  essential
          element in the  quality  of  relationship..."  and  at  [43]  "the
          'parent' must have a 'subsisting' role in personally providing  at
          least some element of direct parental care to the child".

      37. I have already decided that SR has not been taking an active  role
          in A's upbringing.  There is insufficient evidence  to  support  a
          claim that he has been involved in making any important  decisions
          regarding the way in which she is cared  for  and  taught  how  to
          behave.  I must still nonetheless consider whether  he  personally
          provides at least some element of direct parental care to  A.   As
          made clear in  SSHD  v  VC,  a  biological  parental  relationship
          without  more,  is  insufficient.   Indeed,  as   highlighted   by
          Macfarlane LJ, a biological  parental  relationship  wherein  that
          parent does not provide at least some element of  direct  parental
          care to the child is also  insufficient  for  a  genuine  parental
          relationship to be a subsisting one.

      38. I therefore firstly  turn  to  consider  to  what  extent  SR  has
          provided at least some element  of  direct  parental  care  to  A.
          This is a case that includes factors which, to use the wording  of
          the 2018 IDI, prompt closer scrutiny.  The direct contact is  only
          recent in nature and is  limited  to  fortnightly  contact  for  a
          relatively  short  period  of  time,  such  that  A   is   largely
          independent of SR and entirely dependent upon her mother  for  her
          practical and emotional  needs.   SR's  role  in  caring  for  and
          making decisions in relation to the child is limited to the three-
          hour contact fortnightly sessions and can at best be described  as
          minor.  However, it is undeniable that  once  a  fortnight  for  a
          period of three hours, SR provides A with  direct  parental  care.
          The level of parental care is obviously limited,  but  A  is  only
          three years old - the care that she  currently  requires  is  much
          more practical and immediate - and SR provides this on  a  regular
          basis, albeit for a limited period  time  and  to  a  much  lesser
          extent than  her  mother.   This  has  only  been  ongoing  for  a
          relatively  short  time,  but  the  contact  has   developed   and
          increased in  that  time  and  appears  well-placed  to  continue,
          subject to SR's immigration  position.   After  all,  the  current
          level  of  contact  is  sanctioned  by  court  order:  SR  is  her
          biological father, has parental  responsibility  and  contact  has
          been progressing smoothly and has been assessed to be in A's  best
          interests.

      39. There are likely to be many cases in which both  parents  play  an
          important role in their  child's  life  and  therefore  both  have
          subsisting parental relationships with the child, even though  the
          child resides with one parent and not the other.   There are  also
          cases where the nature and extent of  contact  and  any  break  in
          contact is such that  although  there  is  contact,  a  subsisting
          parental relationship cannot be said to have  been  formed.   Each
          case turns on its own facts.

      40. I am satisfied that SR has a  parental  relationship  with  A  and
          that it is genuine and subsisting  for  the  purposes  of  section
          117B(6)(a).  It may be a limited parental  relationship  but  that
          does not mean it is not genuine or  subsisting.   SR  and  A  have
          seen each other on a  regular  fortnightly  basis  since  February
          2018.  These are unsupervised sessions that now occur away from  a
          contact centre, in which SR provides A  with  elements  of  direct
          parental care. For that period of time SR  is  not  looking  after
          and directly caring for A in other  capacity  than  as  a  parent.
          The independent evidence describing the contact sessions and  from
          CAFCASS support SR's claim that A  enjoys  contact  albeit  it  is
          limited given A's age and  her  mother's  reluctance  to  increase
          contact.  I am satisfied that although SR plays no active role  in
          any significant decision-making regarding A's day to day care  and
          well-being, he  has  nonetheless  developed  in  recent  months  a
          genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her.

      41. I now turn to the third strand of section 117B(6).   The  question
          posed by section 117B(6)(b) is whether it would it  be  reasonable
          to  expect  A  to  leave  the  UK.   The   correct   approach   to
          reasonableness in this context is set out in MA (Pakistan) V  SSHD
          [2016] 1 WLR  5093,  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.    I  must  determine
          whether it is reasonable to expect A to leave the UK, in light  of
          all the circumstances.  These include her best  interests  on  the
          one hand and any countervailing circumstances such as  the  public
          interest in maintaining immigration  control  on  the  other.   In
          other words, the public interest  must  be  balanced  against  the
          impact upon the child when assessing reasonableness.

      42. The importance of a child's British citizenship was emphasised  by
          the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.   The
          Supreme Court, acknowledging  that  citizenship  carried  with  it
          both  a  right  of  abode  and  a  range  of  other  benefits  and
          advantages, stated that this was likely to mean that  it  was  not
          in such a child's  best  interests  to  leave  the  UK.    British
          citizenship  is  a  powerful   factor   in   the   assessment   of
          proportionality under Article 8 although it is not a  trump  card.
          Whilst the views expressed in the Supreme Court were not  said  in
          the context of s.117B(6) - which had yet to be enacted - they  are
          of importance when considering whether it is reasonable to  expect
          a child to leave the UK under s.117B(6).  Indeed,  the  importance
          of a child's British citizenship is reflected in the 2018 IDI  set
          out above.

      43. A's best interests overwhelmingly  favour  remaining  in  the  UK,
          where she resides with her British citizen mother.  It  would  not
          be reasonable to expect the mother to relocate  to  Pakistan:  she
          has not been an enthusiastic support of contact between A  and  SR
          and is very likely to be implacably opposed to moving to  Pakistan
          for this reason or  any  other.   The  practical  reality  of  the
          family structure in  this  case  is  such  that  A  could  not  be
          reasonably expected to leave  the  UK  for  Pakistan  without  her
          mother.  In assessing the reasonableness of A leaving  the  UK,  I
          must therefore  factor  in  that  this  would  involve  a  British
          citizen mother leaving her family and private life in  the  UK  to
          move  to  a  country  she  does  not  wish  to  reside   in,   for
          understandable reasons.  This can  be  contrasted  with  a  family
          unit in which the parents remain in a  relationship  -here  it  is
          much more likely to be reasonable for a British citizen parent  to
          join his / her partner without any basis to remain in the  UK,  in
          his / her country of origin.

      44. There has been a very recent determination of A's  best  interests
          by the family court.  It has been determined that  it  is  in  her
          best interests to have regular  direct  contact  with  her  father
          albeit limited to a fortnightly  basis  for  three  hours  or  any
          other contact that can be  agreed  between  the  parties.   Direct
          contact has commenced and will be  interrupted  by  SR's  removal.
          However, A is only three years old and has the love and  attention
          of her mother to support her through any changes to  her  routine.
          A can continue to have contact by means of  online  communications
          from Pakistan.  I appreciate that A is young, but the internet  is
          widely used as a forum for family members to  have  face  to  face
          communications albeit online.

      45. On balance, I conclude  that  the  best  interests  of  A,  viewed
          through the lens of Article 8 private life, overwhelmingly  favour
          her and her mother remaining in the UK and  marginally  favour  SR
          remaining in the UK.

      46.  I  am  mindful  that  the  best  interests  assessment   is   not
          determinative.   As Elias LJ noted in MA (Pakistan) at  [47]  even
          where the child's best interests are to stay, for the purposes  of
          section 117B(6) it may still be not  unreasonable  to  expect  the
          child to leave.  That will depend upon a careful analysis  of  the
          nature and extent of the  links  in  the  UK  and  in  this  case,
          Pakistan, as well  as  any  other  relevant  wider  considerations
          relevant to SR - see [45] of MA (Pakistan).

      47. I accept that other than not being able to meet  the  requirements
          of the Immigration Rules in order to remain in the UK,  there  are
          no  other  public  interest  factors  weighing  against  SR.   His
          immigration history is not poor as he entered the  UK  with  entry
          clearance as a student and has remained lawfully since  then.  His
          English is adequate.  He would like to work  if  given  permission
          to do so.  There are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  parental
          relationship continuing in its  present  form  in  Pakistan.   A's
          mother will not countenance an increase in contact  far  less  the
          upheaval of her own family and private life from the UK.

      48. Having considered all the relevant  factors,  including  A's  best
          interests and the public interest I conclude that it would not  be
          reasonable to expect A to leave the UK.

      49. Although the representatives did not refer me to it, I  note  that
          since MA (Pakistan)  the  relevant  IDI  has  been  amended.  This
          guidance is concerned with the relevant routes for  a  partner  or
          parent under Appendix FM and  not  section  117B(6)  specifically.
          However, as I have already observed, EX.1 is reflected in  section
          117B(6).  The 2018 IDI (pg 74/106) states:


                 "The decision maker must consider  whether  the  effect  of
                 refusal of the application would be, or would be likely  to
                 be, that the child would have to leave the  UK.  This  will
                 not be the case where, in practice, the child will,  or  is
                 likely to, continue to live in the UK with  another  parent
                 or primary carer. This will be likely to be the case  where
                 for example:
                 . the child does not live with the applicant
                 .  the  child's  parents  are  not  living  together  on  a
                 permanent basis because the applicant parent  has  work  or
                 other commitments which require them  to  live  apart  from
                 their partner and child
                 . the  child's  other  parent  lives  in  the  UK  and  the
                 applicant parent has been here as a visitor  and  therefore
                 undertook to leave the UK at the end of their  visit  as  a
                 condition of their visit visa or leave to enter


                 If the departure of the non-EEA national  parent  or  carer
                 would not result in the child being required to  leave  the
                 UK, because the child will (or is likely to) remain  living
                 here  with  another  parent  or  primary  carer,  then  the
                 question of whether it is reasonable to expect the child to
                 leave the  UK  will  not  arise.  In  these  circumstances,
                 paragraph EX.1.(a) does not apply.


                 However, where there is a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship between  the  applicant  and  the  child,  the
                 removal  of  the  applicant   may   still   disrupt   their
                 relationship with that child. For that reason, the decision
                 maker will still need to consider whether,  in  the  round,
                 removal of the applicant is appropriate in light of all the
                 circumstances of the case, taking  into  account  the  best
                 interests of the child as a primary consideration  and  the
                 impact on the child of the applicant's departure  from  the
                 UK.  If  it  is  considered  that  refusal  would  lead  to
                 unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  applicant,  the
                 child or their family, leave will fall to be granted on the
                 basis of exceptional circumstances."

      50. The 2018 IDI therefore appears to indicate  that  section  117B(6)
          has "no application" to this case as it  only  applies  where  the
          effect of the decision would "necessitate the qualifying child  in
          question also having to leave the UK".    I  reject  the  argument
          that section 117B(6) is of no application to this case or  as  Mrs
          Petterson put it, it is unnecessary to consider Article 8  outside
          the Rules.  In my judgment, this aspect of the 2018  IDI  provides
          an untenable construction of the plain  and  ordinary  meaning  of
          EX.1. and section  117B(6).   As  I  have  already  observed,  the
          wording in EX.1 is reflected within section 117B(6) and in so  far
          as the guidance in the 2018 IDI provides the  SSHD's  position  on
          the correct approach to section 117B(6)(b), I reject it for  these
          reasons.

      51. First, it is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can  be  said
          to  be  of  no  application  or  to  pose  a  merely  hypothetical
          question.  Section 117B(6) dictates  whether  or  not  the  public
          interest  requires  removal  where  a   person   not   liable   to
          deportation has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
          with a qualifying child.  The question that must  be  answered  is
          whether it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
          the UK.  That question as contained in statute, cannot be  ignored
          or glossed  over.   Self-evidently,  section  117B(6)  is  engaged
          whether the child will or will not in fact or practice  leave  the
          UK. It addresses the  normative  and  straightforward  question  -
          should the child be "expected to leave" the UK?

      52. Secondly, the approach in the 2018  IDI  appears  to  reflect  the
          line of authorities following Case C-34/09 Ruiz  Zambrano,  [2011]
          EUECJ C-34/09.  Section 117B(6)  is  not  confined  to  such  (EU)
          cases.  It extends to those persons "not liable  to  deportation".
          In addition, it self-evidently applies to those  who  are  not  EU
          citizens and can apply to a child who is not  a  British  citizen,
          but has lived in the  UK  at  least  7  years,  to  which  EU  law
          provides no assistance.

      53. Thirdly, although  the  straightforward  construction  of  section
          117B(6)(b) might appear to provide an overly generous approach  to
          those parents with a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
          British citizen child living with another parent in  the  UK,  but
          who cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  it  is
          important to acknowledge the position  is  markedly  different  in
          the deportation context.  If a deportation decision had been  made
          against the SR, an altogether different approach would apply.   If
          not sentenced to four years or  more  imprisonment,  the  question
          would be whether or  not  Exception  2  as  contained  in  section
          117C(5) of the 2002 Act applies i.e.  would  the  effect  of  SR's
          deportation on A be  unduly  harsh.     To  use  the  language  of
          paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, although  it  may  present
          difficulties, it might not be unduly harsh for A to remain in  the
          UK without SR.  I need say no  more  about  this  because  section
          117C(5) and paragraph 399 are not relevant to this case.

      54. Having considered all the relevant circumstances and  weighed  the
          public interest in expecting A to leave the UK in order  to  enjoy
          family life with SR (because SR cannot meet  the  requirements  of
          the Rules), I am satisfied that, to use  the  wording  of  section
          117B(6),  the  public  interest  does  not  require  SR's  removal
          because it would not be reasonable to expect A to leave the UK.

      55. The proper application of section  117B(6)  when  resolved  in  an
          individual's   favour   is   determinative   of   the   issue   of
          proportionality.  As Sales  LJ  made  clear  in  Rhuppiah  v  SSHD
          [2016] EWCA Civ 803, [2016] 1 WLR 4204  at  [45],  sections  117A-
          117D of  the  2002  Act  provide  a  structured  approach  to  the
          application of Article 8 which produces  in  all  cases  a  "final
          result" compatible with Article 8.  Where Parliament has  declared
          that the public interest does not require a  person's  removal  in
          specified circumstances,  and  those  circumstances  are  present,
          that is the end of the matter.

      56. For these reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  the  interference  with
          family life in this case is disproportionate and it  follows  that
          the appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


I remake the decision by allowing SR's appeal pursuant to Article 8  of  the
ECHR.





Signed:  UTJ Plimmer                                     Dated: 30 August
2018
Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
