

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      OT (Ankara agreement: students, businessmen, workers) Turkey [2010]
UKUT 330 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2009                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     ot

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Duncan of Duncan Moghul Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. HC 510 contains no provision entitling a person admitted as a  student
      to remain (or seek leave to remain) as a businessman;
   2. R (Payir and others) v SSHD has no application to those  who  are,  or
      claim to be, businessmen as distinct from "workers".

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Introduction: the Respondent's decision

   1. The Appellant, a national  of  Turkey,  appealed  to  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  on  3
      December 2008 refusing to  vary  his  leave.  Immigration  Judge  Hart
      dismissed  his   appeal.   The   Appellant   sought   an   order   for
      reconsideration, which was refused by the  Tribunal,  but  granted  on
      renewal to the High Court. The reconsideration was heard  by  the  AIT
      but, by virtue of paragraph  4  of  Schedule  4  to  the  Transfer  of
      Functions of the Asylum and Immigration Order 2010, now  continues  as
      an appeal to this Tribunal.

   2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student  on  31  January
      2007. He obtained further leave to remain  as  a  student,  under  the
      Immigration Rules, which was due to expire on 30 June 2008. Within the
      period of that leave he made an application to  remain  as  a  Turkish
      businessperson,  under  the  terms  of  the  Ankara   Agreement.   The
      application was made on 7 March 2008, and was accompanied by  a  form,
      in which the Appellant stated that he had started his business  on  24
      October 2007, and various financial and other  documents  relating  to
      it. The application was refused for reasons which we need to  set  out
      in full:

         "Kuddus Solicitors applied on your  behalf  for  further  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom as  a  self-employed  business  person
         under HC510, the Immigration Rules in force as at 1973,  by  virtue
         of the terms of the EC Turkish Association Agreement.

         An official has  considered  your  application  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State.

         You established your business on 26 October 2007 in breach  of  the
         conditions of your previous leave to  remain  as  a  student  which
         prohibited setting up in self employed business.

         It is our position that establishing a business in  breach  of  the
         conditions of your  previous  leave  is  tantamount  to  fraudulent
         activity and you are therefore excluded from taking the benefit  of
         the standstill clause contained in the ECAA which gives  effect  to
         these Rules.

         In order for you to obtain leave to establish in business you  need
         to meet the relevant requirements in paragraphs 206 of  HC395,  the
         current  Immigration  Rules.  Your  application   is   refused   in
         accordance with paragraph 208 of these Rules because  you  did  not
         enter the UK with valid entry clearance in this capacity.

         Therefore, you do not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules for this category and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
         application for leave to remain as a self employed business  person
         under HC510, the Immigration  Rules  in  force  as  at  1973  under
         paragraphs 4 and 21 of HC510 and paragraphs 206 and  208  of  HC395
         (as amended)."

   The appeal to the Immigration Judge

   3. The grounds of appeal are headed "Appeal Statement". They are  in  the
      vaguest of terms, but appear  to  amount  to  an  assertion  that  the
      Appellant's application met the requirements of  relevant  immigration
      rules. The Appellant's representative produced a skeleton argument for
      the hearing before the Immigration Judge. That bases  the  Appellant's
      appeal on the following propositions. (a) The Ankara Agreement of 1963
      and article 41 of the Additional Protocol established the  "standstill
      clause", that is  to  say  the  prohibition  on  introducing  any  new
      restrictions on the  freedom  of  establishment  and  the  freedom  to
      provide services. (b) As a student, the Appellant  has  permission  to
      work, subject only to the requirement that he  requires  authorisation
      from the Respondent. "The Appellant sought authorisation to set up  as
      a self-employed businessman and it is the refusal of that  application
      which is the matter currently under appeal". (c) The Appellant has not
      acted "fraudulently" within the meaning of relevant European law.  (d)
      The decision of the European Court of Justice in R (Payir and  others)
      v SSHD C294/06 establishes  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
      granted leave to enter as a student cannot deprive him of  the  status
      of "worker" and cannot prevent him from relying on provisions enabling
      him to renew his permission to work and have a right of residence. The
      Respondent is therefore not entitled to refuse his application on  the
      basis that he was originally admitted as a student.

   4. The Immigration Judge took into account the authorities  to  which  he
      had been referred, and others, including Tum and Dari  v  SSHD  [2007]
      INLR 473, LF v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1441, and IY v SSHD  [2008]  UKAIT
      00081. He observed that his task was to attempt to interpret and apply
      the law as a whole, not the selected parts of it to which the  parties
      had made reference.

   5. He noted the terms of paragraph 57 of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
      Immigration Rules, HC  395,  and  observed  that  the  restriction  on
      engaging in business or taking employment was  "well  known".  He  had
      before him photocopies of the Appellant's  passport,  containing  both
      the grants of leave, the first endorsed "work (and any  changes)  must
      be authorised",  the  second  "able  to  work  as  authorised  by  the
      Secretary of State". It is clear that the principal factual submission
      made before him, as adumbrated by the skeleton argument, was that  the
      Appellant  was  seeking  permission  for  future  work:  he  had   not
      previously worked, and as a result had not breached the conditions  of
      his leave.

   6. The Appellant gave  evidence  that  he  had  undertaken  his  studies,
      finishing perhaps on 31 May 2008 (there  appears  to  have  been  some
      doubt about it). So far as the business was concerned, the Appellant's
      case before the Immigration Judge was that in October 2007 he had  set
      up a company to take over a business he was purchasing.  But  although
      he had moved into the flat above the business, he took no part  in  it
      at all. His own part in the business was still in the future.

   7. The Immigration Judge's conclusion on that issue was as follows:

         "68.     In the light of all I have set out above, I do not  accept
             the Appellant's apparent claim that he was not  conducting  the
             business. In his brief evidence,  he  has  tantamount  accepted
             that he did run the business through the medium of the  limited
             company and, since the retirement of his partner, had  done  so
             alone. He has not  otherwise  explained  how  the  company  was
             running itself and thus operating its shop business without his
             direction and control. I do not find credible  the  Appellant's
             evidence that since November 2007 he has sat day by day  during
             shop opening hours in the flat over the shop without taking any
             part in the activities of running a company. It is self-evident
             that a director of the company  may  not  himself  produce  the
             goods or services for which the  business  is  constituted.  In
             this case the business plan clearly describes the Appellant  as
             a chef. I do not imagine that it would have stated that  if  it
             were not to be so. I therefore find that the Appellant has  not
             only on his own admission participated in the setting up  [and]
             operation of the business but  has  also  participated  in  its
             business activities  for  which  it  was  established.  He  has
             established and has since been running  the  business.  He  has
             been the sole proprietor since his partner was refused  similar
             permission. He has not claimed that his erstwhile  partner  did
             all the work.

         69.      The whole weight of the application was that the  business
             had been up and running in November 2007 having  taken  over  a
             going concern and that going concern had not simply been closed
             down and left dormant until such time as the Appellant and  his
             colleague received the sanction of the Respondent.

         70.      In respect to Mr Duncan's submissions and the apparent aim
             of his case, it is not a matter for  the  Respondent  to  prove
             that the Appellant  had  been  working  in  the  shop,  carving
             kebabs, preparing pizzas or cooking chickens.  He  was  running
             the business. His  leave  as  a  student  prohibited  him  most
             clearly from self-employment by engaging in business. He did so
             in breach of that leave. Moreover, I find that he had  embarked
             upon the business many months before he  made  his  application
             and above all before being given permission by  the  Respondent
             to establish that business."

   8. The Immigration Judge went on  to  say  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      entitled to rely on his own wrong by working in breach of  his  leave,
      in order  to  claim  that  he  met  the  requirements  of  HC510,  the
      immigration rules in  force  in  1973  and  hence  applicable  to  the
      Appellant under the "standstill" provisions. He accordingly found that
      the Respondent's decision was the correct one.

   9. In passing, the  Immigration  Judge  had  devoted  some  attention  to
      whether the Appellant could be regarded as  genuinely  a  student.  He
      clearly had some doubt about the Appellant's pursuit of  his  studies,
      and his qualifications. At paragraph 64 of his determination, he  said
      this:

         "I find that the Appellant finished his studies  by  October  2007.
         There was no evidence that he in fact continued his studies and  in
         particular remained in London for that purpose after that date".

   The application for reconsideration

  10. The grounds for reconsideration were  drafted  by  counsel  and  raise
      three discrete issues. The first is that the Immigration Judge  should
      not have dealt with the question whether the Appellant had  ceased  to
      be a student. It had not been raised by the Respondent. If it  was  to
      be raised by the Immigration Judge, he needed to give the Appellant an
      opportunity to deal with this. The Appellant had been prejudiced.  The
      second ground is that the Immigration Judge erred in law  and  reached
      an irrational conclusion "in that he did not accept that the Appellant
      had only completed purchase of the business on 15 August 2008... it is
      contended that  the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to  the  evidence
      regarding the purchase of the business was  clouded  by  his  concerns
      over the lack of evidence relating to the Appellant's studies  between
      October 2007 - May 2008". The third ground  is  that  the  Immigration
      Judge erred in failing to consider all relevant factors under  Article
      8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

  11. The Senior Immigration Judge who refused reconsideration, pointed  out
      that there was nothing to suggest that the Appellant had any answer to
      the Immigration Judge's concerns about him having ceased his  studies,
      and that the second and third grounds merely amounted to  disagreement
      with the Immigration Judge's conclusions.

   The reconsideration hearing

  12. When the application was renewed to the High  Court,  without  seeking
      any permission to do so, the Appellant's representative added  further
      grounds, which  were  phrased  in  terms  of  failure  by  the  Senior
      Immigration Judge to consider issues which had not (in fact) been  put
      to him. In addition to the grounds lawfully renewed, it was  submitted
      that the Senior Immigration Judge had erred by failing  to  take  into
      account the practice of Home Office Presenting Officers at Field House
      (on which no evidence had been  offered),  had  failed  to  take  into
      account Payir (which had not formed the subject of any  ground  before
      him), and had erred in failing to consider Article 8. The  High  Court
      Judge made no distinction between the grounds properly renewed to  the
      High Court and those simply added  without  any  permission.  He  said
      this:

         "1.      There may be  merit  in  the  claimant's  submission  that
             having been taken by surprise on the question  as  to  when  he
             ceased to be a student, he did  not  have  the  opportunity  to
             produce relevant evidence on  the  issue  that  may  have  been
             material to whether he had breached the conditions of his leave
             to remain by taking employment in the business.

         2.        The  AIT  should  further  examine  whether  operating  a
             business in breach of an express restriction on leave,  can  be
             equated to fraudulent conduct in the light of paragraphs 40 and
             41 of ECJ 294/06 Payir and others ECJ which is  binding  as  to
             when the Ankara Agreement applies.

         3. Further the AIT will need to consider whether a rule  preventing
             a student from taking over and running an existing business  is
             itself in  breach  of  the  standstill  clause  in  the  Ankara
             Agreement."

  13. At the reconsideration hearing, Mr Duncan addressed no submissions  on
      the two latter points taken by the learned judge, though we shall have
      to deal with them in this determination. So far as the other point  is
      concerned, Mr Duncan's submission was that the Immigration  Judge  had
      found that the breach of the conditions of his leave  meant  that  the
      Appellant had ceased his studies. Although Mr  Duncan  was  unable  to
      substantiate that, he then directed his  submissions  to  establishing
      that the Immigration Judge had erred  in  his  interpretation  of  the
      evidence relating to the purchase and running of the business. In  the
      course of his submissions on  that  issue,  we  drew  attention  to  a
      document in the bundle before the Immigration  Judge  and  before  us,
      that is to say the request for transfer of a VAT registration  number.
      That contains a declaration, signed by the  Appellant,  that  "I  took
      over the business as  a  going  concern  on  26/10/07".  After  taking
      instructions, Mr Duncan said this to us:

         "The date on that declaration is incorrect. It was a falsehood. The
         Appellant told the VAT authorities a complete lie. He had not taken
         over the company on the date he said."

  14. Mr Duncan's position  was  that,  on  the  facts,  the  Appellant  was
      entitled  to  rely  on  the  "standstill"  provisions  of  the  Ankara
      agreement, and accordingly that his application was to  be  considered
      under HC510, and was therefore to be granted. We asked him to point to
      the provisions of HC510  which  would  have  allowed  the  Appellant's
      application to be granted. He conceded that there were none, but  said
      that "the door was open".

   Discussion

  15. There are a number of layers to this case, and  we  need  to  separate
      them in order to reach a coherent decision on it.

   (i) The Appellant's studies

  16. We have considerable sympathy with the view that the Immigration Judge
      risked unfairness to the Appellant by raising without prior notice the
      question of whether the Appellant was genuinely undertaking any course
      of studies at the time when he began the purchase of the business.  If
      the question whether the Appellant had  continued  as  a  student  was
      relevant to the determination of this appeal, it might have been  that
      the  Immigration  Judge's  treatment  of  that  issue  would   require
      reconsideration. But it was entirely irrelevant. The question was  not
      whether the Appellant was still studying, but whether he was  engaging
      in business. The Immigration Judge's finding was  that  the  Appellant
      was engaging in business. We are entirely unable to accept Mr Duncan's
      submission that the Immigration Judge found  that  the  Appellant  was
      engaging in business because he was not  a  student.  The  Immigration
      Judge found that  the  Appellant  was  engaging  in  business  on  the
      evidence relating to the business. We are also unable  to  accept  the
      submission made in the grounds (but not expressly pursued  before  us)
      that the Immigration Judge's conclusion that the Appellant had  ceased
      his studies influenced his decision that the Appellant was engaging in
      business: as is  clear  from  the  passage  we  have  cited  from  his
      determination, the Appellant's other activities or lack of them played
      no part in the Immigration Judge's reasoning in relation  to  engaging
      in business.

  17. Any error of law made by the Immigration  Judge  in  his  raising  and
      deciding the issue of whether the Appellant was still pursuing studies
      is thus entirely immaterial to the determination of the appeal.

   (ii) Buying the business and "engaging in business"

  18. The grounds for reconsideration argue that the Immigration  Judge  was
      not entitled,  on  the  evidence,  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had
      completed the purchase of the  business  before  his  application  for
      leave as a businessman. They point to evidence before the  Immigration
      Judge that the purchase of the business was not completed  until  July
      2008.  This  issue  is  entirely  immaterial.  The  question  for  the
      Immigration Judge did not concern the ownership of  the  business:  it
      concerned its operation  and,  in  particular,  the  question  of  the
      Appellant's own activities.

   (iii) Was the Appellant engaging in business?

  19. This is a matter not dealt with by the  grounds  for  reconsideration,
      but it was the subject of Mr Duncan's submissions  before  us.  As  we
      have observed, in the course of those submissions the Appellant  made,
      for the first time as we  understand  it,  a  statement  that  he  had
      deliberately lied to the VAT authorities.

  20. The Immigration Judge did not believe the  Appellant's  evidence.  The
      admission  made  before  us,  evidently  designed   to   improve   the
      Appellant's case that he had  not  begun  working  before  making  his
      application, simply confirms the Immigration  Judge's  view  that  the
      Appellant's word is not to be relied on. The Immigration Judge took  a
      balanced view of the evidence and concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
      been engaging in business from the time when he became involved in the
      business in October 2007. In our view the Immigration Judge was  amply
      entitled to reach that conclusion on the  facts,  for  the  reason  he
      gave. There was no error in law.

  21. It follows (and if those are the facts it is not  disputed)  that  the
      Appellant was in breach of the conditions of his leave as a student.

   (iv) "Standstill"

  22. Because of the  "standstill"  clause  of  the  Ankara  Agreement,  the
      Appellant has to be considered under terms  no  less  favourable  than
      would have applied to him in 1973.  If  in  1973  his  setting  up  of
      business would not have been regarded as a breach of his  leave  as  a
      student, it is arguable that no such condition could have been imposed
      on his leave now. The relevant provisions of HC510 are as follows:

         "13.      Applications  from  students  or  would-be  students  for
             variation of their leave will consist  mainly  of  applications
             for extension of  stay  as  a  student.  An  extension  for  an
             appropriate period, normally up to 12 months, may be granted if
             the applicant produces evidence, which is verified on  a  check
             being made, that he has enrolled  for  a  full-time  course  of
             daytime study which meets the requirements for admission  as  a
             student; that he is giving regular attendance; and that he  has
             adequate funds available for his maintenance and  that  of  any
             dependants. When an extension is granted  the  student  may  be
             reminded that he will be expected to leave at the  end  of  his
             studies.

         14.      Doctors, dentists  and  nurses  admitted  as  postgraduate
             students will be permitted to take full-time  employment  which
             is associated with their studies. Other bona fide students may,
             with the approval of the  Department  of  Employment,  work  in
             their free time or vacations and there is no restriction on the
             freedom of their wives to take employment: earnings so obtained
             may be taken into account when assessing the adequacy of  their
             arrangements  for  maintenance.  If  the  Immigration   Officer
             imposed a condition prohibiting employment on someone who later
             establishes satisfactorily that he is engaged  on  a  full-time
             course  of  studies,  the  condition  may  be  varied  to   one
             permitting him to take approved employment. Except as mentioned
             in this paragraph,  employment  is  inconsistent  with  student
             status.

        [There are then special provisions for student employees, trainees,
        au pairs, and work permit holders.]

         Businessmen and self-employed persons

         21.      People admitted as visitors may apply for the  consent  of
             the Secretary of State to their  establishing  themselves  here
             for the purpose of setting up in business, whether on their own
             account or as partners in a new or existing business. Any  such
             application is to be  considered  on  merits.  Permission  will
             depend on a number of  factors,  including  evidence  that  the
             applicant will be devoting assets of his own to  the  business,
             proportional to his interest in it, that he  will  be  able  to
             bear his share of any liabilities the business may  incur,  and
             that his share of its profits will be sufficient to support him
             and any dependents. The applicant's part in the  business  must
             not amount to disguised employment, and it must be  clear  that
             he will not have  to  supplement  his  business  activities  by
             employment for which a  work  permit  is  required.  Where  the
             applicant  intends  to  join  an  existing  business,   audited
             accounts  should  be  produced  to  establish   its   financial
             position, together with a written statement  of  the  terms  on
             which he is to enter into it; evidence should be sought that he
             will be actively concerned with its running and that there is a
             genuine  need  for  his  services  and  investment.  Where  the
             application is granted, the applicant's stay  may  be  extended
             for a period of up to twelve months, on a condition restricting
             his  freedom  to  take  employment.  A  person  admitted  as  a
             businessman in the first instance may be granted an appropriate
             extension of stay if the conditions set  out  above  are  still
             satisfied at the end of the period for which  he  was  admitted
             initially."

  23. It is clear that paragraph 21 allows a person admitted as a visitor to
      "switch" category to that of a businessman. Paragraph  21  also  draws
      the clearest imaginable distinction between businessmen and  those  in
      employment, of which we shall have more to say shortly. But we do  not
      see any suggestion in HC510 that a person admitted as a student should
      be entitled to "switch" to being a businessman. In  1973  as  today  a
      student could undertake  employment  only  with  the  consent  of  the
      Secretary of State. In 1973 there was, as  there  is  not  today,  the
      statement that, in general, "employment is inconsistent  with  student
      status". It is perhaps conceivable that mere ownership of  a  business
      would not be regarded in the same way, but it is very difficult indeed
      to see that the Immigration Rules as they were  in  1973  provide  any
      facility for a student to be  allowed  to  remain  as  a  businessman,
      whether that word is taken as meaning  a  person  who  merely  owns  a
      business, or a person who is occupied in business.

  24. It is clear from the respondent's refusal of the  present  application
      and the Immigration Judge's determination that the  case  has  so  far
      been conducted on the basis that the rules as they were in 1973  would
      have permitted a person admitted to the United Kingdom as a student to
      obtain further leave as a businessman. That does not appear to  us  to
      be the case. Nor does it appear that HC510 envisages  the  possibility
      of a student spending his time engaging in a business of his own.

   (v) Payir

  25. It is very difficult to see how the decision of the European Court  of
      Justice in Payir advances the Appellant's case at all.  The  claimants
      in that case were au pairs and students who had been employed lawfully
      in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  their
      respective grants of leave. They  claimed  to  have  thereby  attained
      status as  "workers",  and  therefore  to  be  able  to  rely  on  the
      provisions of Article 6(1) of Decision  No  1/80  of  the  Association
      Council of 19 September 1980 on the development  of  the  Association.
      That Article provides as follows:

         "1.      Subject to Article 7 on  free  access  to  employment  for
             members of his family, a  Turkish  worker  duly  registered  as
             belonging to the labour force of a Member State:

             - shall be entitled in that Member  State,  after  one  year's
               legal employment, to  renewal of his permit to work for  the
               same employer, if a job is available;

             - shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of
               legal employment and subject to the priority to be given  to
               workers of Member States of the  Community,  to  respond  to
               another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice,
               made  under  normal  conditions  and  registered  with   the
               employment services of that State, for the same occupation;

             - shall enjoy free access in that Member  State  to  any  paid
               employment  of  his  choice,  after  four  years  of   legal
               employment."

  26. The government's position was that although the claimants'  employment
      was legal, their status as au pair and students respectively prevented
      them from being regarded as "workers". That argument was  rejected  by
      the court. At paragraphs 28-30 the court identifies the  claimants  as
      workers because they were employed, performing services for and  under
      the direction of another person in return for remuneration;  they  had
      met the conditions laid down by law or regulation in the  host  member
      state for their working, and they had legal employment, that is to say
      a stable and secure situation as a member of the labour force  of  the
      host member  state.  In  those  circumstances  the  purpose  of  their
      admission was not to be taken as restricting  the  rights  granted  by
      Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80.

  27. In the present case, the Appellant has never  been  employed.  He  has
      never provided services for somebody else, or worked  under  anybody's
      direction. His case is that, before  his  application,  he  had  never
      worked at all. On the facts as found  by  the  Immigration  Judge,  he
      engaged in business - his own business - from October  2007.  Whatever
      arguments might be raised as to the legality of any restriction on his
      employment, the simple fact is that he has not been  employed  and  is
      not a "worker". The distinction drawn in  paragraph  21  of  HC510  is
      apposite. His application and his claim was that he was a businessman.
      As paragraph 21 makes clear, a person seeking leave as  a  businessman
      must not be  in  disguised  employment.  His  application  was  itself
      inconsistent with any claim under Payir and Article 6(1)  of  Decision
      1/80.

   (vi) Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

  28. Article 8  did  not  form  part  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
      Immigration Judge. It was raised for the first time in the grounds for
      reconsideration. The Immigration Judge had no obligation  to  consider
      an argument which was not put to him, and we observe  that  the  order
      for reconsideration does not suggest any error of law in this regard.

   Conclusions

  29. Throughout the proceedings, the Appellant has attempted to  show  that
      he had not engaged in business before  making  his  application.  That
      submission has failed on the facts. The Appellant therefore  falls  to
      be regarded as a person who has breached the terms of  his  leave.  On
      the Immigration Judge's findings, he has been involved in and occupied
      in the business since October 2007.

  30. He is not entitled to be regarded as a worker; indeed he puts no  case
      that would have enabled him to be so regarded.  His  application,  and
      his appeal, are on the basis that he is  entitled  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a businessman. But he has pointed to no provision in
      the rules either of 1973 or now, that would  enable  him  to  "switch"
      from being a student to being a businessman. Indeed, as we read  them,
      the 1973 rules would have regarded occupation  in  a  business  as  in
      principle inconsistent with being a student.

  31. Even if that were not so, his application under HC510 was, as both the
      Immigration  Judge's  findings  and  the  hearing   before   us   have
      established, based on either documents, or assertions or  both,  which
      were not true. Whatever the Appellant's position might in theory  have
      been, he has no entitlement to leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  an
      application supported by falsehood.

  32. For the foregoing reasons the  Appellant's  appeal  in  our  judgement
      falls necessarily to be dismissed. Any errors made by the  Immigration
      Judge were accordingly immaterial,  and  we  dismiss  the  Appellant's
      appeal.


   Signed

                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                        Vice President of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
