
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  PA (protection claim: respondent's enquiries; bias) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT
                                                                  0337 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 June 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     PA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



1. Respondent's inquiries in country of origin of applicant for
international protection

(1) There is no general legal requirement  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
obtain the consent of  an  applicant  for  international  protection  before
making an inquiry about the applicant in the applicant's country of  origin.
The decision in VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive -  confidentiality)  Sri
Lanka [2017] UKUT 00368 (IAC) is not to be read as holding to the contrary.

(2)  The  United  Kingdom's  actual  legal  obligations  in  this  area  are
contained in Article 22 of the Procedures Directive (2005/85/EC),  as  given
effect in paragraph 339IA of the Immigration  Rules.  So  far  as  obtaining
information is concerned, these provisions prohibit making such  an  inquiry
in a manner that  would  result  in  alleged  actors  of  persecution  being
directly informed of the fact that that  an  application  for  international
protection has been made, which would jeopardise  the  applicant's  (or  his
family's) physical integrity, liberty or security.

(3) If information is obtained in a way that has such an  effect,  the  fact
that the applicant may have given consent will  not  affect  the  fact  that
there is a breach of Article 22.

2. Allegations of judicial bias

(1)  An allegation of bias against a judge  is  a  serious  matter  and  the
appellate court or tribunal will expect all proper steps to be taken by  the
person making it, in the light of a response from the judge.

(2) The views of an appellant who cannot speak English and who  has  had  no
prior experience of an appeal hearing are  unlikely  to  be  of  assistance,
insofar  as  they  concern  verbal   exchanges   between   the   judge   and
representatives at the hearing of the appeal. In particular, the  fact  that
the judge had more questions  for  the  appellant's  counsel  than  for  the
respondent's presenting officer has no bearing  on  whether  the  judge  was
biased against the appellant.

(3) It is wholly inappropriate for an official interpreter to  have  his  or
her private conversations with an appellant put forward as evidence.

(4) As a general matter, if Counsel concludes during a hearing that a  judge
is behaving in an inappropriate manner, Counsel has a  duty  to  raise  this
with the judge.

(5) Although each case will turn on its own facts,  an  appellate  court  or
tribunal may have regard to the fact that a complaint of this kind  was  not
made at the hearing or, at least, before receipt of the judge's decision.

(6) Allegations relating to what occurred at a  hearing  would  be  resolved
far more easily if hearings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  officially
recorded.







                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born in  1993,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom with a visitor's visa,  a  few  months  after  his  18th
    birthday.

 2. The appellant's visa was valid until  January  2012.   On  19  February
    2013, the appellant was  arrested  by  the  police  for  theft  and  on
    suspicion  of  being  an  overstayer.   He  was  placed  on   reporting
    conditions.

 3. On 5 April 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.  He  said  that  he  had
    been a member of the BNP in Bangladesh and that in 2010 he  had  become
    President of the Union Chatrodol, as well as  becoming  a  more  active
    member of the party.  After arriving in the  United  Kingdom,  however,
    the appellant said he became less active in BNP matters. The  appellant
    said that his family in Bangladesh were active with the BNP.

 4. The appellant's  claim  to  be  in  need  of  international  protection
    stemmed, he said, from the fact that he was afraid that  local  members
    of the Awami League  had  had  the  police  issue  a  warrant  for  the
    appellant's arrest; that they had issued threats against his family  in
    order to ascertain his whereabouts; that as a result his  brothers  had
    to go  into hiding in 2008 and his sister had to stop her studies; that
    in September 2011 Awami League members attempted to kill the  appellant
    by hitting and stabbing him;  and that he had been forced into  hiding.



 5. In connection  with  his  protection  claim,  the  appellant  submitted
    documents said by him to have been  obtained  from  Bangladesh.   These
    included two First Information Reports (FIR)  and  two  charge  sheets,
    said to have been issued at a police station in Sylhet.




B. The respondent's decision

 6. On 17 March 2017, the respondent refused the appellant's claim.  So far
    as  BNP  activity  was  concerned,   the   respondent   considered   it
    inconsistent that the appellant should be highly active with the BNP in
    Bangladesh but less active after he had come  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant's answer was that he had been  constrained  by  financial
    difficulties.  The respondent considered it  inconsistent  that,  as  a
    lifelong follower of the BNP, the appellant would stop engaging in  BNP
    activities, once in the United Kingdom.  The respondent noted that  the
    appellant had given an additional reason for his  lack  of  activities;
    namely, that if he were seen in a photograph in the media "it would  be
    more destructive for my family".  The respondent did not consider  that
    this was a satisfactory explanation.

 7. So far as being President of the Union  Chatrodol  was  concerned,  the
    respondent found the appellant's answers on this matter  to  be  "vague
    and more  about  your  brothers'  involvement".   The  appellant  could
    provide  only  limited  information  about  his   responsibilities   as
    President.

 8. Turning to the alleged attack from the  Awami  League,  the  respondent
    noted a number of inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account.   The
    appellant said, on the one hand, that those witnessing  the  attack  on
    him ran away due  to  their  fear  of  violence  but  that  they  later
    returned, pushing his attackers away, who then apparently  feared  that
    they would themselves be tortured.

 9. The appellant said that the Awami League had  arranged  for  an  arrest
    warrant in respect of the appellant to be issued before the  attack  on
    him.  The respondent considered it inconsistent, if he  was  wanted  by
    the police, that the appellant was able, as he had  claimed,  to  "walk
    into a police station in order to lodge a [general diary] without being
    arrested and held for questioning".



C. The Document Verification Exercise and Report

10. As we have said, the appellant submitted to the  respondent  two  FIRs.
    The first was numbered 23 and dated 10/01/2010.   The  second  FIR  was
    numbered 30 and dated 05/01/2011.

11. The two charge sheets submitted by the appellant were numbered  87  and
    dated 25/02/2010 and numbered 53 and dated 08/03/2011.

12. The British  High  Commission  in  Dhaka  carried  out  a  verification
    exercise in respect of the FIRs and charge sheets.  On 23 October 2016,
    a member of the High Commission visited the  officer  in  charge  of  a
    named police station in Sylhet.  He introduced himself as  an  official
    of the High Commission and asked the officer  in  charge  if  he  could
    verify the two FIRs and two charge sheets.

13. The officer in charge physically located the register and searched  the
    records.  The officer said that neither the FIRs nor the charge  sheets
    existed on record.

14. The High Commission official then acted as follows:-

         "I requested to take a look at the FIR register, to  which  the  OC
         permitted.  From the register I discovered that on  06/01/2011  FIR
         No. 28 to 29 was filed.  Furthermore,  FIR  No.  23  was  filed  on
         06/01/2010.

         Similarly, the register showed on 05/01/2011 FIR No. 27  was  filed
         and FIR No. 30 was filed on 07/01/2011.

         None of the names and dates  in  the  documents  submittrd  by  the
         subject matched the details contained in the register."

15. The respondent's letter of refusal made  reference  to  the  official's
    findings regarding the FIRs and charge sheets.  They were found  to  be
    "false and non-genuine".  The respondent considered that the  fact  the
    appellant had provided false documents as part of  his  claim  "damages
    your credibility.  In light of all the above findings it is  considered
    that you have failed to provide a credible and consistent account  with
    regard to this aspect of your claim.  It is not accepted that the Awami
    League tried to kill you.  This part of your claim has been rejected".

16. The respondent considered that the  appellant's  credibility  had  been
    further damaged by the fact that  he  had  only  claimed  international
    protection after being detected and arrested as an  overstayer  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Indeed, the claim had been made over three years after
    that arrest.  When asked why he had not claimed earlier, the  appellant
    said: "I thought  I  need  to  prove  that  I  am  having  problems  in
    Bangladesh so it took some time for me to get these documents".



C. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

17. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    of his protection claim.  The grounds of appeal contended that  he  had
    provided "a credible statement.  The respondent's assertion in relation
    to credibility of the appellant lacks details".

18. Counsel for the appellant provided a skeleton  argument  in  connection
    with his appeal.  The skeleton argument referred to a letter  from  the
    General Secretary of the BNP  in  the  United  Kingdom;  some  Facebook
    "screen shots" relating to the appellant; and various documents said to
    emanate from Bangladesh, including the general  diary  reports,  charge
    sheets and First Information Reports (FIRs).

19. It was submitted that the appellant's account was "both internally  and
    externally consistent with  the  objective  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant,  which  refers  to  the  assault  on  the   appellant,   the
    outstanding police warrants and charge sheets".  The  letter  from  the
    General Secretary of the BNP purported to confirm  that  the  appellant
    and his family were members of that party and were  politically  active
    in Bangladesh.  The  letter  also  confirmed  that  the  appellant  was
    President of the Chatrodol Union.

20. The skeleton argument made  reference  to  the  Home  Office's  Country
    Information Guidance on Bangladesh of  2015,  which  outlined,  amongst
    other things, "systematic corruption in the criminal justice system".

21. The decision which is the subject of  the  present  appeal  followed  a
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 19 October 2017 before  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  He noted that the original hearing of the appeal,
    on 2 May 2017, had been adjourned in order to  give  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to challenge the  findings  of  the  Document  Verification
    Report.  Apparently,  the  appellant  wanted  to  contact  "sources  in
    Bangladesh" for this purpose.  At paragraph 4 of his decision, however,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was  "no  evidence  that
    the appellant had been active in seeking evidence  from  Bangladesh  to
    challenge the DVR".

22. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.   The  appellant
    adopted his witness statement.

23. So far as the DVR was concerned, the appellant said as follows:-

        "53.  I now  would  like  to  give  my  response  to  Home  Office's
             allegations  of  fraudulent  documents  being  submitted.    I
             appreciate that the Home Office conducted a field visit to the
             relevant police station and found  the  documents  to  be  not
             genuine.  However what the document verification report  (DVR)
             does not reveal is the sinister plan of Awami League.

        ...

        55.   The Awami League does not want political cases to be known  or
             found.  My  political  colleagues  and  I  have  learned  from
             discreet sources that the police have two  types  of  records.
             One is for the general public and the other is  for  political
             opponents.

        56.   The reason the political cases are kept secret, is to show the
             world that we are not persecuted.  In turn foreign governments
             will find that our cases  are  false  which  will  compel  the
             foreign governments to return us to  Bangladesh  and  hand  us
             over to the authorities."

24. The judge's findings  concerning  the  international  protection  claim
    begin at paragraph 13 of his decision and run to paragraph 30.

25. The judge agreed with the respondent that certain answers the appellant
    gave regarding his alleged  BNP  involvement  were  vague.   The  judge
    categorised them as "platitudes" which were "common  to  any  political
    party" (paragraph 15).

26. At paragraph 17, the judge noted the letter from the General  Secretary
    of BNP UK.  This asserted that the appellant "has been  active  in  BNP
    politics in the UK 'since coming to the UK'".  The judge was  concerned
    about that assertion, since, if the writer of the  letter  had  met  or
    known anything about the appellant, he would  have  realised  that  the
    appellant had not previously been involved in BNP politics in the UK.

27. The judge noted various Facebook printouts relating to the  appellant's
    alleged involvement with BNP politics.  The judge found that every  one
    of them post-dated the asylum interview, in  which  the  appellant  had
    been asked about his lack of interest in the BNP, since coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge was not persuaded  that  the  appellant  was
    telling the truth about alleged Facebook activity which, he had said in
    evidence,  pre-dated  the  asylum  interview.   The   judge   was,   in
    particular, unpersuaded that the appellant's assertion that he did  not
    realise  evidence  of  this  activity  would  be  needed  was  credible
    (paragraph 18).

28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the DVR report at the  British
    High Commission,  beginning  at  paragraph  21  of  his  decision.   At
    paragraph 22, the judge noted what the appellant said  in  his  witness
    statement on this issue.  However, the judge noted that  "the  officers
    at the police station not only checked the sources themselves but  also
    made the source available to the  Officers  from  the  BHC".   Although
    Counsel for the appellant "submitted that I should not rely on the  DVR
    report ... she failed to support  [this]  with  any  authority  or  any
    citation of an authority" (paragraph 22).

29. The judge noted that he had been given  an  additional  bundle,  called
    "App 2", which the appellant said dealt with the  appellant's  response
    to the DVR report.  This bundle included a document, at page 3, said to
    have been written to the appellant  by  someone  in  Bangladesh,  which
    reads as follows:-

         "I am telling you like before.  I cannot give any letter about your
         documents.  You know I tell you last time,  Bangladeshi  government
         threatening everyone who help people with cases outside Bangladesh.
          If they catch me I will loose (sic) my  certificate.   I  have  no
         other income except my legal work.

         I am sorry don't ask me again.  You can explain to court in London.
          It not possible help you more  (sic).   Whatever  you  say  please
         don't mention my name.  Too dangerous for me.

         Good luck".

30. The App 2 bundle was the subject of exchanges  between  the  judge  and
    Counsel:-

         "23. In support of  his  assertion  that  due  to  fear  people  in
             Bangladesh  are  unable  to  provide  him  with  evidence   to
             challenge the DVR  (see:  "App  2")  (sic).   Page  4  of  the
             document is not translated.  [Counsel] does not appear to have
             noticed that it is not translated.  I asked the  appellant  if
             it is translated and he  produced  what  purports  to  be  the
             original translation (see: "App 2"  page  4A).   The  relevant
             document in issue is at page 3 of "App  2".   Ms  Gill  cross-
             examined the appellant as to when he received  this  document.
             The appellant said that he received it around the 5th  of  May
             2017.  However, on the top left hand corner the  date  it  was
             transmitted by  facsimile  transmission  is  recorded  as  the
             '5/1/17'.  The appellant accepted that he received it  on  the
             5th January 2017.  {Counsel] interjected to say that  that  is
             the date it was sent to the appellant.  I asked [Counsel]  not
             to intervene and that she does have  the  opportunity  to  re-
             examine  her  client.   Further,  I  reminded  her  that   the
             appellant has actually accepted that the document was received
             by him on the 5th January 2017.  There are a number of numbers
             running along the top of page 3 of "App 2" but the appellant's
             unequivocal evidence is that he received that document on  the
             5th January 2017, it deals with the VDR (sic) (dated  23.10.16
             & 2.11.16); it was available at the last hearing  but  due  to
             lack  of  time  it  was  not   disclosed.    He   subsequently
             contradicted this by saying he was advised by his  Bangladeshi
             solicitors not to disclose it.

         24.  Ms Gill pursued the point.  She asked the  appellant  that  if
             the document was in his possession at the last hearing (2nd of
             May 2017) and the contents are true why was it not produced at
             that hearing.  The appellant said there was a lack of time  to
             produce and he further asserted he was advised not to disclose
             it.  He was asked which solicitors asked him not to  disclose.
             He said his solicitors in Bangladesh.

         25.  [Counsel] sought to re-examine the appellant on this point and
             in so doing she in effect ask him to repeat  the  contents  of
             his latest witness statement (see  "App  1"  page  1-4).   The
             appellant had already adopted this when [Counsel]  opened  the
             evidence by calling the appellant and asking him to adopt  his
             witness statements."

31. The judge's findings on the international  protection  aspects  of  the
    appellant's appeal were as follows:-

         "27. It is my finding, to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  the
             core of the appellant's claim is a fiction. It is not  a  well
             thought out fiction, but a fiction nevertheless.  The  account
             he presented in the AIR does not jel (sic) together.   Leaving
             aside the age when he claims he became the  president  of  the
             [Union], the appellant's failure  to  articulate  clearly  the
             aims and policies or the role he claims to have played for the
             BNP does not stand up to  scrutiny,  anxious  or  cursory.   I
             observed and heard the  appellant  give  oral  evidence.   His
             account of why he did not  produce  Facebook  documents  which
             predate the AIR changed with the space of seconds.  It changed
             from experiencing difficulties in printing them to stating  he
             did not think they were needed.  I take both  aspects  of  the
             appellant's performance, during the AIR and  during  his  oral
             evidence.  I find the appellant is  not  a  truthful  witness.
             Apart from his name and his date of birth I do  not  find  the
             appellant   told   me   the   truth   about   anything   else.
             Consequently, I find I am unable to attach any weight  to  the
             documents he relies on."

32. Having found that the appellant could not succeed in his  human  rights
    appeal, by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR, the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dismissed the appeal.  His decision was promulgated on 6 November
    2017.



D. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

33. The grounds of appeal  accompanying  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal were settled by Counsel (not
    previously connected with the case) on 19 November 2017.   The  grounds
    were as follows:-

      a) The judge failed to properly assess the appellant's risk given that
         the respondent "has now alerted the persecutors themselves  of  his
         asylum claim";

      b) the judge "has failed to consider numerous  pieces  of  documentary
         evidence provided and not applied anxious scrutiny";

      c) the determination of the judge "is infected by judicial bias".

34. So far as ground  (a)  was  concerned,  the  grounds  cited  the  Upper
    Tribunal reported  case  of  VT  (Article  22  Procedures  Directive  -
    confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00368 (IAC),  which  was  handed
    down in July 2017.  The relevant part of the headnote of VT was set out
    as follows:-

         "(ii)    There is a general  duty  of  confidentiality  during  the
             process of examining a protection claim,  including  appellate
             and  judicial  review  proceedings.   If  it   is   considered
             necessary to make an inquiry in  the  country  of  origin  the
             country of asylum must obtain the applicant's written consent.
              Disclosure of confidential  information  without  consent  is
             only justified in limited and exceptional circumstances,  such
             as combating terrorism.


         (iii)    The humanitarian principles underpinning Article 22 of the
             Procedures Directive prohibit direct contact with the  alleged
             actor of persecution in the country of origin in a manner that
             might alert them to the likelihood that a protection claim has
             been made or in a manner that might place applicants or  their
             family members in the country of origin at risk.


         (iv) The humanitarian objective of the Refugee Convention  requires
             anyone seeking to authenticate a document produced in  support
             of a protection claim  to  follow  a  precautionary  approach.
             Careful  consideration  should  be  given  to  the   duty   of
             confidentiality,  to  whether  an  inquiry  is  necessary,  to
             whether there is a safer alternative and whether  the  inquiry
             is made in a  way  that  does  not  give  rise  to  additional
             protection issues for  applicants  or  their  family  members.
             Disclosure of personal information should go no  further  than
             is strictly necessary.  Whether an inquiry is necessary and is
             carried out in an appropriate way will depend on the facts  of
             the case and the circumstances in the country of origin.


         (v)  Failure to comply with the duty of confidentiality or a breach
             of  the  prohibitions  contained  in  Article  22   does   not
             automatically lead to recognition as a refugee, but  might  be
             relevant to the overall assessment of risk on return."

35. At paragraph 10 of the grounds, it was asserted that VT held  "that  if
    it is considered necessary to make an inquiry in the country of origin,
    the country of asylum must obtain  the  applicant's  written  consent".
    Reference was made in this regard to paragraph 38(viii)  of  VT.   This
    reads as follows:-

         "(vii)   There is a general  duty  of  confidentiality  during  the
                process of examining a protection claim, including appellate
                and  judicial  review  proceedings.   If  it  is  considered
                necessary to make an inquiry in the country  of  origin  the
                country  of  asylum  must  obtain  the  applicant's  written
                consent.  Disclosure  of  confidential  information  without
                consent  is  only  justified  in  limited  and   exceptional
                circumstances, such as combating terrorism."

36. The grounds went on to submit that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  "has
    failed to consider the enhanced risk the appellant now faces given that
    the persecutors themselves have been alerted to a protection appeal  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   The  failure  to  analyse  this   serious   and
    substantial risk is a material error of law".

37. Ground (b) contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  refer
    in any way to medical documentation, submitted by the appellant,  which
    was said to "go to the politically motivated attack on him as  well  as
    accompanying photos".  The same applied to news articles said  to  show
    external consistency,  the  "general  diary"  and  "two  extant  arrest
    warrants in the appellant's name".

38. So far as the DVR was concerned, the grounds complained that  this  did
    not relate to "checks on  the  two  arrest  warrants  provided  by  the
    appellant".

39. Ground (c) related to what was said to be the judge's behaviour  during
    the hearing, which "would lead a reasonable bystander to perceive  that
    she (sic) was biased".  Reference was  made  to  a  witness  statement,
    provided by Counsel who had represented the appellant before the First-
    tier  Tribunal.   It  was  alleged  that  the  judge  "did  not   allow
    permissible re-examination-in-chief of the appellant"; that  the  judge
    stated in open court "Thank God for that" when Counsel  cut  short  her
    closing speech "once it became apparent ... that the judge was destined
    to refuse the appeal as a result  of  bias";  that  the  appellant  was
    "shaken and upset"; and that the  judge's  unacceptable  behaviour  was
    also perceived as such by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  and  her
    colleague.



E. The response of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the allegation of bias

40. Following the grant of permission by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Dawson  sought  the  observations  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in respect of the allegations made in ground  (c).   The
    judge provided a detailed response, the substance of which was set  out
    in a memorandum, drawn up by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 20 February
    2018, and sent to the parties.

41. In his response, the judge set  out  why  he  considered  that  certain
    matters, upon which Counsel had sought to re-examine the appellant, did
    not arise out of cross-examination, which led  the  judge  to  seek  to
    preclude Counsel from pursuing her line of  questioning.   However,  in
    respect of the issue of whether the  appellant  had  had  contact  with
    lawyers in Bangladesh, which was raised by Counsel  in  re-examination,
    the judge said he had indicated  to  Counsel  that,  if  this  line  of
    questioning was to occur, he would permit  the  Presenting  Officer  to
    cross-examine on it.  At that point, according to  the  judge,  Counsel
    for the appellant said that she would "leave it", in response to  which
    the judge invited her to "pursue it if you have to".   The  judge  then
    further invited Counsel to deal with this and other  matters,  but  she
    declined to do so.  Given that the judge  considered  "her  refusal  to
    pursue troubling", the judge said he asked Counsel to  pause  while  he
    made a note of the conversation, to which she said: "please  do".   The
    judge said that he found that reply of Counsel to be  "impertinent  and
    said so".  The judge said that Counsel's  response  "was  discourteous"
    and  that  "no  member  of  the  judiciary  should   countenance   such
    behaviour".

42. The judge denied using the word "impertinent" more  than  once  and  he
    emphatically refuted the suggestion that he had  said  "Thank  God  for
    that".  He did not consider the appellant  had  at  any  time  to  have
    appeared "shaken or upset".

43. The judge did not accept he had behaved in a "overly critical"  fashion
    in noting various defects in  Counsel's  skeleton  argument,  including
    what he considered to be a significant error in the  recording  of  the
    appeal reference.

44. The judge did not disagree with Counsel's contention that he  had  told
    her "This is not a conversation", during the course of her submissions.
     The judge said  that  Counsel  had  invited  him  to  agree  with  her
    submission by saying "agreed?".   The  judge  considered  that  it  was
    "inappropriate for a Tribunal judge to indicate,  during  the  hearing,
    whether he/she agreed with a legal, or any other, point either advocate
    [raised] in submissions", since that could be interpreted as giving  an
    indication of the way the judge would be likely to decide the appeal.

45. The memorandum recorded the judge as dealing with  a  number  of  other
    issues, raised in Counsel's witness statement.  Both the assertions and
    responses are in a similar vein to those described above.



F. Discussion

(a) The Document Verification Exercise

46. We deal first with ground (a).  As we have seen, the case of VT  played
    no part whatsoever in the submissions of Counsel before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Given that VT is not a  "starred"  (that  is  to  say,
    binding) decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  this  point  is  of  some
    significance, notwithstanding that the First-tier  Tribunal  is,  as  a
    general matter, expected to follow  reported  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, whether starred or not.

47. It is necessary to set out, in detail, the  relevant  findings  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in VT.   These  preceded  from  the  provisions  of  the
    Procedures Directive and from paragraph 339IA of the Immigration Rules,
    which is intended to give effect to Article 22 of that Directive.

48. The Upper Tribunal was also concerned with an advisory opinion given by
    UNHCR in March 2005, concerning the "Rules of confidentiality regarding
    asylum information".

49. The Upper Tribunal said the following:-

         "19. Council  Directive  2005/85/EC  ("the  Procedures  Directive")
             introduced a minimum framework of procedures for granting  and
             withdrawing  refugee  status.   As  with   the   Qualification
             Directive, the  UK  has  not  adopted  the  recast  Procedures
             Directive (2013). Article 22 of the 2005 Procedures  Directive
             sets out the following provisions relating to  the  collection
             of information:


             Article 22


             For the purposes of examining individual cases, Member  States
                  shall not:


               a)  directly  disclose   information   regarding   individual
                  applications for asylum, or the fact that  an  application
                  has been made, to the alleged actor(s) of  persecution  of
                  the applicant for asylum;


               b) obtain  any  information  from  the  alleged  actor(s)  of
                  persecution in a manner that would result in such actor(s)
                  being directly informed of the fact  that  an  application
                  has been made by the  applicant  in  question,  and  would
                  jeopardise the physical integrity  of  the  applicant  and
                  his/her dependants, or the liberty and security of his/her
                  family members still living in the country of origin.

         20.  The provisions  are  transposed  in  paragraph  339IA  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

             339IA.  For the purposes of examining individual  applications
                    for asylum

              i) information provided in support of an application  and  the
                 fact that  an  application  has  been  made  shall  not  be
                 disclosed to the alleged actor(s)  of  persecution  of  the
                 applicant, and


             ii) information shall not be obtained from the alleged actor(s)
                 of persecution that would result in  their  being  directly
                 informed that an application for asylum has  been  made  by
                 the applicant in question and would jeopardise the physical
                 integrity of the applicant and  their  dependants,  or  the
                 liberty and security of their family members  still  living
                 in the country of origin.

         21.  The parties were unable to refer the Tribunal to jurisprudence
             from the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)
             relating to Article 22.  The only case that touches on  it  is
             the Supreme Court decision in R v McGeough [2015] UKSC 62.  In
             that case the Supreme  Court  considered  Article  22  of  the
             Procedures Directive in the context of criminal proceedings in
             the UK.  An application was made during  Mr  McGeough's  trial
             for information he supplied when he made a protection claim in
             Sweden to be excluded from the evidence.  In view of the  fact
             that Swedish law allowed  for  disclosure  of  information  in
             unsuccessful asylum cases, and Mr McGeough was  likely  to  be
             aware of the fact when he provided the information, the  judge
             admitted  the  evidence,  which  formed  the  basis   of   his
             conviction for membership of a proscribed organisation.

         22.  The Supreme Court in McGeough found that it  was  self-evident
             that there was a need to encourage asylum applicants  to  feel
             able to make full disclosure to the relevant authorities,  but
             this did not give rise to an inevitable requirement  that  the
             information  must  be  preserved  in   confidence   in   every
             circumstance.  The court  made  clear  that  such  information
             should not be disclosed to those who persecuted an  applicant.
             The  injunction  against  such  disclosure  was  contained  in
             Article 22 of the Procedures Directive  and  was  specifically
             related to the process of examining an  individual  protection
             claim.  In that case  the  appellant's  protection  claim  was
             examined  and  the  application  refused.   The  trigger   for
             confidentiality under Article 22 was not present on the  facts
             of the case.  The court concluded that  the  trial  judge  was
             right to refuse the application to exclude the evidence.

         The UNHCR advisory opinion


         23.  Signatory States to the 1951 Refugee Convention  undertake  to
             co-operate with the UNHCR and to facilitate it in its duty  to
             supervise the  application  of  the  provisions  of  the  1951
             Convention (Article 35).  Paragraph 358C  of  the  Immigration
             Rules recognises the supervisory role of the UNHCR in relation
             to individual applications.  The UNHCR shall be provided  with
             information  relating  to  an  individual  applicant  if   the
             applicant agrees to the information being disclosed.


         24.  On 31 March 2005 the UNHCR issued an "Advisory opinion on  the
             rules of confidentiality regarding asylum  information".   The
             UNHCR began by  emphasising  the  importance  of  the  general
             principle of confidentiality in a protection claim.  The right
             to privacy and the  need  for  confidentiality  is  especially
             important to an asylum seeker whose claim is likely to suppose
             a fear of persecution by the authorities  in  the  country  of
             origin and whose situation could be jeopardised if  protection
             of information is not  ensured.   Bearing  those  concerns  in
             mind, the State  which  receives  a  protection  claim  should
             refrain from sharing any information with the  authorities  of
             the country of origin and from informing  the  authorities  in
             the  country  of  origin  that  a  national  has  presented  a
             protection claim.  This  applies  regardless  of  whether  the
             country of origin is considered  by  the  authorities  of  the
             country of asylum as a "safe country of origin" or whether the
             claim is considered to be  based  on  economic  motives.   The
             authorities of the country of asylum may not weigh  the  risks
             involved in  sharing  of  confidential  information  with  the
             country of origin and conclude that  it  will  not  result  in
             human  rights  violations.   The  UNHCR  observed  that  these
             principles are reflected in the Procedures Directive.


         25.  The advisory opinion says the authorities must seek in advance
             the written consent of an asylum seeker if they want to  check
             personal data in the country of origin.  If an  asylum  seeker
             considers that compelling information might be obtainable from
             the country of origin, and that this could  only  be  obtained
             through disclosure of personal  information,  he  or  she  may
             occasionally request the authorities of the country of  asylum
             for help in obtaining such evidence.  In the opinion of  UNHCR
             confidentiality is required until a final decision is taken on
             an  individual  case,  including  during   administrative   or
             judicial  review  proceedings.   If  an  asylum   seeker   has
             voluntarily disclosed their identity and the  fact  that  they
             have made a protection claim through public statements, in the
             view of UNHCR, this may not  be  interpreted  as  an  explicit
             waiver of confidentiality.

         26.  While there is a general rule against sharing information with
             the country of origin the disclosure of  certain  confidential
             information to the country of origin without  the  consent  of
             the applicant may be  justified  in  limited  and  exceptional
             circumstances, such as combatting terrorism.  In circumstances
             where a person is found not to be  in  need  of  international
             protection, and has exhausted available  legal  remedies,  the
             authorities  in  the  country  of  asylum  may  share  limited
             information, even without  consent,  in  order  to  facilitate
             return.  Disclosure should go no further than  is  lawful  and
             necessary  to  secure  readmission  and  there  should  be  no
             disclosure that could endanger the  individual  or  any  other
             person, including the fact that the person applied for asylum.




         27.  The UNHCR summed up the advice with the following  conclusions
             and recommendations.

                  "25. UNHCR shares the  legitimate  concern  of  States  to
                      clearly  distinguish   between   persons   who   need
                      international protection and those who have no  valid
                      claim  for  refugee  status.    It   is   a   State's
                      prerogative,  and  in  fact  its  duty,  to  make   a
                      determination  on  refugee  status   based   on   all
                      available  evidence  presented  in  the  case.  Human
                      rights standards prescribe the State's obligation  to
                      protect the right to privacy of  the  individual  and
                      its inherent protection against information  reaching
                      the hands of persons not authorized to receive or use
                      it.  The possible risks  to  the  individual  asylum-
                      seeker  caused  by  information  reaching  the  wrong
                      people, but also the detrimental effect of misuse  of
                      information to the asylum system as a whole are  very
                      serious in nature.  Consequently, strict adherence to
                      the fundamental principles and refugee protection  is
                      vital, and exceptions should only  be  allowed  under
                      well-defined and specific circumstances.

             Summary of recommendations


                   . If the authorities responsible for assessing an asylum
                     claim, whether administrative  or  judicial,  deem  it
                     necessary to collect information from the  country  of
                     origin, such requests must  be  couched  in  the  most
                     general and anonymous terms, and should never  include
                     names or data by which the asylum seeker or his or her
                     family could be identified in the country  of  origin.
                     Such authorities however  must  not  communicate  with
                     entities in the country  of  origin  of  the  claimant
                     (whether governmental or non-governmental)  to  verify
                     or authenticate declarations or documents provided  by
                     the asylum-seeker.


                   .  Confidentiality  requirements  apply  throughout  the
                     asylum procedure, including judicial review.

                   . If research is conducted  on  an  individual  case  to
                     verify a fact or a document, the  written  consent  of
                     the individual has to be sought  in  advance,  unless,
                     exceptionally,  a   legitimate   overriding   security
                     interest is at stake.""

     50. The Upper Tribunal's analysis of what it  described  as  the  legal
         framework was as follows:-

             "28. The basic legal framework outlined above will be familiar
                  to those involved in preparing, presenting  and  assessing
                  protection claims.  The area needing some analysis,  which
                  has been subject to less scrutiny by courts and tribunals,
                  is the nature of the duty of confidentiality and the scope
                  of Article 22 of the Procedures Directive.


             29.  We find that the Supreme Court decision in McGeough is of
                  limited assistance in interpreting how Article  22  should
                  be applied in the context of assessing a protection claim.
                   The crux of  the  case  related  to  whether  information
                  provided during the  examination  of  a  protection  claim
                  should have been admitted in a criminal trial.  The  court
                  made clear that the prohibitions contained in  Article  22
                  focus on the process of examining an individual protection
                  claim.  The court thought it  "obvious"  that  information
                  relating to a claim should not be disclosed to an  alleged
                  actor of persecution.


             30.  It is necessary to put the provision  in  context  before
                  considering the wording.  The  humanitarian  objective  of
                  the  Refugee  Convention  underpins   the   legal   regime
                  contained in the Qualification and Procedures  Directives.
                  Any action that is taken in examining an asylum claim that
                  might place a person or their family members at  risk,  or
                  that might enhance  an  existing  risk,  must  be  avoided
                  because  it  would  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
                  Convention.


             31.  The purpose of the Procedures Directive is to introduce a
                  minimum framework of standards within the  European  Union
                  on procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status.
                    Article  4  of  the  Qualification  Directive   provides
                  guidance  on  how  a  claim  should  be   assessed.    The
                  Procedures Directive sets  out  more  detailed  provisions
                  relating to the procedures  for  making  and  examining  a
                  protection claim.


             32.  As recognised in McGeough, Article  22  applies  for  the
                  "purposes of examining individual cases".  Confidentiality
                  is  of  the  utmost  importance  during  the  process   of
                  examining a protection claim.  An applicant must feel able
                  to provide relevant information without fear that it might
                  be  disclosed  to  the  alleged  actor   of   persecution.
                  Breaches of  confidentiality  during  an  inquiry  in  the
                  country of origin could give rise to  additional  risk  to
                  the applicant or to other people connected to the claim in
                  the country of origin.


             33.  The provisions contained in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of
                  Article 22 set out two  separate  prohibitions  on  Member
                  States during the process of examining a claim.  The first
                  prohibition contained  in  sub-paragraph  (a)  relates  to
                  disclosure of information by the Member State  to  alleged
                  actors of persecution. The second prohibition contained in
                  sub-paragraph (b) relates to  obtaining  information  from
                  the alleged actor of persecution.  While it would  not  be
                  difficult to imagine circumstances in which disclosure  of
                  information could be made  in  the  process  of  obtaining
                  information from the alleged  actor  of  persecution,  the
                  separation of the two provisions makes a clear distinction
                  between disclosure of information and the risks that might
                  be associated with the process of obtaining information.

             34.  We conclude that the reference to 'direct' disclosure  of
                  personal information or the fact that a person has made  a
                  protection claim must relate to direct  contact  with  the
                  alleged actor of persecution and not solely to  disclosure
                  of specific information.  The provision must  be  read  in
                  the context of the overall humanitarian objective  of  the
                  Refugee Convention. Any direct contact made "in a  manner"
                  that might  lead  the  alleged  actor  of  persecution  to
                  conclude that a person is likely to have made a protection
                  claim, or in a way that  might  give  rise  to  additional
                  risk, is likely to engage the  prohibition  under  Article
                  22.  Whether direct contact  with  the  alleged  actor  of
                  persecution has been done in a way that is  prohibited  by
                  Article 22 will depend on the nature of  the  inquiry  and
                  the circumstances of each case.


             35.  On behalf of the appellant it was argued that the  remedy
                  for a breach of confidentiality under  Article  22  is  to
                  grant refugee status.   The  respondent  states  that  her
                  general policy is to  do  so  if  an  inquiry  verifies  a
                  document as genuine.


             36.  The wording of Article 22 does not include a remedy for a
                  breach of the provision.  It cannot be right that a breach
                  of a procedural requirement would give rise to recognition
                  as a refugee if the evidence shows, as a matter  of  fact,
                  that a  person  does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
                  persecution.  To do so would undermine the purpose of  the
                  Refugee Convention.  A parallel can be drawn with the duty
                  to endeavour to  trace  family  members  of  unaccompanied
                  asylum seeking children under Article 19  of  the  Council
                  Directive 2003/9/EC ("the Reception  Directive").   In  KA
                  (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 615 the Court of  Appeal
                  found that failure to comply with the duty did not lead to
                  a successful outcome in  a  claim.  Careful  consideration
                  will need to be given to  the  facts  of  each  individual
                  case.  The failure to discharge the duty might be relevant
                  to judicial consideration of a protection claim.


             37.  A breach of  confidentiality  to  the  alleged  actor  of
                  persecution might give  rise  to  additional  risk  to  an
                  applicant.  This could be ameliorated by a grant of status
                  but would not protect those who might be  associated  with
                  the claim in the country  of  origin.   Anyone  making  an
                  inquiry in the country of origin, whether on behalf of  an
                  appellant or the respondent, should be vigilant about  the
                  duty of  confidentiality  and  the  need  to  avoid  risk.
                  Careful  consideration  should  be  given  to  whether  an
                  inquiry is necessary, and if it is, whether it can be made
                  in a way that complies with the principles of the  Refugee
                  Convention.

             38.  We draw together the following principles relating to the
                  assessment and  authentication  of  evidence  produced  in
                  support of a protection claim  from  the  legal  framework
                  outlined above.

                  (i)  The Refugee Convention  is  the  cornerstone  of  the
                      international protection  regime.   The  humanitarian
                      principles of the Convention underpin the  provisions
                      outlined  in  the  Qualification  Directive  and  the
                      Procedures Directive.


                  (ii) The standard of proof is low because of  the  serious
                      nature of the potential consequences of  return.   It
                      creates a 'more positive role for uncertainty'.


                  (iii)    Where possible, an asylum applicant must  make  a
                      genuine effort to  substantiate  his  or  her  claim,
                      although it is recognised  that  an  applicant  might
                      have difficulty in producing evidence to support  the
                      claim.


                  (iv) The overall  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the  asylum
                      applicant, but there is also a duty on  the  examiner
                      to assess the relevant elements  of  the  application
                      according to the principles outlined in Article 4  of
                      the Qualification Directive.


                  (v)   Documentary  evidence  produced  in  support  of   a
                      protection claim forms part of a holistic assessment.
                       The principles outlined in Tanveer Ahmed  (documents
                      unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT  00439
                      should be considered when assessing what  weight  can
                      be placed on documentary evidence.


                  (vi) There is no general duty of inquiry upon the examiner
                      to authenticate documents produced in  support  of  a
                      protection   claim.    There   may   be   exceptional
                      situations when a document can be authenticated by  a
                      simple process of  inquiry  which  will  conclusively
                      resolve  the  authenticity  and  reliability   of   a
                      document.


                  (vii)    There is a general duty of confidentiality during
                      the  process  of  examining   a   protection   claim,
                      including appellate and judicial review  proceedings.
                      If it is considered necessary to make an  inquiry  in
                      the country of origin  the  country  of  asylum  must
                      obtain the applicant's written  consent.   Disclosure
                      of confidential information without consent  is  only
                      justified in limited and  exceptional  circumstances,
                      such as combatting terrorism.


                  (viii)   The humanitarian principles underpinning  Article
                      22  of  the  Procedures  Directive  prohibit   direct
                      contact with the alleged actor of persecution in  the
                      country of origin in a manner that might  alert  them
                      to the likelihood that a protection  claim  has  been
                      made or in a manner that might  place  applicants  or
                      their family members in  the  country  of  origin  at
                      risk.


                  (ix) The humanitarian objective of the Refugee  Convention
                      requires anyone seeking to  authenticate  a  document
                      produced in support of a protection claim to follow a
                      precautionary approach.  Careful consideration should
                      be given to the duty of confidentiality,  to  whether
                      an inquiry is necessary, to whether there is a  safer
                      alternative and whether the inquiry is made in a  way
                      that does not  give  rise  to  additional  protection
                      issues  for  applicants  or  their  family   members.
                      Disclosure  of  personal  information  should  go  no
                      further  than  is  strictly  necessary.   Whether  an
                      inquiry  is  necessary  and  is  carried  out  in  an
                      appropriate way will depend on the facts of the  case
                      and the circumstances in the country of origin.


                  (x)  Failure to comply with the duty of confidentiality or
                      a breach of the prohibitions contained in Article  22
                      does not  automatically  lead  to  recognition  as  a
                      refugee,  but  might  be  relevant  to  the   overall
                      assessment of risk on return."

51. As can now be seen from a detailed reading of VT , it was wrong of  the
    appellant in the present appeal to take out of context the sentence  in
    paragraph 38(vii): "If it is considered necessary to make an inquiry in
    the country of origin the country of asylum must obtain the applicant's
    written  consent".   What  is  prohibited  by  Article  22(b)  of   the
    Procedures Directive and paragraph 339IA(ii) of the  Immigration  Rules
    is the obtaining of information  in  a  manner  that  would  result  in
    alleged actors of persecution being directly informed of the fact  that
    an application for  international  protection  had  been  made  by  the
    applicant,  which  would  jeopardise  his  or  his  family's   physical
    integrity, liberty or security.

52. The Upper Tribunal's reference to requiring consent  derived  from  the
    UNHCR's Advisory Opinion of  2005.   That  document  is,  as  it  says,
    advisory in nature.  In order to determine the  extent  of  the  United
    Kingdom's actual legal obligations in this regard, it is  necessary  to
    concentrate on Article 22 of the Procedures Directive.

53.  As can be seen from paragraph 34 of the  decision  in  VT,  the  Upper
    Tribunal was not, in fact, of the view that  any  direct  contact  with
    alleged actors of persecution is prohibited.   Furthermore,  the  Upper
    Tribunal was at pains to stress that the prohibition under  Article  22
    "will depend on the nature of the enquiry and the circumstances of each
    case".

54. It will also be evident that, even if the  United  Kingdom  authorities
    were to obtain the express consent of the person concerned, a breach of
    Article 22 would still arise, if the ensuing direct contact would  lead
    to one or more of the results described in Article 22(b).

55. For these reasons, it is wrong to interpret paragraph 38(vii) of VT  as
    holding that consent is a legal necessity in all circumstances,  or  as
    implying that, if consent is given, there  can  be  no  question  of  a
    breach of Article 22.

56. With that in mind, we turn to the DVR in the present case.  There is no
    indication in the report that the official  from  the  High  Commission
    gave the name or other personal details of the appellant to the  police
    in Sylhet.  The enquiry merely referred to  numbered  FIRs  and  charge
    sheets, each of which were said  to  have  been  issued  on  particular
    dates.

57. As the official  discovered  by  his  or  her  own  inspection  of  the
    register, there was no FIR 30 dated 5 January 2011.   FIRs  28  and  29
    were not dated until the following day. FIR 23  had  been  filed  on  6
    January 2010, not 10 January 2010, as  asserted  in  the  document  put
    forward by the appellant.  The official also noted  that  none  of  the
    dates and names in the documents submitted by the appellant matched any
    of the details contained in the register.

58. Having regard to Article 22 and paragraph 339IA, it  is  manifest  that
    the FIR exercise could not rationally be said to have created a risk to
    the appellant, if returned to Bangladesh.

59. That position is not affected by the point that, if the FIRs and charge
    sheets as produced had been genuine, then the official's enquiry of the
    police, made by reference to  specifically  numbered  FIRs  and  charge
    sheets, would, of course, have led to the police being informed of  the
    appellant's  name  and  to  the  inference  that  the  United   Kingdom
    authorities were enquiring about the appellant, in  the  context  of  a
    likely claim by him to be in need of international protection from  the
    authorities in Bangladesh.

60. The fact that, in this scenario,  the  documentation  would  have  been
    verified as correct  would,  plainly,  have  materially  supported  the
    appellant's claim to a very significant extent.  That is likely to have
    led to a different outcome for the appellant, irrespective  of  whether
    the risk might have increased as a result of the  enquiry  having  been
    made.   In  any  event,  in  those  hypothetical   circumstances,   the
    respondent could be expected to have regard to that increased risk,  in
    determining whether international protection should be granted  to  the
    appellant.

61. In an email dated 25 June 2018, dealing with the DVR in this case,  the
    respondent has confirmed that it has never  been  normal  practice  for
    those conducting a  verification  to  give  the  names  of  the  person
    concerned. The email also states that,  if  the  verification  exercise
    were to be conducted today, the official would now ask only to see  the
    relevant register and would not give the authorities  the  FIR  number.
    Thus, in the scenario discussed in paragraphs 59 and  60  above,  there
    would have been no increased risk to  the  person  concerned.  For  the
    reasons we have given, however, this has no impact on what happened  in
    the present case.



(b) Alleged failure to consider evidence

62. So far as ground (b) is concerned, it is trite law that a judicial fact-
    finder does not have to refer expressly  to  each  and  every  item  of
    evidence.  There was no indication in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that any emphasis was placed by Counsel for the appellant upon
    the medical evidence or photographs, said to emanate  from  Bangladesh.
    In any event, the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave  entirely  sustainable
    reasons for finding that the core of the appellant's claim  was  false.
    The appellant had, unquestionably, seen fit to  put  forward  documents
    that had been found as a result of the DVR exercise to be  fakes.   The
    appellant has not begun to show why, in  the  light  of  that  striking
    fact, any other personal documentation he put forward should fall to be
    regarded as discharging the  evidential  burden.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant's account is  said  to  be  compatible  with  the  background
    evidence, likewise, takes his case no further.

63. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to find  as  he
    did at paragraph 27, concerning other  significant  problems  with  the
    appellant's credibility.



(c) Alleged bias

64. We turn, finally, to ground (c).

65. As we have already noted, Counsel who appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge filed a witness statement, which accompanied the grounds
    of application for permission to appeal, stating  what,  in  her  view,
    occurred at the hearing.  As we have also seen,  the  judge,  upon  the
    request of the Upper Tribunal, gave his  written  observations  on  the
    statement.  These were communicated to the parties in February 2018.

66. At the commencement of the hearing before us  on  26  June,  Ms  Seehra
    applied for an adjournment.  She did so on the ground that Counsel  had
    not provided a reply to  the  judge's  observations.   Ms  Seehra  did,
    however, tell us that she thought Counsel  was  nevertheless  aware  of
    those observations.

67. We were entirely unpersuaded by Ms Seehra's application.   The  judge's
    observations had been communicated approximately four months before the
    Upper Tribunal hearing.  There had, accordingly, been  ample  time  for
    instructing solicitors to contact Counsel to enquire  whether  she  had
    any reply to make to the judge's observations.

68. An allegation of bias against a judge is a serious matter.   If  it  is
    made, the appellate court or tribunal will expect all proper  steps  to
    be taken by the person making it, in the light of a response  from  the
    judge.

69. In the present case, steps should have been taken, in  advance  of  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, to obtain a reply from Counsel  or,  at  least,
    ascertain her stance, following sight of the judge's observations.

70. The failure is, in our view, compounded by the fact that  on  22  June,
    only four days before  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  the  appellant's
    solicitors filed a supplementary witness statement  of  the  appellant,
    dated 21 June 2018, in which the appellant, apparently  for  the  first
    time, comments upon what happened at the First-tier Tribunal hearing in
    October 2017.

71. In this statement, the appellant asserts that, when his Counsel  wanted
    to speak  to  the  judge,  the  latter  told  her  to  stop  and  "kept
    interrupting"  her.   Conversely,  when  the  Presenting  Officer   was
    speaking "the judge allowed  the  HOPO  to  speak  freely  without  any
    obstruction".

72. This caused the appellant to say the following:-

         "7.  Immediately I felt that the judge was being  more  lenient  to
             the Home Office.  The judge appeared to be  verbally  scolding
             my barrister when she tried to advance further submissions  to
             the court.

         ...

         12.  It was very obvious that the judge sided with the Home  Office
             from the beginning because there is very little  reference  to
             my documents or information I provided for the hearing made at
             the hearing.  It may be more so  because  the  judge  did  not
             allow [my] barrister to present my case properly  to  make  an
             informed decision."

73. Leaving aside the fact that this witness statement was filed in  breach
    of directions, it is manifestly problematic.   It  comes  from  someone
    who, on any rational view, had seen fit to put forward false  documents
    in connection with a belated claim for international  protection.   The
    appellant's  explanation  that  documents  of  this  kind  relating  to
    political opponents are kept secret does not begin  to  deal  with  the
    outcome of the document verification exercise.

74. Even on its own terms, the  appellant's  statement  sheds  no  relevant
    light on ground (c).  The appellant, so far as we  are  aware,  had  no
    prior experience of substantive immigration tribunal  hearings  in  the
    United Kingdom, when he attended the hearing in  October  2017.   Since
    the appellant required the assistance of  an  interpreter,  it  is,  at
    best, doubtful how much he understood what was being said by the  judge
    and the representatives.

75. In particular, the fact that the judge  had  more  verbal  interactions
    with the appellant's barrister than with the Presenting  Officer  tells
    us nothing of relevance.  The appellant bore the burden of proof, which
    meant that it was for his  Counsel  to  persuade  the  judge  that  the
    refusal of the appellant's protection claim should be overturned.

76. The statement describes an interaction that the appellant says  he  had
    with the interpreter.  It  is  wholly  inappropriate  for  a  court  or
    tribunal-appointed interpreter to have his or her private conversations
    with an appellant put forward as evidence; particularly if - as appears
    to be the case - the interpreter has not been told that this was to  be
    done.

77. In the light of all this, it was wrong for the appellant to put forward
    this supplementary witness statement, as supportive of  his  allegation
    of bias against the judge.

78. At this point, we should state that those advising the appellant sought
    confirmation of their bias allegation from the Presenting  Officer  who
    appeared at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  In the event, a  response
    was received, shortly before the hearing before us in June  2018;  but,
    in the interests of fairness, we informed Ms Seehra and Mr Clarke  that
    we would  not  take  the  response  into  account,  given  the  limited
    opportunity that Ms Seehra had had to deal with it.

79. Having considered the judge's decision,  Counsel's  statement  and  the
    judge's observations, we are in no doubt that the appellant has  failed
    to make good the allegation of bias against the judge.  It is  apparent
    that the judge was unimpressed by what he regarded (understandably)  as
    a number of deficiencies in the way  in  which  those  acting  for  the
    appellant had prepared for the appeal  hearing.   The  judge  was  also
    troubled  by   Counsel's   approach   to   re-examination   and,   more
    particularly, in what he took to be her reaction to his observations on
    this matter.  It is common ground that the  judge  accused  Counsel  of
    being "impertinent".

80. Overall, it is plain that the hearing was, at times,  fractious.   That
    does not, however, come close to demonstrating that the judge failed to
    afford the appellant a fair hearing.

81. Members of the Bar are expected to put their clients' cases fearlessly.
     As a general matter, if Counsel concludes during a  hearing  that  the
    judge is behaving in an inappropriate manner, Counsel  has  a  duty  to
    raise that matter with the judge, there and then.   In  this  way,  the
    issue will, at the very least, be recorded in  the  judge's  record  of
    proceedings and, ideally, in the record of Counsel and/or  his  or  her
    instructing solicitor.

82. The fact that an allegation of bias is not made until an application is
    filed for permission to appeal is not, of course, determinative of  the
    issue.  Each case must turn on its own facts  and  circumstances.   The
    appellate court of tribunal may,  nevertheless,  be  entitled  to  have
    regard to the absence of any challenge at  the  hearing,  or  at  least
    before receipt of the decision, in determining the allegation.

83. It is self-evident that the challenges of the  present  kind  would  be
    resolved far more  easily  if  hearings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  were   officially   recorded.    The
    expenditure that would be required has to be set  against  the  expense
    and delay inherent in having to deal with allegations of  bias  in  the
    way that has been necessary in this case.

84. Although we are fully  satisfied  that  the  judge's  decision  is  not
    tainted by bias, the judge does not escape criticism.  In paragraph  5,
    dealing with the re-examination of the appellant, the judge said:-

         "I reminded [Counsel] ... if she continues with a second attempt at
         examination-in-chief (after cross-examination had been concluded on
         the point) Miss Gill may seek a second chance at cross-examination.
          [Counsel] said she does not wish to take the  matter  further.   I
         asked [Counsel] to pause whilst I recorded matters in my Notes  and
         she said 'please do'.  It  is  very  commendable  of  [Counsel]  to
         permit me the opportunity to make notes."

85.   That passage, we are sorry to say, is sarcastic.  Sarcasm has no  part
    to play in written judicial decisions.



G. Decision

86.  For the reasons we have given, there is no merit in ground (a), (b)  or
    (c).  The appellant's appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                         Signed                      Dated:    September
                         2018






                         The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                         President of the Upper Tribunal
                         Immigration and Asylum Chamber
