
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

RK (Allowed appeals - service on respondent) Albania [2015] UKUT 00331
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2015                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                             SIR STEPHEN SILBER
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, of counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller (Oxford)

1. Service by the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  determination  allowing  the
appeal on the Presenting Officers'  Unit  in  Cardiff  rather  than  on  the
Specialist Appeals Team in Angel Square was good service  despite  what  was
said to be an agreement to serve all allowed appeals  on  the  Angel  Square
team.

2. Accordingly on the evidence before it,  the  Upper  Tribunal  upheld  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal to refuse  to  admit  the  Secretary  of
State's appeal from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  the  appeal
was out of time and it was not in the interests of justice to extend time.

                                  DECISION

    1. Following a hearing on  24th  April  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
       claimant) from a decision by the Secretary of State to  deport  him.
       The claimant is a citizen of Albania who has lived in  this  country
       since the age of 16 and he had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a spouse of a British Citizen. They have  three  children.
       The determination of the First-tier Tribunal was  promulgated  on  1
       May 2014.

    2. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the First-
       tier Tribunal. The application for permission was received on 16 May
       2014.  First-tier Judge Pirotta granted permission,  stating  simply
       that the application was in time.

    3. On 3rd October 2014 Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice  President,  and  Deputy
       Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge, sitting as  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       found that the  question  of  whether  the  application  was  to  be
       admitted had not yet been determined, that it fell to the First-tier
       Tribunal to determine it in order to complete the  consideration  of
       the  application  and  went  on  to  refuse  to  extend  time.   The
       determination was promulgated on 3rd December 2014. The grounds  for
       an extension of time before the First-tier Tribunal were as follows:

           "It is respectfully asked that the  Tribunal  extends  the  time
           limit for making this application.   The  main  reason  for  the
           delay was because the Specialist Appeals Team (SAT) on behalf of
           the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  receive  the  determination
           directly from the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal within  the  2
           day limit of receipt following the date of the determination  as
           per the agreed procedure.  Corroboration of the late receipt  of
           this determination can be seen by the date  stamp  on  the  IA60
           (see the stamp  SAT  Admin  received  9  May  2014).   It  would
           therefore seem that delivery of this determination  was  delayed
           prior to arrival in SAT.


           Having now reviewed the decision, it is considered that there is
           a fundamental error in the approach of the  First-tier  Tribunal
           and that grounds should be lodged.  It is  considered  that  the
           merits of the  present  application  are  strong  and  that  the
           interests of justice should not be  jeopardised  by  what  is  a
           relatively minor delay.  It is submitted that the delay was  not
           on account of SAT and they  have  endeavoured  to  submit  these
           grounds within 5 working days of receipt.  An extension of  time
           is respectfully requested."


    4. The First-tier Tribunal stated as follows:

           "4. Investigations have  shown  that  there  appears  to  be  an
           arrangement between the Secretary  of  State  and  the  Tribunal
           under which an appeal which is dismissed has  its  determination
           sent to the Presenting Officers' Unit, but an  appeal  which  is
           allowed has its determination sent  to  the  Specialist  Appeals
           Team at Lunar House.


           5. Whether that arrangement is lawful  within  the  Rules  is  a
           matter which may cause some  question,  but  in  any  event  the
           position in the present case was that  the  Secretary  of  State
           apparently accepted, that the application was made out of  time;
           but despite having had an extra week of having the determination
           in her hands, made no apparent attempt to speed  the  submission
           of the application any more than would have  been  the  case  if
           time had begun to run one week later."

    5. The First-tier Tribunal found there was no good reason for extending
       time and, as required by rule 24(4)(b) of the Asylum and Immigration
       Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230),  did  not  admit  the
       application.[1] The Tribunal concluded by stating that the Secretary
       of State  had  the  opportunity  of  renewing  the  application  for
       permission to the Upper Tribunal, if so advised.

    6. This the Secretary of State did. However, in a further complication,
       the Upper Tribunal received  the  application  out  of  time  on  10
       February 2015.

    7. Mr Duffy submitted that the point was a simple one.  In  effect  the
       Tribunal had an agreement to send all appeals which had been allowed
       (apart from asylum appeals which had a different procedure) to Angel
       Square in London. We note that  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds
       point out that the First-tier Tribunal was in error in referring  to
       allowed appeals being sent to Lunar House in Croydon.  Such  appeals
       should, it was said, be sent to Angel Square to a  centralised  team
       referred to in the annexes to the grounds  of  appeal  variously  as
       "The Specialist Appeals Team" (SAT) or "The  Allowed  Appeals  Admin
       Team."  Mr Duffy referred to an email from the  Home  Office  to  HM
       Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) sent on  10  December  2014  to
       which   was   attached   "a   revised    list    clarifying    where
       determinations/notices should be sent." In breach of this  agreement
       the Tribunal had sent the decision to the Presenting Officers'  Unit
       in Cardiff where it was received on 2nd  May  2014.  Such  a  course
       would only have been appropriate where  the  appeal  was  dismissed.
       Dismissed appeals were to be notified to the appropriate  Presenting
       Officers' unit for  the  particular  court  centre  (the  First-tier
       Tribunal had sat in Newport.)

    8. The document was then sent by internal mail to Angel Square where it
       was received on 9 May 2014. The application for permission to appeal
       was lodged on 16th May which was within 5 working days of receipt at
       the correct address for service, Angel Square.

    9. It was acknowledged that the Cardiff Unit had received the  decision
       on 2nd May and could have faxed it to Angel Square. However, it  had
       been received on a Friday and Monday was a Bank Holiday.  The  first
       realistic opportunity to send the decision by internal post  was  on
       Tuesday 6th and it would take two to three  working  days  to  reach
       Angel Square.

   10. Mr Duffy further acknowledged there was no witness statement to back
       up the contentions in the grounds of appeal and the annexes. However
       the grounds had been settled by a senior  member  of  the  team.  He
       pointed out that grounds of appeal  in  deportation  cases  required
       sensitive handling and needed to be cleared for example by the Legal
       Advice Bureau. Grounds were not submitted automatically.

   11. Mr Duffy referred to rule 56 of the 2005 Rules which reads,  so  far
       as is material, as follows:

           "(1) Every party, and any person  representing  a  party,  must
           notify the Tribunal in writing of  a  postal  address  at  which
           documents may be served on  him  and  of  any  changes  to  that
           address.
           (2) Until a party or representative notifies the Tribunal of  a
           change of address, any document served on him at the most recent
           address which he has notified to the Tribunal shall be deemed to
           have been properly served on him. ..."


   12. He submitted that the arrangements with the Tribunal  complied  with
       the requirements of rule 56. The Home Office  handled  4000  appeals
       per week and  the  agreed  procedures  saved  time  and  money.  The
       procedures worked in the majority of cases and what had happened  in
       this appeal was a slip. Accordingly he submitted in summary that the
       decision had not been  sent  to  the  correct  address  and  in  the
       alternative that there was a good reason for extending time.

   13. Mr Gilbert referred to rule 55:

           "55.-(1) Any document which is required or permitted  by  these
           Rules or by a direction of the Tribunal to  be  filed  with  the
           Tribunal, or served on any person may be-
           (a) delivered, or sent by post, to an address;
           (b) sent via a document exchange to a document  exchange  number
           or address;
           (c) sent by fax to a fax number; or
           (d) sent by e-mail to an e-mail address,
           specified for that purpose by the Tribunal or person to whom the
           document is directed.


           (2) A document to be served on  an  individual  may  be  served
           personally by leaving it with that individual.


           (3) Where a person has notified the Tribunal that he is  acting
           as the representative of an appellant and has given  an  address
           for service, if a document is served on the  appellant,  a  copy
           must  also  at  the  same  time  be  sent  to  the   appellant's
           representative.


           (4) If any document is served on a person who has notified  the
           Tribunal that he is acting as the representative of a party,  it
           shall be deemed to have been served on that party.


           (5) Subject to paragraph (6), any document that is served on  a
           person in accordance with this rule shall, unless  the  contrary
           is proved, be deemed to be served-
           (a) where the document is sent by post or document exchange from
           and to a place within the United  Kingdom,  on  the  second  day
           after it was sent;
           (b) where the document is sent by post or document exchange from
           or to a place outside the United Kingdom, on  the  twenty-eighth
           day after it was sent; and
           (c) in any other case, on the day on which the document was sent
           or delivered to, or left with, that person.


           (6) Any notice of appeal which is served on a person under rule
           6(3)(b) or 6(4)(b) shall be treated as being served on  the  day
           on which it is received by that person.


           (7) Where the United Kingdom Representative has given notice to
           the Tribunal under rule 49 in relation to any  proceedings,  any
           document which is required by these Rules or by a  direction  of
           the Tribunal to be served on a party in those  proceedings  must
           also be served on the United Kingdom Representative."


   14. He submitted it was clear from rule 55(4) and (5) that the  decision
       had been served on the Presenting Officers' Unit in Cardiff and that
       the Presenting Officers represented  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
       decision had not been sent simply to the Home Office.

   15. Mr Gilbert disputed what was said in the grounds and annexes and  in
       particular  pointed  out  that  the  email  relied  upon  from   the
       respondent to the Tribunal was dated  10  December  2014.  This  was
       after the relevant dates of promulgation in this case. There was  no
       evidence that the procedures were applicable at the time. He further
       submitted that matters were compounded by subsequent irregularities.
       As confirmed in an email to the Tribunal on 30  January  2015  those
       instructing him had contacted the Tribunal on 16, 23 and 30  January
       to be told that no application for permission  to  appeal  had  been
       received from the Home Office.  Accordingly  the  challenge  to  the
       decision of the panel chaired by the Vice President was also out  of
       time. The time limit was 14 days under rule 21(3)(aa)(i). The appeal
       had been lodged after two months on 10 February. The Home Office had
       not provided the appellant with the original appeal.

   16. Mr Gilbert said the appellant and his family  found  the  procedures
       extremely stressful. His appeal  had  been  successful  and  he  had
       thought that there was to be no challenge by the Home Office.

   17. Mr Duffy referred to  an  email  from  the  Home  Office  Specialist
       Appeals Team (which incidentally bears the date  10  February  2014)
       stating that the appeal was lodged  by  fax  on  12  December  2014.
       Although there was no fax transmission sheet a screen shot was  said
       to show that permission to appeal had been sought  as  asserted.  Mr
       Duffy acknowledged there was no witness statement to verify this.

   18. We reserved our decision.

   19. Mr Duffy faces multiple difficulties in this case. The first is that
       the decision was clearly served on the Presenting Officers' Unit  in
       Cardiff on 2nd May. There is no  indication  that  service  was  not
       accepted there.  On  the  contrary  the  email  was  in  due  course
       forwarded by internal mail to Angel  Square.  If  the  Secretary  of
       State was relying on an agreement or rule  56  the  document  should
       have been promptly returned to the Tribunal for proper  service.  As
       it is, by accepting service as Mr Gilbert pointed out under rule 55,
       time starting running immediately.

   20. The second problem is that it is  not  demonstrated  by  appropriate
       evidence that the agreement as claimed was in effect at the relevant
       time. The email  evidencing  the  claimed  agreement  postdates  the
       relevant period. If it was necessary to  "clarify"  where  documents
       were  to  be  sent  that  does  not  indicate  that  the   preceding
       arrangements were clear. There is no  witness  statement  (as  there
       should have been) confirming the matters asserted in the grounds  of
       appeal in relation to the first delay or the second delay.

   21. On the limited material before us we find that at best there was  an
       understanding between the Home Office and the Tribunal as  to  where
       documents were to be  sent.  We  are  unable  to  accept  that  this
       understanding was sufficiently formalised to fall within rule 56. We
       do not need in the circumstances to decide  whether  rule  56  would
       cover the arrangements. The language of rule 56 is perhaps  not  apt
       to cover service of decisions to different  addresses  depending  on
       the outcome, in effect requiring the Tribunal to act as an  external
       filing clerk. Further the email  refers  to  "our  agreement"  about
       where documents are to be sent. There is no need  for  an  agreement
       under rule 56. All that is required is  a  notification.  A  further
       feature is that by the  time  the  email  was  sent  the  rules  had
       changed. The 2005 rules had been replaced by The Tribunal  Procedure
       (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014
       (SI 2014/2604) with  effect  from  20  October  2014.  We  were  not
       addressed on the application of the current rules to any agreement.

   22. It does appear to us that there is no good reason to extend time  in
       this case for the reasons given by the panel  chaired  by  the  Vice
       President and in the light of our comments above,  quite apart  from
       the  subsequent  procedural  irregularity  (delay  in  applying  for
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal). Mr Duffy said that  the
       current arrangement worked well and saved  resources  and  that  the
       present case was  a  slip.  He  referred  to  the  sensitivities  of
       deportation appeals  in  particular.  It  would  not  appear  to  be
       unreasonable in those circumstances for staff to check decisions  in
       deportation appeals (clearly identified by the letters "DA") and  to
       take prompt action to fax or email the small number of  cases  which
       have slipped through the net to Angel Square.  The  very  importance
       and sensitivity of deportation  appeals  requires  more  expeditious
       handling than was seen in this case even allowing for a slip on  the
       part of the Tribunal.


   23. The First-tier Tribunal did not admit the  application.  Under  rule
       21(7)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI
       2008/2698) we "must only admit the application if the Upper Tribunal
       considers that it is in the interests of justice for it to  do  so."
       For the reasons given above we do not so find.


   24. The application is not admitted.


    Anonymity
    The First-tier Tribunal in its decision of 1st May 2014 made  an  order
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005. We were not invited to  rescind  or  vary  that
    order. We continue it (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

    Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
                                  22 May 2015
-----------------------
[1] But see now the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

