
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Fernandez (Dissidents and defectors) Cuba CG [2011] UKUT 00343 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 June 2011                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                         ERIK IVAN VEITIA FERNANDEZ


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr  E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust

    (i)  The human rights situation in Cuba is dismal  and  the  government
    continues to deny its citizens basic civil and political rights.


      (ii)  The authorities are intolerant  of  any  form  of  unauthorised
    opposition to its political agenda and the law is used  to  criminalise
    dissent.


      (iii) The term "dissident" in the context of Cuba does not refer to a
    homogenous group  of  people  but  can  refer  to  anyone  engaging  in
    activities regarded by the authorities as  contrary  to  its  political
    agenda.


      (iv) The "dangerousness" law is used  as  a  political  tool  against
    those seen as dissidents or otherwise opposing the  regime's  political
    agenda


      (v) Those regarded by the Cuban authorities as opponents,  dissidents
    or defectors can be at risk of  treatment  of  sufficient  severity  to
    amount to persecution.  Whether a particular individual will be at such
    risk depends upon his background and profile but in  general  terms  an
    active political  opponent  who  has  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities or someone who has been openly disloyal to  the  regime  is
    likely to be at such risk.


      (vi)  This  guidance  replaces  that  given  in  OM  (Cuba  returning
    dissident) Cuba [2004] UKAIT 00120 which is no longer to be regarded as
    providing country guidance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is the resumed hearing of an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the determination of  an  Immigration  Judge  who  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against the decision made on 2 July 2010 to  remove
    him from the UK following a  decision  that  he  was  not  entitled  to
    asylum.  In this determination I will refer to the parties as they were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Fernandez as the appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Cuba born on 14 February 1967.  He  left
    Cuba on 27 August 1995 and went to Botswana where he lived  and  worked
    until he came to the UK in January 2006 following the  grant  of  entry
    clearance as a student.  He was granted further leave to remain in this
    capacity until 31 December 2008.  On 5  January  2009  he  applied  for
    further leave but this was refused on  11  August  2009  because  of  a
    failure to disclose a conviction. He did not attempt to regularise  his
    immigration status until 20 April 2010 when  he  claimed  asylum.   His
    application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  the  respondent's
    decision letter dated 2 July 2010.  His appeal  against  this  decision
    was allowed following a hearing on 17 September 2010.   The  respondent
    was subsequently granted permission to appeal and  in  a  determination
    issued on 18 January 2011 the Upper Tribunal (Irwin J  and  SIJ  Eshun)
    found that the judge had erred  in  law  such  that  the  determination
    should be set aside for the following reasons:

         "1.      The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  reached
             by Immigration  Judge  Abebrese  following  a  hearing  on  17
             September 2010 promulgated on 13 October 2010.  In the  course
             of this judgment we will refer to the parties by  name,  since
             the description appellant and respondent might be confusing.


         2. Mr Fernandez was born on 14 February 1967 and is  a  citizen  of
             Cuba.  His  personal  history  is  well   set   out   in   the
             determination, but in very short summary he moved to Russia in
             1986 to study physics and mathematics. He returned to Cuba  in
             1991, remaining there until 1995, and in the  course  of  that
             period his case is that he got into various difficulties  with
             the Cuban authorities.  He subsequently lived  and  worked  in
             Botswana and there were complicated events  and  relationships
             between Mr  Fernandez,  the  Botswana  government,  the  Cuban
             authorities and Mr Fernandez's attempts to work in  Russia  or
             to achieve other changes in his life.


         3. In 2006 Mr Fernandez  left  Botswana  and  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom on the  grounds  that  he  had  been  accepted  for  a
             teaching post.  He hit a difficulty with achieving a job as  a
             teaching assistant, but in fact decided to enrol as a  student
             in the United Kingdom, since he could by then  not  return  to
             Botswana.  He has renewed successfully  his  student  visa  on
             three  occasions.   As  the  Immigration   Judge   found,   Mr
             Fernandez's wife joined him  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  his
             dependant.   However,   that   relationship   broke   up    in
             circumstances of some complexity.  Mr Fernandez  sought  legal
             advice and was advised to claim asylum in 2010.


         4. On 1 July 2010 the decision was made to refuse to  grant  asylum
             and indeed on  2  July  a  decision  was  made  to  remove  Mr
             Fernandez from the United Kingdom. The decision letter recites
             the  basis  of  the  asylum  claim  and  a  good  deal  of  Mr
             Fernandez's personal   history  as  well  as  the  immigration
             background.  The letter also recites  some  of  the  objective
             information on the general policy regarding human  rights  and
             the treatment of detainees in Cuba. Then in passages beginning
             at paragraph 25 of the  decision  letter,  the  heart  of  the
             reasoning on the part of the Secretary of State  is  set  out.
             The Secretary of State noted that Mr Fernandez has


                  'Generally provided a consistent account of  your  reasons
                  for claiming asylum in the  UK  and,  further,  that  your
                  description of Cuban immigration policy as  given  ...  is
                  consistent with the background information ...'


         5. However, the Secretary of State also  noted  that  Mr  Fernandez
             departed from Cuba originally with a two  year  contract  from
             the Cuban authorities authorising his employment in  Botswana,
             and that therefore the original departure from Cuba  was  with
             the  indefinite  or   permanent   exit   permission   of   the
             authorities.  The Secretary of  State  went  on  to  note  the
             rather  complicated  history  of  applications  to  renew   Mr
             Fernandez's Cuban passport.  The relevant text reads:


                  'It is further noted you claim a Cuban passport  is  valid
                  for six years but must be renewed every two years ...  You
                  state that you renewed your passport  twice  in  2000  and
                  2002.  However you go on to claim that after your passport
                  was withheld in 1998 and you demanded it  be  returned  to
                  you, your passport was returned with an issue date of 1999
                  and would therefore have expired in 2005.  You then  state
                  that you only began renewing after this  passport  expired
                  ... Finally you claim you were issued with a new  passport
                  in  2004  or  2005  in  Botswana  ...  In   your   further
                  representations ... you add that you renewed your passport
                  in the UK in 2007 and 2008 and at this point you were told
                  that you could only return to  Cuba  for  21  days,  after
                  which you would have to leave ... You further  state  that
                  your family have advised you that nothing has changed  and
                  the authorities are waiting for your to  return  in  order
                  for them to "make an example out of you".'


         6. Given that history, the Secretary of State took the view that it
             had not been necessary for Mr Fernandez to renew his  passport
             in 2007 or 2008 and that,  given  the  various  irregularities
             present  in  the  account,  it  was  not  accepted   that   Mr
             Fernandez's immigration status  in  Cuba  is  as  he  claimed.
             Moreover, the letter notes that when Mr Fernandez was asked if
             he had ever attempted to have a ban  on  his  return  to  Cuba
             lifted:


                  'You stated that you had "never bothered" because  of  the
                  way you were treated by the Cuban authorities.'


             The Secretary of State therefore concluded that  Mr  Fernandez
             had not provided any evidence that he had tried and failed  to
             obtain a permit to enter Cuba from the Cuban  Embassy  in  the
             UK.  Thus it was not accepted that he had taken adequate steps
             to ascertain whether or not  he  would  be  granted  an  entry
             permit to Cuba and hence he had not  sufficiently  established
             that he was banned from the country.


         7. The decision letter went on to rely upon what was said to be the
             status of perceived dissidents in Cuba, as considered  in  the
             country guidance case OM (Cuba returning  dissident)  Cuba  CG
             [2004] UKAIT 00120.  The Secretary of State suggested that the
             thrust of the OM case was that even someone with the  asserted
             past history of the  claimant  in  OM  might  very  well  live
             reasonably in Cuba and obtain an exit permit.


         8. There is no Record of  Proceedings  of  the  hearing  before  IJ
             Abebrese but it is clear from the determination that much  the
             same position was adopted by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
             course of the hearing.  In the course of  his  long  paragraph
             11, the IJ made a reference to the Human Rights Watch  Report,
             stating that the Cuban government forbids  its  citizens  from
             leaving or returning to Cuba without first obtaining  official
             authorisation, concluding that the Human Rights  Watch  Report
             gives some support to the claims of Mr Fernandez  in  relation
             to the conduct of the Cuban authorities.  The judge  concluded
             that the incidents which Mr Fernandez relies upon


                  'are not challenge [sic] by the respondents adequately via
                  the objective evidence to extent  [sic]  that  it  suggest
                  [sic] that the Cuban authorities could not have behaved in
                  the manner suggested by the appellant in his evidence.'


             Later in the same paragraph the  Immigration  Judge  concluded
             that the extracts from objective sources


                  'suggest  [sic]  that  his  evidence  has  an  element  of
                  credibility and that individuals with a similar profile as
                  himself who have sought to return have been  arrested  and
                  dealt with severely by the authorities in Cuba.'


             The IJ went on to  conclude  'I  found  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant credible and that the facts  of  this  case  can  be
             distinguished from OM (Cuba returning dissident) Cuba CG UKIAT
             00120', concluded that the appellant "would be of interest  to
             the authorities" [sic] and concluded it would be  unreasonable
             and unduly harsh to expect the appellant 'to exercise internal
             flight option for reasons stated above'.


         9. Senior Immigration Judge  Waumsley  granted  permission  to  the
             Secretary of State to  appeal  on  1  November  2010.   It  is
             helpful to recite the reasons:


                  'In substance, the grounds on  which  the  respondent  has
                  applied for permission to  appeal  may  be  summarised  as
                  follows:


                  1.    The  Immigration   Judge   failed   to   give   any,
                      alternatively adequate,  reasons  for  accepting  the
                      appellant's account;


                  2.   He failed to  give  any  reasons  for  distinguishing
                      binding country guidance authority.'


         10.      Before us, Mr Norton for the  Secretary  of  State  argued
             that both these grounds were made out. There was  no  adequate
             analysis, he said, as to why the Immigration Judge  found  the
             credibility of Mr Fernandez established in  the  face  of  the
             points relied on by the Secretary of State,  particularly  the
             confusing  facts  surrounding  a  Botswana  "defection",   the
             confusing evidence about passport applications  and  the  fact
             that Mr Fernandez had been present in the United  Kingdom  for
             four years on  student  visas  before  seeking  to  apply  for
             asylum.   Whilst  that  last  point  had  not   been   drafted
             specifically as part of the grounds of appeal, in our view  it
             properly forms part of the consideration of  the  question  of
             credibility.   The  second  complaint  before  us   from   the
             Secretary of State was that the Immigration  Judge  completely
             failed to set out any basis for distinguishing this case  from
             the guidance given in OM.


         11.      In reply, Miss Easty submitted with energy  and  eloquence
             that credibility was in large measure a matter  of  assessment
             of the individual witness,  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
             given  reasons,  including  linking  his  conclusions  to  the
             objective evidence submitted  in  the  hearing  and  that  the
             credibility point was not made out.  She  submitted  that  the
             Immigration Judge had of course been fully  aware  of  the  OM
             case and indeed had made direct reference  to  it.   Moreover,
             the facts of the appellant in OM were  widely  different  from
             those in the case of Fernandez  and  the  Immigration  Judge's
             conclusions  sat  well  with  the   distinction   between   Mr
             Fernandez's position and that of the claimant in OM.


         12.      In our view the general finding as to credibility by  this
             Immigration Judge was sufficient. It  is  not  appropriate  to
             require an essay from an Immigration Judge  upon  the  general
             topic of credibility.  We do observe that it would  have  been
             desirable to have been somewhat fuller in giving  reasons  but
             we would not have set aside the decision  of  the  Immigration
             Judge on this basis alone.


         13.      There were, however, specific areas which did  require  to
             be  dealt  with  by  the  IJ.   These  included  the  evidence
             concerning passport applications and the delay in applying for
             asylum, an issue which, even if  not  strictly  arising  under
             Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment   of
             Claimants etc) Act 2004, was an important consideration in the
             case.


         14.      We also conclude that  the  Immigration  Judge  needed  to
             consider  more  fully  the  implications  of  the  OM  country
             guidance case. The format of OM, reading as it  does  much  as
             might an ordinary judgment, does not lend  itself  necessarily
             to the application of the case to other individuals. So far as
             anyone's researches have detected, this is  the  only  country
             guidance case dealing with Cuba and it is  now  several  years
             old.  We note in passing it might be appropriate  to  consider
             whether there should be a more  comprehensive  and  up-to-date
             country guidance in relation to Cuba.  Be that as it may,  the
             case was one to which the Immigration Judge was obliged to pay
             proper attention.  There may well be a valid distinction to be
             made between the position of Mr Fernandez and OM, but  the  IJ
             had an obligation to set out clearly the reasons  why  he  was
             able to do so.  He did not do so.  Once  again,  there  is  no
             need to write an essay on such a point, but  a  disapplication
             of a country case must be reasoned, so that  all  parties  can
             understand the basis on which the conclusion has been reached.
             Perhaps the most pertinent point arising is that  part  of  OM
             which deals with the likely treatment of OM on return to  Cuba
             and observes that  the  prospects  were  of  treatment  which,
             whilst unacceptable in  a  liberal  western  democracy,  could
             fairly be described as amounting to no more than "harassment".
              If such was indeed the prospect for Mr Fernandez, that  would
             be unlikely to found a successful claim for asylum.


         15.      For these reasons we find that there were errors of law on
             the part of the Immigration Judge in handling this  case.   We
             therefore set aside the decision, allow the appeal and  direct
             that there must  be  a  continuation  hearing  to  remake  the
             decision.


         16.      After the substance of our decision  was  communicated  to
             the parties, Miss Easty submitted  that  Mr  Fernandez  should
             retain the benefit of factual findings made by the Immigration
             Judge, including factual findings as to his credibility in the
             continued hearing. She  has  placed  in  writing  the  factual
             findings which it is submitted should be preserved:


                  '1.   The  appellant  has  openly  criticised  the   Cuban
                      government and the exploitation of the  Cuban  people
                      (determination para 11 line 4).


                  2.    The  appellant  has  experienced  difficulties  when
                      attempting to express his views in Cuba as  far  back
                      as 1992/1993 (determination para 11 line 5)


                  3.   The appellant and his wife were banned from  Cuba  in
                      1997 (determination para 11 line 8/16)


                  4.   The appellant suffered the  treatment  by  the  Cuban
                      authorities as described in  Botswana  (determination
                      para 11 line 4 up from the bottom of the page)


                  5.   The appellant will be permitted entry for 21 days  to
                      Cuba and then will be arrested (determination para 11
                      page 5 lines 6 to 8).


                  6.   The appellant assisted  individuals  to  defect  from
                      Cuba for a number of  years  (determination  para  11
                      page 4 lines 24/27).


                  7.   The appellant would  be  of  interest  to  the  Cuban
                      authorities (determination para 11 page 5  lines  27-
                      29).


                  8.    The  appellant's  ex-wife  has  been   banned   from
                      returning to Cuba.  The appellant encouraged his  ex-
                      wife to defect (determination para 11 page 5 line  10
                      from the bottom of the page).


                  9.   The appellant has been  downgraded since 1999 and  he
                      is now a Cuban citizen who is  no  longer  under  the
                      Cuban government (determination para 11 page 5 line 7
                      from the bottom of the page).'


         17.      Miss Easty made reference to the general proposition  that
             appellants should retain the benefit  of  favourable  existing
             factual findings and conclusions.   It  is  correct  that  the
             starting point  for  any  reconsideration  or  remaking  of  a
             decision is that factual findings and conclusions arising from
             those findings which are unaffected by the error of  law  need
             not be revisited: see DK (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the
             Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1747.  It would  be  wrong  in
             principle to deprive a party of a finding in his or her favour
             and to dismantle an edifice  of  reasoning,  when  neither  is
             necessary in order to remedy the legal error contained in  the
             original decision: see Sedley LJ in Mukarkar  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1045.   It  is
             equally correct that where a  Tribunal  has  made  a  positive
             credibility finding in relation to a given appellant as to his
             account  of  past   events,   the   reconsidering   Tribunal's
             assessment on hearing the appellant about more  recent  events
             that he was not in fact credible witness, has been held not to
             amount to new evidence entitling the Tribunal to go behind the
             first Tribunal's conclusions as to credibility: MY (Turkey)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
             477.


         18.      However, in  our  judgment  the  situation  here  requires
             careful distinction. The  errors  of  law  identified  in  the
             Immigration Judge's decision are relevant to  aspects  of  the
             case affecting the credibility of Mr Fernandez  at  the  time.
             These are not new  matters  in  the  sense  identified  in  MY
             (Turkey) and the relevant error of law does not stand separate
             entirely from the credibility of Mr Fernandez.  The matter can
             be analysed in this way. The purpose of the obligation to give
             reasons in the course  of  a  determination  is  so  that  all
             parties can follow how a given conclusion was reached. In this
             instance, the parties need to follow why the Immigration Judge
             was able to dismiss the Secretary of  State's  attack  on  the
             credibility based on the points we  have  identified.   If  IJ
             Abebrese had stated his reasons fully, and  the  Secretary  of
             State had felt that they were  inadequate,  the  appeal  could
             have been mounted on the reasons given. In such  circumstances
             as this, it  would  be  wrong  to  preclude  the  judge  on  a
             continuation hearing from  reaching  adverse  implications  on
             credibility, if his or her findings  on  the  specific  issues
             which  require  further  consideration  mean  that  revisiting
             credibility is appropriate. The Secretary of State has made no
             concession on  this  issue  even  during  consideration  after
             argument and submissions in this case.


         19.      It follows that the appropriate course on the continuation
             hearing is to focus on those matters which we have  identified
             as errors in the determination  of  IJ  Abebrese.   If  having
             reached  conclusions  on  those  matters,  the  judge  in  the
             continued hearing finds  those  conclusions  must  necessarily
             logically reflect on the conclusions of IJ Abebrese favourable
             to Mr Fernandez identified by Miss Easty, then  those  matters
             may be reopened.


         20.      For those reasons the determination of IJ Abebrese is  set
             aside and a continuation hearing is ordered as set out above."

The Evidence

3.    At the resumed hearing before me the  appellant  gave  oral  evidence.
    He relied on the documentary evidence produced at  the  hearing  before
    the judge (1A 1-172), the additional evidence produced for this hearing
    in 2A 1-14,  an expert report from Ms Joanne Prud'homme 3A, 1-12 and  a
    report from Human Rights Watch  dated  1  June  2011  3A,  13-14.   The
    respondent relied on the appeal papers which include annexes A-J and  a
    bundle R 1-52.  A full list of the documentary evidence is set  out  in
    the annex.

The Appellant 's Witness Statement

4.    The appellant set out the basis of his claim in his witness  statement
    dated 24 August 2010 (1A 6-18).  This is a more detailed version of the
    summary (Annex E)  submitted  to  the  respondent  in  support  of  his
    application.  In light of the issues arising in this appeal, I need  to
    summarise the appellant's evidence in some  detail.   He  was  born  in
    February 1967 in Ciego de Avila but  moved  with  his  family  (father,
    mother, two brothers and two sisters) at the age  of  5  to  Guantanamo
    where he went to school.  He then studied Russian at the University  of
    the Orient in Santiago de Cuba and as he finished his secondary studies
    with good grades he was given the opportunity  of  becoming  a  medical
    doctor in Cuba or a physics teacher in Russia.  In 1984 his father  who
    was the Provincial Director for a government  enterprise  in  Cuba  had
    been rewarded with a trip to the Soviet Union and came back saying  how
    different Russia was from  Cuba.   This  was  the  motivation  for  the
    appellant deciding to go to Russia.

5.    He travelled there in 1986 to study physics  and  mathematics  at  the
    University of Lipetsk.  In 1999 he married a Russian citizen and to  do
    so he had to seek permission from the Cuban Embassy.  He returned  from
    Russia in 1993 and his  wife  was  able  to  join  him  in  Cuba.   The
    appellant worked in Guantanamo teaching at secondary school and then at
    an adult college.  He had been a member of the Youth  Communist  League
    when he was in senior secondary school but he gave  up  his  membership
    because of his disappointment with the  Cuban  Communist  Party  having
    seen the changes that were taking place in Eastern Europe. When he  had
    been in Russia he had been allowed to travel back every two  years.  He
    had hoped that the economic  and  political  situation  in  Cuba  would
    improve but every time he returned it was worse.

6.    He became outspoken about the situation  but  did  not  get  into  any
    trouble until 1992  when  he  was  with  a  group  of  fellow  students
    discussing politics and criticising the government. He said  that  Cuba
    was a dictatorship and that there was no freedom.   Someone  must  have
    reported them because the group  was  surrounded  by  the  police.  The
    appellant and the other students were held overnight and then  released
    with a warning not to discuss politics.   In  1993  the  appellant  was
    selling off some of the items he had  brought  from  Russia.  This  was
    reported.  He was taken to the  police  station  and  detained  for  24
    hours. His property was confiscated and not returned.  He was fined  60
    Cuban pesos and told that it was forbidden to sell to anybody  but  the
    government.

7.    The appellant said that  this  incident  re-affirmed  his  resolve  to
    leave Cuba but he kept a low profile in part because it would have been
    very difficult for his wife if he had been put into  jail  for  a  long
    period of time.  However, he had a personal link with  someone  working
    in the Ministry of Education who found out about  a  recruitment  drive
    for teachers to work in Botswana.  He was  recommended  and  in  August
    1994 interviewed by a representative  from  the  Botswana  Ministry  of
    Education and selected for one of the posts. He travelled  to  Botswana
    in August 1995.  Meanwhile his wife had returned to Russia because  she
    was finding life in Cuba too difficult. The appellant had explored  the
    possibility of returning to Russia with her but that was  not  possible
    and she returned on her own in May/June 1994.

8.    In Botswana the appellant worked as a physics  and  chemistry  teacher
    in Moeng College, Moeng.  He had a two year  employment  contract  with
    the Cuban government and  a  three  year  contract  with  the  Botswana
    government. He said that this was a  means  of  control  by  the  Cuban
    authorities: if he behaved well for two years he would be rewarded with
    the extra third year even though he was entitled to it.  His salary was
    paid by the Botswana government but he was required to  contribute  75%
    of it to the Cuban government.  He was prepared  to  do  this  for  the
    first two years to honour his contract.

9.    In July 1996 he asked for permission  from  the  Cuban  government  to
    visit his wife in Russia not having seen her for two years but this was
    refused.  He was told that he had to spend his holidays  in  Cuba.   In
    late 1996 or 1997 the appellant attended  the  annual  meeting  of  the
    members of the Cuban teaching community in Botswana and publicly  asked
    the Cuban Ambassador to explain why he was not  allowed  to  travel  to
    Russia on holiday. The Ambassador replied  that  he  did  not  have  to
    explain decisions taken by the Cuban Embassy and that the appellant was
    being disrespectful to the authorities.   On  10  June  1997  at  Moeng
    College the appellant was visited by four Cuban officials including the
    Ambassador and they tried to persuade him  that  he  should  return  to
    Cuba.

10.   He said that he was not prepared to do  so  and  they  threatened  him
    with forcible return and prosecution if he did not  sign  a  letter  of
    resignation to the Botswana government.  The appellant refused to  sign
    the letter or to resign.  The  Cuban  authorities  then  wrote  to  the
    Ministry of Education in Botswana requiring the  immediate  termination
    of the appellant's contract but  by  this  time  he  had  instructed  a
    solicitor in Gaborone who prevented the contract from being terminated.
     However, in a meeting  with  the  Director  of  the  Teaching  Service
    Management in Botswana he was told  that  his  contract  would  not  be
    renewed because of the implications it might have for relations between
    Botswana and Cuba but he was allowed to work until the end of the third
    year of his contract.

11.   In July 1997 the appellant obtained a divorce from his wife in  Russia
    having by that time formed a relationship with another Cuban  national,
    Lena Velasquez, who was working as a  nurse  in  Botswana.   The  Cuban
    authorities discovered about this relationship because he was  visiting
    her regularly.  As he was deemed to be a traitor, Lena was banned  from
    Cuba and informed of this in writing.  The appellant provided a copy of
    this letter in  support  of  his  application.   In  October  1999  the
    appellant asked for his account to be changed so that his salary  could
    be paid into his own account, not into  the  general  account  for  the
    Cuban government.    He said that both his and  Lena's  relatives  were
    harassed at times in Cuba and that  this  was  standard  practice  when
    someone defected. His passport had been retained by the Cuban  Embassy,
    this is also being standard practice as a form of insurance that  Cuban
    citizens would not attempt to travel elsewhere.  When he requested  the
    return of his passport it was refused. The appellant again sought legal
    advice in Botswana and he was able to secure the return of his passport
    but was  told  by  the  Cuban  authorities  that  he  was  banned  from
    returning.

12.   The appellant was  able  to  continue  working  in  Botswana  and  was
    employed by the University of Botswana as a demonstrator and  tutor  in
    the physics department.  The returned  passport  identified  him  as  a
    Cuban citizen who was  no  longer  under  the  Cuban  government.   The
    appellant now became actively involved in campaigning and helping other
    Cubans to defect, assisting them with paperwork through his lawyer  and
    finding accommodation and work for them.  A community of about  fifteen
    to twenty defectors was created; some are still living in Botswana  but
    others have moved to Spain or the USA.  The appellant claimed that  the
    Cuban authorities were and are still doing everything in their power to
    stop them  working  and  is  trying  to  get  them  back  to  Cuba  for
    punishment.

13.   The appellant and Lena had a daughter, Mara, born on  28  March  2004.
    The Cuban authorities have  refused  to  issue  Mara  with  a  passport
    despite her being born to Cuban parents.  The appellant's  relationship
    with Lena came to an end in 2005 when in  his  own  words  he  met  and
    became infatuated with another Cuban national, Amaryllis, who had  also
    decided to defect from the Cuban authorities whilst in  Botswana.   She
    had been a member of the  Communist  Party  and  had  been  politically
    active and trusted to take on official duties for the Cuban  government
    in Botswana and for her to defect was regarded as a  serious  loss  for
    Cuba.

14.   In May 2005 the appellant resigned from his  post  at  the  university
    because he decided that he wanted to teach abroad.   He applied  to  an
    agency representing a UK education institution and was led  to  believe
    that he could apply to work as a teacher in the UK.   He  was  told  he
    should enter the UK on a student visa, then have an English  assessment
    and he would be able to switch to a visa that allowed him to work.   On
    27 January 2006 he arrived in the UK on a valid student  visa  but  was
    told by the college where he was sent that  he  was  not  going  to  be
    employed but would be undergoing teaching practice.  The appellant felt
    that he had been misled. He could not return to Botswana because he had
    given everything up to teach in the  UK  and  certainly  he  could  not
    return to Cuba because he was  banned  and  afraid  of  being  sent  to
    prison.  He then enrolled on two or three courses and worked part-time.
     In November 2006 Amaryllis joined him in the UK and they were  married
    on 30 April 2007.

15.   The appellant applied successfully for  extensions  of  his  leave  to
    remain as a student but his last application was refused because  of  a
    failure to disclose a conviction for drink driving.  The appellant said
    that he was unaware that it was classed as a criminal offence in the UK
    and he had not disclosed it when he  had  made  a  previous  successful
    application.  The appellant then sought legal advice and was advised to
    claim asylum.  Initially he and Amaryllis, despite a breakdown in their
    relationship, decided that it would be better if they entered into  the
    asylum process together but after they claimed Amaryllis told him  that
    she was pregnant by another man and he then pursued his own claim.

16.   The appellant  says  that  he  fears  returning  to  Cuba  because  he
    believes his life would be in danger.  He  would  be  imprisoned  as  a
    result  his  defection  and  subsequent  actions  against   the   Cuban
    authorities. He fears being  charged  with  "dangerousness"  under  the
    Cuban criminal code which allows the authorities to punish someone  for
    dissent, disobedience and insubordination.  He would not be able to  go
    back and live a normal life in Cuba not having lived there since  1995.
    He would not and could not conform to the accepted Cuban  way  of  life
    because of the lack of freedom that would necessarily involve.

The Appellant's Oral Evidence

17.   In  his  oral  evidence  the  appellant  confirmed  that  his  witness
    statement was true. He said that if he returned to Cuba,  he  would  be
    persecuted and harassed by the authorities and he  particularly  feared
    being put in prison and beaten up.  His family would be harassed and he
    had been subjected to such behaviour in the past.

18.   In cross-examination he said that he had been in fear of returning  to
    Cuba since 1997-8 after he defected.  He confirmed that he  had  had  a
    contract from the Cuban government for two years but with the  Botswana
    government for three years and that they ran parallel.  In  the  second
    year he had broken ties with the Cuban government.  He  explained  that
    Botswana had had a  lack  of  teachers  and  that  there  had  been  an
    agreement  between  the  Botswana  and  Cuban  governments  to   supply
    teachers.  He said that although the Cuban authorities wanted  to  look
    as though they were behaving like  good  Samaritans,  in  reality  they
    needed foreign currency and this was why the arrangement was  that  the
    salaries were paid into a general account for the Cuban government.  As
    he had signed a contract for three years with the Botswana  government,
    he had been able to resist the attempts by  the  Cuban  authorities  to
    persuade the Botswana government to  terminate  his  contract.  He  had
    engaged a solicitor in Botswana who had acted on his behalf.   However,
    that contract had not been renewed when it came to an end  after  three
    years but he had been able to continue working in Botswana.

19.   He had arrived in the UK  in  2006.  He  accepted  that  he  had  only
    claimed asylum some four years later, saying that he did not know  that
    he had to claim asylum within three days  of  arriving.   He  had  also
    assumed that he would be able to teach in this country.  At that  stage
    he would not have been able to go  to  Cuba  nor  could  he  return  to
    Botswana once he had left.  He accepted that he had been granted a visa
    as a student but had been told by the representative of the college  he
    applied to that he would be teaching and that the  college  would  sort
    everything out.  He said that he had had no experience of  teaching  in
    Europe and that was why he had come to the UK.   He  found  himself  in
    what he described as a no way out situation as he had no place  to  go.
    He was banned from Cuba and could not return to Botswana.   Later  when
    he sought legal advice, he was advised to claim  asylum.   He  had  not
    claimed financial support pending his asylum  claim  despite  the  fact
    that he was not allowed to work.

20.   He explained that he genuinely did not realise  that  he  should  have
    declared his drink driving conviction when making his last  application
    for an extension of leave as a student.  He had come to the UK with the
    intention of teaching.  His daughter  Mara  was  undocumented  and  was
    still living with her mother who was working in Botswana.  He had tried
    to seek assistance from human rights organisations in Botswana but they
    had not been willing to help.  He confirmed that he had  helped  Cubans
    defect when he was in Botswana.  People had wanted to defect but he had
    been the first one to do so and he had been watched to see  what  would
    happen to him.  He had managed to secure a position at  the  University
    of Botswana and then started to help  others  to  defect,  giving  them
    assistance and directing them to solicitors.  He  explained  that  when
    Cubans had contracts to work abroad they had to pay their salaries into
    a  Cuban  government  account   and   that   the   authorities   rented
    accommodation where they lived together.  When he had defected  he  had
    had to leave and fend for himself.  He had helped about fifteen  people
    defect whilst in Botswana.

21.   The Cuban authorities had their own  agents  and  would  be  aware  of
    everything that was being done.   He  accepted  that  some  people  had
    ostracised him and regarded him as a traitor.   He  accepted  that  the
    single photocopy page produced by Mr Tufan at the hearing was from  his
    passport. Someone leaving Cuba had to have an official stamp to do  so.
    He accepted that it was fortunate that after being arrested in Cuba  he
    was able to leave but he had friends who helped him get  his  interview
    with the Botswana government.  He said that when he was young he was  a
    fanatical supporter of the system in Cuba but things  began  to  change
    after his father went to Russia but then came back  and  told  him  how
    they had practically everything there in contrast to the  situation  in
    Cuba.  He said that he had also been impressed with  the  situation  in
    Russia when he had studied there.  He confirmed that Amaryllis had  had
    a daughter, Dina, who was not his child as they were now divorced.   Mr
    Tufan was able to confirm that Amaryllis had been granted discretionary
    leave to remain for three years.

The Respondent's Decision

22.   The respondent has set out her reasons for  refusing  the  appellant's
    application in the decision letter dated 2 July 2010.   The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant had generally provided a consistent account
    of his reasons for claiming asylum  and that his description  of  Cuban
    immigration policy  was  consistent  with  the  background  information
    cited.   It  was  therefore  accepted  that  he  may  have  experienced
    difficulties  with  the  Cuban  government  as  regards  his  residency
    arrangements and employment in Botswana after his  contract  with  them
    ended (para 25).  It was also noted that on his own  admission  he  had
    left Cuba with a two year contract from the Cuban  authorities  and  it
    was therefore considered that he was granted an indefinite or permanent
    exit permit to live and work abroad and this indicated that he might be
    permitted to re-enter Cuba in accordance with  its  immigration  policy
    (para 26).

23.   She also noted that  the  appellant  said  that  he  had  renewed  his
    passport twice in 2000 and 2002 but had claimed that after his passport
    was withheld in 1998 he had demanded its return  and  it  was  returned
    with an issue date of 1999 and would therefore have  expired  in  2005.
    The respondent's records indicated that he held a Cuban passport  valid
    from 2003 to 2009 and that it would not have been necessary for him  to
    renew his passport in 2007  or  2008  as  he  had  claimed  in  further
    representations.  The appellant had been asked at interview if  he  had
    ever attempted to have the ban on his return lifted and he said that he
    had never bothered because of the way he had been treated by the  Cuban
    authorities (para 30).  The respondent considered  that  the  appellant
    had not provided any evidence that he had tried and failed to obtain  a
    permit to enter Cuba from the Cuban Embassy in the UK although  he  had
    said in his further representations that he would in fact be  permitted
    to enter Cuba albeit for only 21 days.

24.   The respondent then referred to the position of  perceived  dissidents
    in Cuba as set out in the country guidance determination of  OM  (Cuban
    returning dissidents) Cuba CG [2004] UKAIT 00120.  That  guidance  lent
    some support to the appellant's claim that whilst the Cuban  government
    was no longer interested in him, they  did  not  want  him  back.   His
    circumstances were similar to the applicant in the sense that they both
    claimed to have expressed views that were critical of  the  authorities
    yet had never been seriously in trouble with  those  authorities.   The
    letter  noted  that  the  determination  had  not  found  that   Cubans
    expressing adverse political views or those who  had  overstayed  their
    exit permits would face a real risk on return. (para 34)

25.   She then considered  whether  there  would  be  a  potential  risk  of
    imprisonment on return for overstaying his exit permit  or  because  he
    claimed asylum in the UK but in reliance on OM it was found that  there
    was no such risk and that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that
    the Cuban authorities had refused him re-entry.  The letter  also  made
    the point  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  an  adequate
    explanation for his failure to claim  asylum  on  arrival  in  the  UK:
    despite arriving in January 2006 he had  chosen  not  to  claim  asylum
    until  April  2010.   Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    employment history in Botswana was not in dispute, that the account  of
    his  experiences  with  the  Cuban  government  was   consistent   with
    background information and that he may have experienced  some  problems
    with the Cuban authorities as regards his immigration status,  she  was
    not satisfied that he would be at real risk of persecution  or  serious
    harm on return.

Background Information

26.   The respondent's  decision  letter  sets  out  background  information
    taken from the US Department of State Human Rights Report 2009 dated 11
    March 2010.  This includes the following:

         "The government continued to deny its citizens  their  basic  human
         rights,  including  the  right  to  change  their  government   and
         committed numerous and serious abuses.  The following human  rights
         problems  were  reported:  beatings  and  abuse  of  prisoners  and
         detainees, harsh and life threatening prison conditions,  including
         denial of medical care; harassment, beatings, and  threats  against
         political opponents by government recruited mobs, police, and state
         security officials  acting  with  impunity;  arbitrary  arrest  and
         detention of human rights  advocates  and  members  of  independent
         professional organisations; and denial of  their  trial,  including
         for at least 194 political prisoners and as many as  5,000  persons
         who have been convicted of potential 'dangerousness' without  being
         charged with any specific crime."

         "The government continued to subject opposition activists and their
         families to abuse by organising  'acts  of  repudiation'  or  stage
         public protests, often in front of their  homes.  Participants were
         drawn from the CP, the Union of Communist Youth  (UJC),  Committees
         for the Defence of the Revolution (CDRs), the Federation  of  Cuban
         Women, and the Association of Veterans of the Cuban  Revolution  or
         were brought in by the  authorities  from  nearby  work  places  or
         schools.  More actions included shouting insults  and  obscenities,
         sometimes over loudspeakers, and throwing rocks, fruit,  and  other
         objects at their  homes.   In  extreme  cases  mobs  assaulted  the
         victims or their relatives or damaged their homes  or  property  as
         was the case  in  the  9  July  arrest  of  Dr  Darsi  Ferer,  when
         neighbours, apparently acting in coordination  with  the  arresting
         officers, ransacked Ferer's home."

27.   The letter also cites the COI key documents:  Cuba,  dated  29/10/2008
    as follows:

         "In their Annual Report on Human Rights 2007, published March 2008,
         the SEO stated:


             'No opposition of the government is tolerated and citizens are
             denied basic civil, political and economic rights.  The  Cuban
             government claims that restrictions  on  individual  liberties
             are  necessary  to  counter  internal  complicity   with   the
             perceived threat of invasion by the US ... On 10 December 2007
             Foreign Minister Perez Roque announced that  Cuba  would  sign
             the International Covenants on civil and political rights  and
             on economic, social and cultural rights in early 2008."

28. This background information has been supplemented by further  documents
    produced by the parties at the hearing.  In the US Department of  State
    Background Note for Cuba dated 25  March  2010  (R1-31)  the  following
    appears:

         "The government incarcerates people for  their  peaceful  political
         beliefs or activities.  The total number of political prisoners and
         detainees is unknown, because the government has not disclosed such
         information and keeps  its  prisons  off  limits  to  human  rights
         organisations and international human rights monitors.   One  local
         human rights organisation lists more than 200  political  prisoners
         currently detained in Cuba in addition to as many as  5,000  people
         sentenced for 'dangerousness'.


         and


         "Although the  government  has  encouraged  a  controlled  form  of
         'constructive criticism' the Cuban  government  continues  to  show
         little tolerance for unauthorised  dissent.  The  Cuban  government
         utilises short term detentions to break  up  peaceful  marches  and
         demonstrations,  and  routinely  resorts  to  organised   mobs   of
         civilians to harass and physically attack the opposition,  claiming
         that these are spontaneous citizen 'counter- demonstrations."

29.   The Human Rights Watch, New Castro, Same Cuba: Political Prisoners  in
    the Post-Fidel era dated  18  November  2009  at  1A  41  says  in  the
    Executive Summary:

         "Raul Castro's government has relied in particular on  a  provision
         of the Cuban criminal  code  that  allows  the  state  to  imprison
         individuals before they have committed a crime,  on  the  suspicion
         that  they  might  commit  an  offence   in   the   future.    This
         'dangerousness  provision'  is  overtly  political,   defining   as
         'dangerous' any behaviour that  contradicts  socialist  norms.  The
         most Orwellian of Cuba's laws, it captures the essence of the Cuban
         government's repressive mindset, which views  anyone who  acts  out
         of step with the government as a potential threat and  thus  worthy
         of imprisonment."

         "The Raul Castro government has applied the 'dangerousness law' not
         only to dissenters and critics of the government, but  to  a  broad
         range of people who choose not to cooperate  with  the  state.   We
         found that failing to attend pro-government rallies, not  belonging
         to official  party  organisations  and  being  unemployed  are  all
         considered  signs  of  'antisocial'  behaviour,  and  may  lead  to
         'official warnings' and even incarceration in Raul  Castro's  Cuba.
         In a January 2009 campaign called  'operation  victory'  dozens  of
         individuals based in eastern Cuba -  most  of  them  youth  -  were
         charged with 'dangerousness' and being unemployed.   So was  a  man
         from Sancti Spiritus who could not find  work  because  of   health
         problems, and was sentenced to two years'  imprisonment  in  August
         2008 for being unemployed."

         "It is important to note that the term 'dissidents'  in  the  Cuban
         context does not refer to a homogenous group of people who share  a
         single ideology, affiliation or common objective.  Rather it refers
         to anyone who  ...  engages  in  activities  the  government  deems
         contrary to its political agenda. Some dissidents may advocate  the
         democratic change or reform of the social system from within; while
         others may be apolitical, focusing instead on a single  issue  such
         as the right to practise their region or organise a trade union."

30.   In a Human  Rights  Watch  Report,  Cuba:  Stop  Imprisoning  Peaceful
    Dissidents" of 1 June 2011 the following is reported:

         "The conviction of six dissidents in summary trials  for  doing  no
         more  than  exercising  their  fundamental  rights  highlights  the
         continuing abuse of the criminal justice system to repress  dissent
         in Cuba: Human Rights Watch said  today  Raul  Castro's  government
         should immediately release the prisoners who were  given  sentences
         ranging   from  two  to  five  years  in  prison,  and  cease   all
         politically motivated repression against Cubans who exercise  their
         fundamental freedoms, says Human Rights Watch."


         "Cuba's laws empower the state to criminalise virtually  all  forms
         of dissent, and grant officials extraordinary authority to penalise
         people who try to exercise their basic rights.  The Cuban  criminal
         code penalises anyone who 'threatens, libels or slanders,  defames,
         affronts or in any other way insults or offends, whether the spoken
         word or inviting, the dignity or decorum of  an  authority,  public
         functionary, or his agents or  auxiliaries'.   The  violations  are
         punishable by one to three years in prison,  if  directed  at  high
         ranking officials.  Such laws  violate  the  right  to  freedom  of
         expression recognised in Article 19 of the  International  Covenant
         on Civil and Political Rights - signed by Cuba in 2008."

The Expert Evidence

31.   In support of the appeal before the judge the appellant  relied  on  a
    report from Wilfredo Allen dated 8 June 2010.  Mr Allen's background is
    set out in the report.  He gives a history  of  involvement  in  issues
    relating to Cuba since 1978 primarily acting as an attorney for various
    dissident Cuban dissidents and activists and says that he has regularly
    represented  government  officials,  athletes,  ballet  dancers,   film
    makers, artists, doctors and other professionals who have defected from
    Cuba.  He describes the appellant as a well-educated and as someone who
    must have been well thought of when he was sent to  the  former  Soviet
    Union and well prepared and talented to  have  been  permitted  by  the
    Cuban government to work in Botswana. His view is  that  the  appellant
    would be  persecuted  in  Cuba  due  to  his  political  opinions.   He
    commented that when he returned to Cuba and expressed opposition to the
    regime he was lucky that he was able to  go  to  Botswana  rather  than
    being put in detention and isolation.  The Cuban government obtained  a
    great benefit from individuals such as the appellant, both economic and
    political.  The appellant was able to receive nearly two-thirds of  his
    salary in hard currency much needed by the authorities.  It used highly
    trained professionals teaching and working abroad as  examples  of  the
    victories of the revolution and the Cuban  authorities'  commitment  to
    the Third World.

32.   In his opinion the appellant's actions in  Botswana  viewed  from  the
    perspective of the Cuban government would  be  considered  as  treason.
    The fact that he abandoned the delegation, instituted a legal action to
    stop the delivery of his salary to the Cuban government and  encouraged
    others to defect and break with  the  government  were  examples  of  a
    political opinion which  the  government  would  seek  to  repress.  He
    assumed that the Cuban government did not take  direct  action  against
    him in Botswana to avoid a scandal but the position would be  different
    if he was returned to Cuba.  He says that the respondent has  erred  in
    the view it has taken of the appellant's passport. The Cuban government
    issues passports with no restrictions to individuals  who  work  abroad
    for the Cuban government  whereas  individuals  who  leave  the  island
    through family  petitions  usually  have  a  permanent  departure  date
    stamped on  their  passport.    In  such  cases  property  in  Cuba  is
    surrendered and they can only return with a visa.  Those whose passport
    is stamped  with  foreign  residence  are  allowed  to  live  in  third
    countries and return as they wish.  The appellant could only return  to
    Cuba with the authorisation of the government  and  such  return  would
    subject him to persecution for his past actions.

33.   At this hearing the appellant relied on a further report  prepared  by
    Ms J Prud'homme dated  22  June  2011.   She  holds  an  LLM  from  the
    University of Essex in national rights law and  a  BA  in  history  and
    human rights from Bard  College,  New  York.   She  has  worked  as  an
    international human rights officer for the  Jacob  Blaustein  Institute
    for the Advancement of Human Rights and with the US member  of  the  UN
    Committee against Torture. She has carried out research  projects  into
    asylum and refugee cases and investigative research into risks faced by
    US detained Algerians if returned to Algeria.  She  has  worked  as  an
    associate with the Asia  Division  of  the  Human  Rights  Watch.   The
    purpose of her report  is  described  as  preparing  an  objective  and
    neutral report on the likely treatment the appellant could   expect  to
    face if returned to Cuba particularly in the light of his defection and
    the fact that he has encouraged others to do so.   She  considers  what
    laws he may be prosecuted under, what detention conditions are like  in
    Cuba, the significance of the fact that he is no longer banned and  has
    been told he may return for up to  21  days.   She  has  consulted  and
    interviewed a number of people with knowledge of the situation in  Cuba
    as identified in her report.

34.   She confirms the notoriously poor human rights  record  of  the  Cuban
    authorities  noting  in  particular  the   annual   report   from   the
    Organisation of the American States Inter-American Commission on  Human
    Rights  of  2010  (IACHR2010),  commenting  on  the   "persistence   of
    structural situations that have a  serious  and  grave  impact  on  the
    enjoyment and perseverance of the fundamental human rights enshrined in
    the American Declaration."  She also refers to the consensus  of  those
    she has interviewed that the human rights situation in Cuba  is  dismal
    with routine  violations  of  the  rights  to  freedom  of  expression,
    assembly, thought and freedom  from  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention.
    Those she interviewed also agreed that  the  persecution  of  political
    dissidents by the Cuban government continued unabated and described the
    government as being highly repressive of its citizens.

35.   So far as the treatment  of  defectors  and  political  dissidents  is
    concerned, she says:

         "The ongoing repression of political dissidents in  Cuba  has  been
         well-documented by a number of credible international sources.   Mr
         Allen referred to the 'revolving door  of  repression',  describing
         the Cuban government's pattern of arresting groups  of  dissidents,
         subjecting them to unfair trials and arbitrary detention, releasing
         them on the condition that they leave that the  country,  and  then
         arresting a new group of dissidents. This  pattern  has  also  been
         discussed by commentator Douglas Payne. The most recent example  is
         the recent release of the 'Black Spring' prisoners, a group  of  75
         journalists, dissidents and activists who were  arrested  in  2003,
         the last of whom were released in March this year.  The majority of
         those prisoners were exiled and emigrated to Spain.  Some emigrated
         to the United States, and a small number remained in  Cuba.   Since
         their release, the government has arrested  more  dissidents,  thus
         repeating  the  pattern.   According  to  Ms  Akerman,  some   such
         prisoners have been detained for up to 30 years."

    She then refers to the law on "dangerousness" as follows:

         "The law on 'dangerousness', which many human  rights  groups  have
         criticised for being overly vague can be found in article 72 of the
         Criminal  Code.   'Dangerousness'  is  defined  as:  'The   special
         proclivity of a person to  commit  crimes,  shown  by  the  conduct
         observed in  manifest  contradiction  to  the  norms  of  socialist
         morality'.  Article 74 of the Criminal Code provides  clarification
         for how 'dangerous' persons are identified: 'The dangerous state is
         noted when the subject displays one of  the  following  indicia  of
         'dangerousness' (a) habitual drunkenness and alcoholism,  (b)  drug
         addiction; (c) antisocial conduct.'  Article 74 further states that
         'one who habitually breaks the rules of social coexistence  through
         acts of violence or other proactive acts that violates  the  rights
         of all others, who by his or her  conduct  in  general  breaks  the
         rules of coexistence or disturbs the  order  of  the  community  or
         lives, as a social parasite, from the work for others, or  exploits
         or practices socially reprehensible vices to be  dangerous  due  to
         antisocial conduct."

    From this definition it is clear that the law on 'dangerousness' is  so
    vague and broad that it can be used to  prosecute  virtually  any  act.
    According to the IACHR 2010  report,  the  concept  of  "dangerousness"
    continues to be used by the Cuban government "as a  tool  of  political
    persecution and repression".

36.   She reports that those she interviewed explained that the  appellant's
    risk  of  persecution  by  the  government   was   increased   by   the
    particularities of his case. He  was  not  simply  a  defector  but  he
    defected from an official mission in Botswana, has been gone  from  the
    country for a very long time and in addition he has  helped  others  to
    defect.  These facts make the situation  significantly  more  dire  and
    according to some interviewees put  him  at  increased  risk  of  being
    prosecuted for serious political crimes.   Three  of  the  interviewees
    described the heavy importance placed on official missions by the Cuban
    government  as  opportunities  to  display  the  "successes"   of   the
    revolution and the appellant's defection during his time as  a  teacher
    on an official mission in Botswana  would  be  regarded  as  a  serious
    political crime as would his assistance in assisting others to defect.

37.   When asked about the likelihood of the Cuban  authorities  having  any
    interest in the appellant, the interviewees all agreed  that  this  was
    highly likely and all except for Mr  Allen said that it was most likely
    to various degrees that the appellant would be imprisoned  if  returned
    to Cuba.  All agreed that he would be made to  pay  for  his  political
    crime but there was a difference in how  he  would  be  punished.   One
    expressed the view  that  as  the  appellant  had  assisted  others  in
    defecting, this would put him at risk of being prosecuted  as  being  a
    suspected CIA agent or for trying to undermine  the  Cuban  mission  in
    Botswana.  Two said that there was a very strong  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would face imprisonment  and  one  that  would  it  would  be
    inevitable that he would be prosecuted  and  imprisoned.  There  was  a
    common view that so far as charges were concerned, the Cuban government
    could  essentially charge him with anything they pleased, as was  often
    the case for political dissidents.  It  was  another's  view  that  the
    appellant would be considered a traitor and he felt it more  like  that
    he would face time in a labour brigade rather than in a prison although
    he was the only person interviewed  who  took  this  view;  all  others
    thought it was likely the appellant would be prosecuted either  overtly
    for trying to undermine the revolution or for being a traitor or  would
    be prosecuted for smaller offences on false charges as has been done to
    other political dissidents.

38.   Ms Prud'homme sets out her conclusions as follows

         "Based on the information I have gathered and the information  made
         available to me by the attorney in this case, it is  my  considered
         opinion that the appellant's long absence from Cuba, his  defection
         from an official mission in Botswana  and  the  fact  that  he  has
         assisted others to  defect  puts  him  at  serious  risk  of  being
         prosecuted and imprisoned if  he  returns  to  Cuba.   The  charges
         against him could be for serious political  crimes,  or  for  petty
         charges. In addition, it is my opinion  based  on  the  information
         provided to me by  the  interviewees,  that  if  the  appellant  is
         returned he and his family will in all likelihood  face  government
         harassment and intimidation in the  form  of  public  denunciation,
         demonstrations outside their homes and even physical assaults; that
         he will be unable to find employment; and that  he  will  be  under
         close  government  scrutiny.   The  appellant's  account   of   his
         ostracisation from the Cuban community in Botswana and his fear  of
         being arrested and imprisoned upon return to  Cuba  are  consistent
         with the information provided to me by the interviewees  about  the
         treatment of defectors and those considered politically disloyal.


         All of the interviewees expressed their  strong  concern  over  the
         appellant's possible return to Cuba.  It was their  view  that  his
         defection from an  official  mission  as  a  teacher,  and  he  has
         assisted others in defecting, put him at increased risk  for  being
         targeted  for  harassment,  intimidation,  prosecution  and  either
         imprisonment or assignment to a labour brigade.   [One]  emphasised
         to me at the conclusion of my conversation  with  her  that,  'This
         asylum applicant should not return to Cuba under any circumstances.
         He would be going into the lion's den."

The Submissions

39.   Mr Tufan relied on  the  points  made  in  the  respondent's  decision
    letter and submitted that there  were  a  number  of  relevant  matters
    undermining the credibility of the appellant's claim  that  he  was  in
    fear of persecution on return to Cuba.  He had  come  to  this  country
    with entry clearance as a student but in fact said that he  thought  he
    was going to teach.  He had been granted a number of extensions but his
    final application was refused because of a failure to declare  a  drink
    driving offence. He had only claimed asylum in  2010  when  he  had  no
    other way of remaining in this country.  The appellant  may  well  have
    sought to remain in Botswana  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  Cuban
    authorities but there was no reason to believe  that  they  would  know
    that he had helped other people defect even if that was the  case.   He
    argued that the appellant would not now be perceived as someone who had
    worked against the Cuban regime.  He held a Cuban  passport  issued  in
    Paris which on its face was valid from 2003 to 2009.  He relied  on  OM
    arguing that the appellant fell into the same category as the applicant
    in that case, someone who might run into some problems as a  result  of
    being away from Cuba but who would not be at real risk of  persecution.



40.   Ms Easty submitted  that  the  appellant  had  explained  why  he  had
    delayed claiming asylum and  about  the  difficulties  he  had  had  in
    obtaining his passport from the Cuban authorities. There was no  proper
    basis for departing from the general credibility findings made  by  the
    judge. If returned to Cuba the appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution as a defector and as  someone  who  had  helped  others  to
    defect. He would be regarded as a dissident or  traitor  by  the  Cuban
    authorities.  She submitted  that  OM  was  an  unsatisfactory  country
    guidance case by current  standards.  In  any  event,  its  application
    should be limited to individuals who had limited exit permits  but  had
    failed to return in time.  The fact that the appellant would be able to
    return to Cuba for 21 days illustrated the extent of the danger he  was
    in.  If he was returned it was unlikely that he would be able to obtain
    a visa to leave before the 21 day period was over and if has overstayed
    that period, there would be a risk  of  arrest  and  imprisonment.  She
    submitted that the appellant's circumstances when set in the  light  of
    the background evidence including the expert evidence reports indicated
    that he would be at real risk of serious harm on return.

Assessment of the Appellant's Evidence

41.   The judge found that the appellant was generally credible and  at  the
    error of law hearing the Tribunal found that  although  it  would  have
    been desirable for fuller reasons to have been  given  that  would  not
    without more have justified setting aside his decision but  that  there
    were specific areas which should have been  dealt  with  including  the
    evidence about the passport applications and the delay in applying  for
    asylum.  The Tribunal held that  it  would  be  wrong  to  preclude  an
    adverse finding on credibility if the findings on the  specific  issues
    requiring further  consideration  meant  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    revisit the issue of credibility.

42.   Dealing firstly with the evidence about  the  passport,  this  is  not
    entirely straightforward.   In  his  witness  statement  the  appellant
    explained that when he was in Botswana his passport  was  held  by  the
    Cuban authorities but with the intervention of  his  solicitor  he  was
    able to obtain its return on 2 February 1999.  He says that  it  was  a
    different type of passport, one identifying him as a Cuban  citizen  no
    longer under the Cuban government.  In his statement he  says  that  he
    has provided the respondent with copies of the  correspondence  between
    the solicitor and the Cuban Consulate.  This is a reference to a letter
    from the appellant's Botswana solicitors dated  22  June  1998  to  the
    Cuban Consulate and its reply dated 8 June 1998.   These  letters  cast
    little further light on this particular issue.

43.   In his statement and in his  oral  evidence  the  appellant  explained
    that the passport had to be renewed every two years largely so that the
    Cuban authorities could levy a charge. In para 39(ii) of his  statement
    the appellant says that when he was interviewed he  tried  to  remember
    when he had renewed his passport.  He  accepts  that  the  Home  Office
    letter refers to electronic records  and  disputes  the  fact  that  he
    renewed his passport in 2007 or 2008 because it  expired  in  2009.  He
    says that regarding discrepancies in dates it is impossible for him  to
    remember every single  date  because  the  Home  Office  has  held  his
    passport for more than a year.  He cannot remember exactly when he last
    renewed his passport but he thinks it was around March 2008 in  London.
    For a Cuban passport to be valid, regardless  of  the  length  of   its
    validity, it needs  to  be  endorsed  every  two  years  by  the  Cuban
    authorities.  It was for this reason that he went to the Cuban  embassy
    with Amaryllis to find to what would happen if they tried to  go  back.
    It was then he discovered that he would only be allowed to  return  for
    21 days at a time and Amaryllis was told that she would not be  allowed
    to return at all.

44.   In his interview the appellant had been asked at Q151 why  he  thought
    he would not be allowed to go back to Cuba.  He  replied:  "Because  of
    all the problems we had before and  as  I  have  said  before  I  never
    actually bothered to  ask  them  and  also  because  of  my  daughter's
    problems with her passport and the  recognition  of  her  citizenship."
    The appellant was then asked at Q152 that if the Cuban embassy  renewed
    his passport twice then gave him a new one, that  would  indicate  that
    they still considered him a Cuban national and entitled  to  travel  to
    and from and live there.   The appellant's reply was

         "No, what happened is yes, you are a  Cuban  national  because  you
         never relinquished your citizenship so  what  happens  is  you  are
         still a Cuban national but you cannot go  into  your  country.  You
         cannot buy a ticket, go back and show up at the airport.  You  have
         to go to the Cuban Embassy to  pay  for  permission  to  enter  the
         country. Formally, you have to apply.  Then they tell you  'Oh.  We
         will come back to you' and after two to three weeks they  tell  you
         yes or no.  If you ever show up at any airport without having  that
         permission in your passport which is valid for one  year  only  you
         are immediately returned to where you came  from.  This  has  never
         happened to me because I never bothered to go there, but there  are
         cases that have happened to people before.  Another  thing  is  you
         have dual nationality, let's say British and Cuban citizenship, you
         cannot go to Cuba on British citizenship, you have to enter with  a
         Cuban passport as you are originally from Cuba."

45.   At the hearing a photocopy of one page  of  the  appellant's  passport
    was produced by Mr Tufan which the appellant  accepted  was  his.  This
    shows a Cuban passport issued in Paris and valid from 24 September 2003
    to 23 September 2009.  A question arose as to  why  it  was  issued  in
    Paris but the appellant explained that he had never been to France  and
    Paris was the place where new Cuban passports would be  issued  outside
    Cuba.  However, the rest of the passport was not produced  and  on  the
    basis of the evidence before me it does seem reasonably likely that any
    errors about the date when the passport was renewed arose from a simple
    error from which no adverse inference on  the  appellant's  credibility
    can be drawn.

46.   The questions to which I have referred in the  interview  deal  simply
    with whether the appellant is able to return to Cuba  and  what  formal
    requirements will be required by the Cuban authorities.   They  do  not
    deal with the issue of what might happen to  him  if  he  is  returned.
    That is dealt with at Q230 when the appellant was asked  why  he  could
    not simply apply for entry clearance for Cuba and it  was  put  to  him
    that he had not even tried to establish whether he would be allowed  to
    return.  The appellant replied that he had been in  communication  with
    his family and he knew that they were OK, at least in terms of  health,
    but he added that he was afraid because of all the problems he had been
    through in Botswana and he knew how the Cuban  government  behaved  and
    how they treated people with different opinions.   He said that it  did
    not make any sense to him to apply to see if he  would  be  allowed  to
    return to Cuba when he would be resigned to going straight to jail.  He
    said the Cuban authorities always remembered even though ten or fifteen
    years had passed.  As soon as they had  a  chance  of  messing  someone
    around and making them pay, they would.  When asked  at  Q232  what  he
    feared would happened if he went back to Cuba he said that he would  be
    imprisoned and  when he came out he would not be able to carry out  his
    normal life.

47.   I now turn to the question of the delay in the appellant applying  for
    asylum.  It is common ground that he arrived in the  UK  in  2006  with
    entry clearance as a student but did not claim asylum until  after  his
    leave to remain had expired and he  sought  legal  advice.  When  asked
    about his delay at interview he gave a variety of answers, saying  that
    he had claimed asylum when he did because he had grown tired of all the
    silly jobs and courses (Q188), that he  had  been  confused  about  the
    process and had submitted the claim to his lawyers  shortly  after  his
    visa application was refused but then later discovered that he  had  to
    claim in person (Q189) and finally that if he had been granted  further
    leave to remain he would still have claimed asylum (Q192).  In his oral
    evidence he said that he had not realised that he should  have  claimed
    asylum within three days of arriving in this country but was unable  to
    explain where the idea came from that there was a three day time  limit
    on claims.

48.   I find it difficult to believe, as the appellant  also  claimed,  that
    he had not known about being able to claim  asylum  until  he  received
    advice from his solicitor. When questioned further he said that when he
    had leave to be in this country he did not see that there was any  need
    to make a claim and it was only when his leave expired and his  options
    were running out that he chose to do so.  This seems to me to be nearer
    the truth of the matter.  I must take into account when  assessing  the
    credibility of his evidence but when this factor is looked  at  in  the
    light of the evidence as a whole I do not find that the  core  elements
    of his account are undermined to such an extent that  it  can  be  said
    that there is no reasonable degree of likelihood that they are correct.

49.   The appellant has given a consistent account  of  events  in  Botswana
    which the respondent accepted was consistent with  the  way  the  Cuban
    authorities  were  likely  to  behave.  The  appellant  supported   his
    application with documentary  evidence  confirming  his  employment  in
    Botswana and the fact that he instructed solicitors in Botswana to  act
    on his behalf when dealing with firstly the government of Botswana  and
    secondly the Cuban consulate.  I accept that the appellant subsequently
    helped and encouraged other  Cubans  to  defect.  The  fact  that  such
    defections took place in Botswana  is  also  confirmed  by  documentary
    evidence. He has also produced evidence  to  show  that  Lena  received
    documents from the Cuban authorities revoking her functions as a member
    of the Cuban Health Team and ordering her to return to Cuba because she
    had accepted into her house a collaborator who  had  broken  all  links
    with the Cuban mission.   She  remains  in  Botswana.   There  is  also
    documentary evidence to confirm  the  appellant's  attempts  to  obtain
    citizenship for his daughter Mara but apparently to no avail  and  that
    Amaryllis has been refused permission to return to Cuba.

50.   I am therefore not satisfied that there is any basis for reaching  any
    different view from that reached by  the  judge  that  the  appellant's
    evidence judged by the standard of the reasonable degree of  likelihood
    is generally credible.

Assessment of Risk on Return

51.   I must now consider whether there is a real risk of serious  harm  for
    the appellant on return to Cuba.  His case is that he would be regarded
    by the Cuban authorities as a defector and despite the passage of  time
    would still be of adverse interest to them because it  would  be  known
    that he had helped others defect.  The risk must  be  assessed  in  the
    light of the background evidence which shows that the Cuban authorities
    criminalise and take action against those perceived  as  dissidents.  A
    vaguely drafted law on dangerousness is used  against  individuals  who
    oppose the Cuban authorities or who are seen to  do  so  by  trying  to
    exercise basic rights  of  freedom  of  speech  and  belief  or  indeed
    indulging in any behaviour that is seen to contradict socialist  norms.
    In her report Ms Prud'homme consulted a number of people with knowledge
    of Cuba. They were not in full agreement about what would happen to the
    appellant on return but all agreed that there was a real risk  that  he
    would be subjected to treatment which could properly be categorised  as
    amounting to persecution or serious harm. The majority were of the view
    that there was a real risk of imprisonment  whereas  one  interviewee's
    view was that he would be required to undergo forced labour.

52.   In the decision letter the respondent appears to have  approached  the
    case on the basis that the risk to the appellant  if  any  would  arise
    from a lack of proper documentation  for  returning  to  Cuba  or  from
    overstaying the length of time he was  permitted  to  leave  Cuba.  The
    respondent sought to rely on the country guidance determination in  OM.
    As Ms Easty rightly points out, this determination would not  meet  the
    current requirements for country guidance but nonetheless as a  country
    guidance case it must be followed unless there are proper  grounds  for
    distinguishing it or taking a different view.  That  case  involved  an
    applicant who had made no secret of his dissident views  when  in  Cuba
    and the Tribunal accepted  that  there  was  evidence  backing  up  his
    account of being a political opponent of the Castro  regime.   At  some
    point he came to the United Kingdom but did not register with the Cuban
    authorities and it was argued that with his history, if he were  to  go
    back to Cuba he would be at real risk of persecution.

53.   The Tribunal looked at the provisions of Cuban law  about  people  who
    left that country.  It noted the provisions dealing with illegal  entry
    and the fact that the relevant article of Cuban law was plainly dealing
    with people who arrived in Cuba either clandestinely or on false papers
    or otherwise illegally.  In the applicant's case he would be  returning
    perfectly legally on a  proper  Cuban  passport  with  nothing  in  his
    documentation to suggest that he had done anything more than  stay  out
    of the  country longer than his permit and Cuban domestic  law  allowed
    him to do.  It was argued on the appellant's behalf in  reliance  on  a
    letter from Mr Wilfredo Allen (who also  submitted  a  report  in  this
    appeal) that the fact that the claimant had stayed in  Britain  without
    permission would lead the  Cuban  government  to  assume  that  he  had
    claimed asylum and punish him accordingly.

54.   The Tribunal said that it could not see how that could be the case  in
    circumstances where a person did not have proper papers in  the  UK  or
    had not conducted himself in such a way as to come to the attention  of
    the Cuban authorities abroad.  They could not see why  the  authorities
    in Cuba would assume  otherwise  than  that  the  claimant  was  abroad
    perhaps seeking work and paying to find or that  he  simply  overstayed
    taking an opportunity to travel which  otherwise  he  might  not  have.
    They rejected the reasoning behind Mr Allen's suggestion.

55.   The Tribunal then went on to  deal  with  the  argument  that  if  the
    applicant were to return to Cuba he would have no  employment  or  when
    his past was looked up it would be apparent that he was a dissident and
    the authorities might crack down on him.  The Tribunal dealt with  this
    issue as follows:

         "29. There was undoubtedly a crackdown by  the  authorities  on  18
             March 2003 and a number of dissidents were arrested,  many  of
             whom remain in custody, but this was not a widespread  roundup
             of opposition elements, if only 90  people  were  arrested  of
             whom 75 were tried, convicted and sent to prison.  It  is  not
             easy to see how the claimant would be likely to be affected by
             a round up of that nature on his return.


         30.      We do not wish to underestimate the difficulties that  the
             claimant would have if he were  to  return  to  Cuba,  because
             plainly life would be difficult and perhaps unpleasant  for  a
             while.  He might be under government surveillance.   He  might
             very well find it difficult if not almost impossible to obtain
             a job, but we have had  no  material  placed  before  us  that
             indicates  that  he  would  be  likely  to  be   arrested   or
             persecuted.   Mr  Allen  is  of  the  view  that   the   Cuban
             authorities would dismiss him from  his  employment  as  being
             politically  unreliable  and  would  assign  him  to  a   work
             battalion as a field  hand,  presumably  for  some  particular
             period of time.  They might place him  in  detention  facility
             until he could obtain housing and he would be monitored by the
             neighbour CDR once he returned to the community. Even  if  all
             this is true we cannot see that this  amounts  to  persecution
             albeit it amounts to treatment by an oppressive state  of  the
             type that  would  be  entirely  unacceptable  in  Europe.  The
             threshold for persecution is set very high and we  cannot  see
             that that threshold is passed by the claimant  in  this  case,
             even if one takes what might happen to him as  being  what  is
             likely to happen to him.


         31.      For all these reasons we have come to the conclusion  that
             even if the adjudicator had come to the findings of fact which
             the claimant contended before him, he would  have  found  that
             the claimant had never been  persecuted in  the  past,  albeit
             his life had been made difficult, that the most he was  guilty
             of at present was staying out of the country  longer  than  he
             should have been, nor might avail him on his return would be a
             closer enquire into his political past that might lead him  at
             worse to being placed in a work battalion for a period of time
             after which he would be returned to his community  and  family
             area under supervision by the CDR."

56.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  guidance  set  out  in  OM  does  require
    reconsideration in the light  of  the  further  evidence  submitted  in
    support of the present appeal. The background  evidence  relied  on  in
    that case has not been identified. I agree with and adopt the  comments
    made by Irwin J and SIJ Eshun when finding that the judge had erred  in
    law that there should be  more  comprehensive  and  up-to-date  country
    guidance in respect of Cuba.

57.   The conclusions about the current situation in Cuba which I draw  from
    the background and expert evidence produced  at  this  hearing  are  as
    follows:

            (i)  The human rights  situation  in  Cuba  is  dismal  and  the
    government continues to deny its citizens  basic  civil  and  political
    rights.

            (ii) The authorities are intolerant of any form of  unauthorised
    opposition to its political agenda and the law is used  to  criminalise
    dissent.

            (iii)      The term "dissident" in the context of Cuba does  not
    refer to a homogenous group of people but can refer to anyone  engaging
    in activities regarded by the authorities as contrary to its  political
    agenda.

            (iv) The  "dangerousness"  law  is  used  as  a  political  tool
    against those seen as dissidents or  otherwise  opposing  the  regime's
    political agenda

            (v)  Those regarded  by  the  Cuban  authorities  as  opponents,
    dissidents or defectors can be  at  risk  of  treatment  of  sufficient
    severity to amount to persecution.   Whether  a  particular  individual
    will be at such risk depends upon his background  and  profile  but  in
    general terms  an  active  political  opponent  who  has  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities or someone who has been openly disloyal to
    the regime is likely to be at such risk.

            (vi) This guidance replaces that given in OM which is no  longer
    to be regarded as providing country guidance.

58.   In the present appeal  the  appellant's  situation  is  in  any  event
    clearly  distinguishable  from  that  of  the  applicant  in  OM.   The
    appellant has done more than express dissent.  He  publicly  challenged
    the Cuban Ambassador at a meeting about why he was not allowed to go to
    Russia to see his then wife.  He defected from  what  would  have  been
    regarded as an official mission in Botswana.  He encouraged  others  to
    defect whilst in Botswana, including his second  wife.   She  has  been
    banned from returning to  Cuba.  He  then  married  another  Cuban  who
    defected from the Cuban authorities whilst in  Botswana.  Although  the
    appellant continues to hold a Cuban passport he has been  told that  he
    can only return to Cuba for 21 days, but if he does in  all  likelihood
    he will be unable if leave not only because he will have nowhere to  go
    but also by reason of the adverse interest the authorities will have in
    him.

59.   The appellant has on a number on occasions come to the adverse  notice
    of the Cuban authorities and I agree with the assessment in the  expert
    report that there is at least  a  real  likelihood  that  he  would  be
    prosecuted and imprisoned because he is and would  be  perceived  as  a
    dissident.  I  do  not  think  that  the  passage  of  time  since  the
    appellant's defection will mean that he is no longer at  risk.   It  is
    not simply a case of someone returning to Cuba after staying beyond the
    time he was permitted to leave or not having the correct permission  to
    return but of someone who would be seen as a dissident  and  an  active
    opponent of the current regime and for that reason he would be at  real
    risk of persecution.

      Decision

60.   The Tribunal has found that the Immigration Judge  erred  in  law.   I
    substitute a decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.





Senior Immigration Judge Latter
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Amended under Rule 42 by deletion of accidental slip in paragraph 56 on 29
    September 2011




                                     ANNEX


|No. |Item                                             |Date             |
|1.  |Africa On Line: Cuban spy defects to Botswana.   |21 May 2000      |
|2.  |COI Information request on whether Cuban         |26 April 2007    |
|    |immigration officials can and do refuse entry to |                 |
|    |citizens who have previously opted to leave      |                 |
|    |permanently.                                     |                 |
|3.  |Country of Origin Information Key Documents Cuba.|29 October 2008  |
|    |                                                 |                 |
|4.  |Human Rights Watch Report: New Castro, Same Cuba:|18 November 2009 |
|    |Political Prisoners in the post-Fidel era.       |                 |
|5.  |Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Annual |30 November 2009 |
|    |Report 2009: Cuba.                               |                 |
|6.  |US State Department Human Rights Report 2009     |11 March 2010    |
|    |Cuba.                                            |                 |
|7.  |US State Department Background Note: Cuba.       |25 March 2010    |
|8.  |Immigration Refugee Board of Canada, Cuba:       |27 April 2010    |
|    |Procedure for obtaining an exit permit.          |                 |
|9.  |Freedom House, Worst of the worst 2010: The      |3 June 2010      |
|    |world's most repressive societies - Cuba.        |                 |
|10. |Amnesty International, Restrictions on Freedom of|30 June 2010     |
|    |Expression in Cuba.                              |                 |
|11. |BBC News, Madrid: Cuba's freed dissidents vow to |16 July 2010     |
|    |fight on.                                        |                 |
|12. |Voice of America News: Three more freed Cuban    |17 August 2010   |
|    |dissidents arrive in Spain.                      |                 |
|13. |Human Rights Watch, Cuba, Stop Imprisoning       |1 June 2011      |
|    |Peaceful Dissidents.                             |                 |




