
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of KS) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
FCJR [2013]               UKUT 00341 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN application FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|On 19 February 2013                                                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                  the queen
                          ON THE application OF KS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by Birnberg Pierce,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms L Busch, instructed by the Treasury Solicitors.


                                  JUDGMENT


1.   This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decision  set  out  in  letters  of  6  July  2012  and  18  July  2012
    supplemented by a further letter of 18 February 2013 refusing to  treat
    further representations by the  applicant  as  a  fresh  claim  and  to
    maintain the decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

Background

2.   The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in July 1983.  He  claims
    to have entered the UK on 13 September 2002 using false documents.   He
    first came to the attention of the authorities on 14 March 2010 when he
    was arrested for road traffic offences.   Fingerprint  checks  revealed
    that he had previous criminal records from 2006, 2007  and  2008.   The
    police contacted UKBA on 15 March 2010 and he was served with a  notice
    advising him of his liability to detention and removal  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The applicant said that  he  intended  to  claim  asylum  and
    formally made a claim on 23 March 2010.  His application was refused on
    13 May 2010 and he appealed against that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   The Tribunal (Judge Lester) heard his appeal  on  29  June  2010.   The
    applicant had based his claim on problems starting in  2000  after  his
    sister had met and became engaged to R, an LTTE  supporter.   He  asked
    the  applicant  to  help  him  transport  some  goods,  batteries   and
    foodstuffs at night and the applicant undertook six journeys  for  him.
    He did not know at first that R was helping the LTTE but realised  that
    this was the case after about the fourth journey but  he  continued  to
    help because he was afraid of R.  In September 2002 police came to  the
    applicant's home where he and  his  parents  were  beaten  and  he  was
    detained on suspicion of helping the LTTE.  The  army  discovered  some
    guns in their garden which had been buried under  a  tree  by  R.   The
    applicant was released after two days and then ran away to another town
    where he lived with a friend for six or seven months.  He was  able  to
    travel to Colombo and then on to the UK.  He also claimed that after he
    left Sri Lanka his father was abducted by some men in a white van.   He
    did not know who they were but thought they were a political group.

4.   At the hearing the  issue  was  raised  about  his  delay  in  claiming
    asylum.  He said that he had been advised that he had to register  with
    a solicitor and had relied on advice given  to  him  by  friends.   The
    judge said that it appeared that the applicant relied  on  his  friends
    who must have given him the mistaken impression that if he  went  to  a
    solicitor and paid him a  large  sum  of  money,  the  solicitor  could
    register and obtain the necessary visa so that he could remain  in  the
    UK.  The judge accepted that the applicant had no deliberate  intention
    to deceive but that he was  ill-advised  and  na�ve.   She  noted  some
    confusion in his evidence about the dates.  She accepted  that  it  was
    plausible that he carried goods for R although, if he  indeed  was  his
    sister's fianc� and their parents approved of him, it was strange  that
    the applicant did not know his full  name  and  political  affiliation.
    She also accepted that it was likely that he was questioned and  beaten
    by police but commented that it was significant that the applicant  was
    not taken  to  a  police  station,  did  not  have  his  photograph  or
    fingerprints taken and still had his ID card.  It followed  that  there
    could be no record of this  incident  with  the  police  and  that  the
    applicant was of no real interest to the authorities.   The  judge  did
    not consider it plausible that his father  had  been  abducted  by  the
    police or that he had had no contact with his family over the  previous
    six months as he claimed, having been  in  regular  contact  with  them
    until then.  In summary the judge was not satisfied the  applicant  was
    of any interest to the authorities and did not consider that  he  would
    be at risk of ill-treatment on return.  There  was  no  arrest  warrant
    outstanding against him and he had an ID card.  She concluded  that  he
    had nothing to fear from the procedure at the airport  and  his  appeal
    was dismissed.

5.   On 4 April 2011 the  applicant  sent  further  representations  to  the
    respondent claiming that he  could  not  return  safely  to  Sri  Lanka
    because the brother of his cousin, KM, had been granted asylum  in  the
    UK due to his association with him (KM).  He also said that he would be
    at risk because he had attended a demonstration outside the Sri  Lankan
    High Commission. The respondent rejected these  representations  making
    the point that the applicant had not submitted any evidence in  support
    of his contention that he was related to KM.  It was not accepted  that
    he would be in danger of being detained at Colombo  Airport  on  return
    because he had attended a demonstration outside the High Commission.

6.   The applicant was detained in immigration detention on 9 May  2012  and
    removal directions were set for 31  May  2012.   These  were  cancelled
    following the filing of an application for judicial review.   Meanwhile
    the Sri Lankan authorities had agreed  to  issue  an  emergency  travel
    document  on  28  May  2012  and   on   the   following   day   further
    representations were sent on the applicant's behalf arising  from  what
    was said to have taken place when  the  applicant  was  interviewed  by
    officials from the High  Commission.   It  was  asserted  that  he  was
    specifically asked what problems he had in his native country  and  had
    truthfully replied that the army had arrested  his  sister's  boyfriend
    and that he was considered an LTTE supporter. It was  therefore  argued
    that the Sri Lankan authorities had been alerted to the fact  that  the
    applicant was a person in whom they had an  interest.   He  supplied  a
    copy of his account of the questions asked by the  officials  from  the
    High Commission (translation at B29).  The relevant parts are:

         "5.  What are the problems you face in your country?: The army have
             arrested my sister's boyfriend and it is therefore I cannot go
             back.  They consider me as an LTTE supporter, it is because of
             this I cannot go back.


         6.   They advised me to contact my lawyer...


         8.   They asked my Sri Lankan address as well as the UK address.


         9.   I affirm that if I go to Sri Lanka my life would be in danger.
              Also I said that I fear for my life when I go to Sri Lanka."


7.   These submissions were rejected the same day.  Permission to apply  for
    judicial review was refused on 26 June 2012 on the basis that the claim
    was academic as the respondent had undertaken to issue a fresh decision
    letter.

8.   In the decision letter of 6 July 2012 the respondent  dealt  with  this
    issue as follows:

         "6.  Careful consideration has been given to  your  client's  claim
             that in the course of his travel document interview on 22  May
             2012 with officials from the Sri Lankan  High  Commission  his
             responses to certain questions  will  have  alerted  officials
             that he 'is a person in whom they have an interest'.


         7.   In support of this claim you have submitted  a  copy  of  your
             client's statement of the questions  he  claims  that  he  was
             asked along with a certified translation.  There is  no  other
             or independent corroboration your client gave these answers to
             the questions posed.


         8.   However, similar questions are asked in each case by  the  Sri
             Lankan High Commission  to  establish  applicants'  identities
             before emergency travel documents are issued.  This is a well-
             established  process  which  has  been  in  place   for   some
             considerable substantial length of time.  There have  been  no
             issues arising as a consequence of questions posed by the  Sri
             Lankan officials in any case.


         9.   Furthermore the UK Border Agency  have  a  Migration  Delivery
             Officer and  staff  in  Sri  Lanka  who  are  responsible  for
             receiving all returnees from the  United  Kingdom  and  aiding
             their transfer through the airport.


         10.  Returnees and their families are provided with numbers to call
             in confidence should any problems be experienced but, to date,
             there have been no problems experienced by any  failed  asylum
             seekers following their enforced removal -  even  though  most
             will have made  similar  claims  in  their  individual  asylum
             applications.


         11.  Furthermore as noted  in  paragraphs  15-22  of  the  decision
             letter  dated  24  May  2012,  your  client  has   failed   to
             demonstrate he can be relied upon to  provide  consistent  and
             credible evidence regarding  his  alleged  activities  in  Sri
             Lanka and for the reasons given  in  that  letter  it  is  not
             considered his vague  account  of  involvement  with  an  LTTE
             member is one upon which any reliance can be placed. "


9.   On  18  July  2012  removal  directions  were  set  providing  for  the
    applicant's removal to Sri Lanka on 3 August 2012.  In a letter  of  12
    July 2012 the applicant's representatives asserted that there had  been
    a breach of s.13 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 which  provides
    that in providing identification data the respondent must not  disclose
    whether the person concerned has made a claim for asylum.  In  response
    by letter of 25 July 2012 the respondent refuted  the  assertions  that
    there had been a breach of this obligation saying:

         "The Secretary of State in this case has not disclosed  information
         that the person concerned has made a claim for asylum and  has  not
         therefore acted in contravention of section 13.


         Your client has instructed you he made the alleged admission to the
         Sri Lankan authorities in relation to his asylum claim.


         We are aware however there have been no matters of concern  arising
         from the enforced return of Sri Lankan nationals to Sri  Lanka  and
         are content adequate measures are in place to minimise further  any
         possible risk to applicants as a result of enforced removals taking
         place.


10.  The applicant applied for judicial review  on  1  August  2012  arguing
    that in the light of what  had  happened  at  the  interview  with  the
    officials from the  High  Commission  that  the  respondent's  decision
    refusing to accept that there was fresh evidence  amounting  to  a  new
    claim was unjust and irrational.  Permission was refused on the  papers
    but granted following an oral renewal.  When  granting  permission  UTJ
    Jordan said:

         "6.  In the granting of permission to argue this point I  take  the
             view there is an issue as to whether the Secretary of  State's
             response provides the answer that the information  a  returnee
             provides to the High Commission officials will not place  them
             at risk.  The difficulty is that  this  is  positive  evidence
             that has to be established and there is no material before  me
             at present to say what the arrangements  are  apart  from  the
             assertion by the Secretary of State that there  have  been  no
             problems in the past.  I grant permission because unless it is
             accepted (which it is not) by Ms  Jegarajah  that  there  have
             been no problems then it  is  in  issue  whether  or  not  the
             applicant will face a risk on return.


              Mr Ormondroyd properly points out that this is an  application
             for judicial review and the issue before  me  is  whether  the
             decision of the Secretary of State is Wednesbury  unreasonable
             and that if  the  Secretary  of  State  did  indeed  have  the
             information that it is claimed in the letter she had such that
             there is no known risk as a result  of  those  who  have  been
             returned to Sri Lanka, the decision cannot  be  classified  as
             being  unreasonable.   It  is  at  least  arguable  that  this
             material has to be examined in order to determine whether  the
             Secretary  of  State  had  a  proper  basis  upon  which  that
             assertion in the letter was made.  Where there is  a  positive
             assertion made by the Secretary of State that, notwithstanding
             a prima facie case of potential risk, the Secretary  of  State
             can adduce affirmative evidence that  no  problems  have  been
             experienced, this is a matter which has to be  established  by
             hearing the evidence  and  cannot  simply  be  assumed  to  be
             correct by reason of its being asserted in the letter.  It  is
             on this basis that I grant permission."


11.  Directions were issued for the filing of further evidence  and  witness
    statements have been filed by Rachel Green, a Senior Executive  Officer
    with the Detained  Expedited  Team,  Judicial  Review  Unit,  and  from
    Malcolm Lewis, Country Manager of the Returns  Team  in  the  Migration
    Directorate of the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office.  The  forms  and
    documents used when an application is  made  for  an  emergency  travel
    document have been disclosed.  On  14  February  2013  the  applicant's
    solicitors wrote to  the  respondent  enclosing  information  disclosed
    under a Freedom of Information Request relating to the grant of  asylum
    to returnees to Sri Lanka post-conflict.  It also refers to  a  pending
    country guidance case saying that the applicant's Counsel, who is  also
    acting in that appeal, is  aware  that  the  respondent  has  disclosed
    further information relating to the grant of asylum to returnees to Sri
    Lanka.  The information supplied in response to the request is set  out
    in a letter dated 6 February 2013 from UKBA to the effect that  in  the
    period from May 2009 to September 2012 a total of  fifteen  Sri  Lankan
    nationals were granted refugee status who had previously  been  removed
    from the United Kingdom; all fifteen claimed to have been subjected  to
    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment following their return,  five
    were granted asylum following the initial consideration of their  claim
    by the UKBA and ten following the  successful  determination  of  their
    appeal.

12.  The respondent responded by letter dated 18 February 2013 referring  to
    what the applicant said had happened at interview. The letter says:

         "13. The Secretary of State does not accept that your  client  told
             the Sri Lankan authorities at his  re-documentation  interview
             that he was a failed asylum seeker or that the police  thought
             he was an LTTE supporter.  She considers  that  the  applicant
             has previously not been found to be  a  credible  witness  and
             this undermines any future  accounts.   Notwithstanding  this,
             even if it was accepted that he had given this information  to
             the authorities, it is considered that any checks  made  as  a
             result of this would not put him at risk as there is no record
             of him being of adverse interest in Sri Lanka.


         14.  A representative of the Secretary of State has made  enquiries
             with the  UKBA's  Country  Returns,  Operations  and  Strategy
             Department (CROS).  They have in turn  checked  with  the  Sri
             Lankan High Commission who confirmed that they do  not  record
             any interviews for documentation purposes.   Therefore  we  do
             not accept your submissions that the interviews are recorded."


13.  The letter then goes on to deal with the Freedom  of  Information  data
    saying that analysis revealed that there were in  fact  thirteen  cases
    and not fifteen, the data had been rounded up and not all were enforced
    UK returns as two were returns from a third country and  two  had  made
    voluntary returns.  In respect of later asylum claims being  successful
    the respondent said:

         "21. Each case was dealt with on its merits.  To  put  the  figures
             into context we would note that in the eighteen  month  period
             between January 2011 and June 2012, the total  number  of  Sri
             Lankan nationals who returned to Sri Lanka  from  the  UK  was
             1,416.  The FOI figures demonstrate that in  a  longer  period
             (between 2009-2013) only thirteen returned  were  subsequently
             granted asylum.


         22.  The Secretary of State maintains her position that there is no
             risk on return for failed asylum seekers to Sri  Lanka  simply
             by virtue of the fact that they  are  failed  asylum  seekers.
             She contends that failed asylum seekers do not  face  problems
             immediately upon return and certainly not simply by virtue  of
             the fact that they are failed asylum  seekers  returning  from
             London.


         23.  The Secretary of State is not prepared to reverse the decision
             to enforce your client's removal to Sri Lanka,  and  does  not
             accept that the issues raised puts your  client  at  increased
             risk on return and does not accept that an  immigration  judge
             would allow an appeal on the same grounds."


Submissions

14.  Ms Jegarajah adopted her submissions  set  out  in  a  document  headed
    "Amended Grounds and Response to  Decision  of  the  SSHD  18  February
    2013".  She referred to the findings of fact made by  Judge  Lester  in
    the First-tier Tribunal in [25] and [28] and to the risk assessment  at
    [30] of her determination.  The findings as accepted by the  judge  had
    to be looked at, so she submitted, in the context that at the  time  of
    that hearing there was a ceasefire but the findings  would  now  be  of
    importance in the light of the current position and what the  applicant
    had said when interviewed by the officials from  the  High  Commission.
    She accepted that it was open to the respondent not to believe that the
    applicant had made any such statements when interviewed but argued that
    she had failed properly to consider what a judge  would  make  of  that
    evidence when considering whether there was  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  In her written submissions  she  refers  to  the  Treasury  Solicitors'
    public guidance in respect of the duty of disclosure and to the request
    made on 13 February 2013 inviting the Treasury Solicitors  to  consider
    their client's position in the light of the recent  FOI  request.   She
    referred to a recent judgment  in  the  High  Court  disclosed  to  the
    Tribunal with the permission of the High Court judge but  only  on  the
    basis that there  would  be  no  reference  to  or  disclosure  of  its
    substance or contents  in  open  court  or  any  open  judgement.   She
    submitted that the assertions made in the respondent's decision letters
    and in the witness statement from Malcolm Lewis do not sit easily  with
    that judgment or with the response to the FOI request.


16.  She submitted that there was an issue about whether officials from  the
    High Commission asked questions about any  previous  asylum  claims  or
    went beyond issues of nationality and no evidence of any kind had  been
    produced of the  questions  that  would  be  asked.   The  respondent's
    evidence included a reference to the Freedom  from  Torture  Report  at
    3.2.3 of the Sri Lanka policy document of October 2012.  It was not her
    submission that all Tamils were at risk on return but she  argued  that
    there was at least a more than fanciful prospect of success before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  even  if  the  respondent  did  not  believe  the
    applicant's evidence.  It was not open to the applicant to say in  [16]
    of the letter of 18 February 2013 that the evidence  demonstrated  that
    returned failed asylum-seekers were not at risk  on  return.   In  this
    application reliance was not being placed  on  an  assertion  that  all
    failed asylum-seekers were at  risk  but  that  the  applicant  in  his
    particular circumstances would be.  That issue had to  be  assessed  in
    the context of the view the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  take  not
    simply about  failed  asylum-seekers  but  about  the  applicant.   She
    submitted that there must be a realistic prospect that a judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal would find that the conversation had taken place as
    claimed and this would put him in a position of risk on return.

17.  Ms Busch submitted  that  when  assessing  whether  there  would  be  a
    realistic prospect of  success  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    respondent was entitled to take into account the  very  long  delay  in
    making an asylum claim and the finding of the  Tribunal  in  2010  that
    there would be no record of any incident involving  the  applicant  and
    that he would be of  no  adverse  interest  to  the  authorities.   The
    applicant could not be relied on  to  provide  consistent  or  credible
    evidence about his activities in Sri Lanka.  There was no  good  reason
    to believe that he had made the statements he claimed to the Sri Lankan
    officials.  There was evidence  that  he  had  previously  made  untrue
    allegations.  The witness statement of Rachel Green confirmed that  the
    questions asked by the Sri Lankan High Commission followed a pro  forma
    (form D) and this had been the position since 2005.  She submitted that
    there was no evidence at all to support a contention that a  person  in
    the position of the applicant would be at risk on return.  She accepted
    that the situation was volatile in Sri Lanka but the evidence  produced
    in relation to appeals subsequently being successful  following  return
    to Sri Lanka referred to a miniscule proportion: 13 out of about  1,400
    returns.  She submitted that the High Court judgment  referred  to  did
    not take the matter any further  and  essentially  turned  on  its  own
    facts.  In summary, in the light of  the  serious  concerns  about  the
    veracity  of  the  applicant's  statements,  the  respondent  had  been
    entitled to conclude that there was no realistic  prospect  of  success
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Assessment of the Issues

18.   The  respondent's  decision  that  the  further  submissions  did  not
    constitute  a  fresh  claim  can  only  be   reviewed   on   Wednesbury
    unreasonableness grounds.  In WM (DRC) v Secretary of State [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1495 Buxton LJ said that when considering  whether  an  independent
    Tribunal might realistically come down in  favour  of  the  applicant's
    asylum or human rights claim, two questions  arose:  firstly,  had  the
    respondent asked herself the correct  question,  whether  there  was  a
    realistic prospect of an immigration judge applying the rule of anxious
    scrutiny thinking that the applicant would be exposed to a real risk of
    persecution on return, and secondly, in addressing that  question,  had
    the respondent herself satisfied the requirement of anxious scrutiny.

19.  Ms Jegarajah accepted that it had been open to the  respondent  not  to
    believe the  applicant's  evidence  about  what  had  occurred  at  the
    interview with the officials from the Sri Lankan  High  Commission  but
    submitted that the respondent's decision that a claim had no  realistic
    prospect of success before an independent Tribunal was irrational.   Ms
    Busch's submitted that the respondent's decision had been properly open
    to her for the reasons she had given.

20.  The starting point for a judge hearing an appeal would be the  previous
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal following the hearing  on  29  June
    2010.  Judge Lester accepted that it was plausible that  the  applicant
    had carried goods for someone identified as R, these  incidents  taking
    place on his account in 2000-2002 leading to the police coming  to  his
    home in September 2002.  She also accepted that he was  questioned  and
    beaten by the police but went on to find  that  he  did  not  have  his
    photograph or fingerprints taken, he still had his ID card,  there  was
    no record of the incident with the police and he would be  of  no  real
    interest to the authorities.

21.  Ms Jegarajah argues that the position has now changed in the  light  of
    the fact that the applicant, when interviewed, told the High Commission
    officials that he feared returning to Sri Lanka because the authorities
    would be interested in him.  She also submits that  there  is  evidence
    that some returnees have been tortured by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    and that the respondent's analysis of whether an appeal would have  any
    realistic prospect of success is flawed by a  failure  to  assess  that
    issue in the light of evidence of such ill-treatment.

22.  The witness statement of Rachel Green says that in the  eighteen  month
    period between January 2011 and June 2012  the  number  of  Sri  Lankan
    nationals returning to Sri Lanka from the UK was 1,416.  She refers  to
    the Sri Lankan Policy Bulletin issued in October 2012 and to  the  fact
    that the FCO follows the human rights situation through its network  of
    posts  around  the  world  including  the  countries   to   which   any
    unsuccessful asylum-seekers are returned.  If UKBA receive any specific
    allegations that a returnee has experienced  ill-treatment  on  return,
    these will be checked including through the FCO who,  where  necessary,
    would  make  discreet  enquiries.   She  records  that  the  government
    believes that the right approach is to consider the protection needs of
    individuals in their own particular circumstances  and  refers  to  the
    various sources of information taken into account  when  decisions  are
    made on return.  It notes that information from public  resources  such
    as human rights organisations  and  NGOs  regarding  the  treatment  of
    failed asylum-seekers from the UK  or  other  countries  on  return  is
    incorporated into COI service material.  She says at [13]:

         "The UK Border Agency's Country Policy Bulletin for  Sri  Lanka  of
         October  2012  confirms  their  policy  on  returns  to  Sri  Lanka
         following the allegations of mistreatment, amounting to torture, of
         returnees from the UK.  The UK Border Agency does not  accept  that
         the evidence published by Human Rights Watch, Freedom from  Torture
         and Tamils against Genocide, supports their assertion that a change
         in the agency's policy on returns to Sri Lanka is  warranted.   The
         Country Policy Bulletin for Sri Lanka is available on the UK Border
         Agency's website..."


    and at [15]:


         "The UK  Border  Agency  when  applying  for  an  emergency  travel
         document for a subject, have to as a minimum requirement submit  an
         ETD bio-data application form, form K, form D, four photographs and
         if available supporting evidence. (The forms used  in  relation  to
         this applicant have been disclosed  to  the  court).   There  is  a
         mandatory requirement for the individual to be interviewed  by  the
         Sri Lankan High Commission and the High Commission  have  confirmed
         to us that the interview questions used are taken from form  D  and
         that this has been the position since 2005."


23.   These  forms  disclosed  are  in  the  agreed  bundle.   The  bio-data
    information supplied  includes  the  information  available  about  the
    applicant's identity, last known address, his parents, any brothers  or
    sisters and any known dates of employment.  Form D contains particulars
    to be furnished by an applicant who has lost his passport.  In his form
    the applicant has given the details sought and  his  national  identity
    card number.  The allegation made that the respondent had disclosed the
    fact that an asylum claim had been made was not pursued at the  hearing
    and rightly so as it had no substance. There  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that anything other than the information given on the  forms  disclosed
    was provided by the respondent to the Sri Lankan authorities.

24.  The witness statement of Malcolm Lewis gives further details about  the
    process of return including the fact that the British  High  Commission
    in Colombo  has  a  good  working  relationship  with  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities with regard to the return of Sri Lankan nationals who  have
    no leave to enter or remain in the UK.  They assure BHC officials  that
    no arriving passengers are subject to ill-treatment at Colombo  Airport
    and this  is  supported  by  the  experience  of  BHC  officials.   The
    statement goes on to say:

         "7.  The BHC engages with  a  wide  range  of  interlocutors  which
             include  both  government  and  non-government  organisations,
             civil society  and  human  rights  organisations.   Throughout
             these engagements  they  have  not  been  presented  with  any
             conclusive evidence to substantiate these allegations of  ill-
             treatment of  returnees.   They  also  have  access  to  UNHCR
             Refugee Returnee Monitoring Reports.  These indicate that many
             returning refugees do not express safety and security  amongst
             their main concerns since returning to Sri Lanka."


     Annexed to his witness  statements  are  the  observations  of  the  UK
    Government in  two  Sri  Lankan  cases  currently  pending  before  the
    European Court of Human Rights.

25.  References have been made in the submissions  to  the  current  country
    guidance determination pending before the Upper Tribunal but if further
    evidence has been produced in that appeal relevant to  the  applicant's
    circumstances and to the decision under challenge, it has been open  to
    the applicant's representatives to produce it.  Ms Jegarajah  has  made
    it clear that it is not part of her submissions  in  the  present  case
    that all Tamils or all failed asylum-seekers would be at risk on return
    to Sri Lanka.  The issue therefore is whether the  respondent  properly
    considered the applicant's particular circumstances in the  context  of
    the background evidence and the current country guidance when  reaching
    her decision on whether there  was  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

26.  I am satisfied that the respondent asked herself the correct  question.
     In [3] of the letter of  6  July  2012  the  respondent  set  out  the
    provisions of para 353 of HC 395 and referred in [5] to the question of
    whether the submissions taken with the material  previously  considered
    would have created a realistic prospect of success.   In  [26]  of  the
    letter of 18 February 2013 the respondent said:

         "26. Having rejected your client's submissions, it has further been
             concluded  that  there  is  no  realistic  prospect  that  his
             submissions will, when taken together with all the  previously
             considered material, lead an immigration judge,  applying  the
             rule of anxious scrutiny to decide that your client should  be
             allowed to stay in the United Kingdom due to a real risk  that
             your applicant's human rights would be breached on  return  to
             Sri Lanka and accordingly it does not amount to a fresh  claim
             under paragraph 353."

27.  Having identified the correct question, the issue is then  whether  the
    respondent applied anxious scrutiny to the assessment of this issue.

28.  The respondent did not  believe  the  applicant's  evidence  that  when
    interviewed by the officials from the Sri Lankan High Commission he had
    told them that he was of interest to them and therefore brought himself
    directly to the authorities' attention.  That was  a  finding  of  fact
    properly open to the respondent but the fact that she did  not  believe
    the applicant's evidence on this issue does not necessarily  mean  that
    it would also be rejected by a judge. When  considering  whether  there
    would  be  a  realistic  prospect  of  success  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the respondent was also entitled to  take  into  account  the
    fact that the applicant had delayed from 2002 until 2010 before  making
    an asylum claim and then only after he had been stopped by  the  police
    and that he had made a further claim on the basis of  his  relationship
    with MK when there  was  no  evidence  to  support  that  relationship.
    However, the respondent's view of the merits is only a  starting  point
    in the consideration of whether  there  was  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  see  [11]  of  WM  (DRC)  v
    Secretary of State.

29.   It  is  clear  from  the  documents  produced  that  emergency  travel
    documentation interviews are preceded by the supply of  information  on
    forms which simply set out background matters with no reference to  the
    kind of questions which the applicant alleged were asked of him in  his
    interview. In [8] of the letter of 6 July 2012 the respondent says that
    similar questions are asked in relation to establishing identity, there
    is a set procedure and that no  issues  have  arisen  in  any  case  in
    consequence of questions posed by Sri Lankan officials.  However,  that
    does not mean that  there  might  not  be  cases  where  officials  ask
    questions in addition to those on the standard forms or  take  note  of
    further information volunteered at interview, still less that  they  do
    not pass on information of potential interest to the authorities in Sri
    Lanka.

30.  The applicant relies not only  on  what  he  claims  was  said  at  the
    interview with the High Commission officials but also on his  previous,
    albeit limited, work for the  LTTE.  In  the  present  case  the  issue
    whether the applicant would be at real risk on return has, according to
    the decision letters, been assessed on the broad assertions in [10]  of
    the letter of 6 July 2012 that there have been no problems  experienced
    by any failed asylum seekers following their enforced  removal  and  in
    the letter of 25 July 2012 that the respondent is aware that there  are
    no matters of concern arising from the enforced return  of  Sri  Lankan
    nationals.

31.  This does not take account of the fact that concerns have  been  raised
    in the Freedom from Torture Report  and  in  the  information  supplied
    under the Freedom of Information Report.  Even if  only  13  out  of  a
    large number of returnees are accepted as being the victims of torture,
    this must be a matter of concern and indicates  that  there  have  been
    reports of problems faced by some failed asylum seekers  and  returnees
    even if a small number.  It is clear  from  the  statements  of  Rachel
    Green and Malcolm Lewis that considerable information is  available  to
    the respondent but in the present case the assessment of  risk  to  the
    applicant has been on the basis that there  have  been  no  reports  of
    matters giving rise to concern.

32.  The respondent has  placed  reliance  in  [14]  of  the  letter  of  18
    February 2013 on the confirmation from the Sri Lankan  High  Commission
    that interviews are  not  recorded  for  documentation  purposes.   The
    issue, however, is not so much whether records are  kept  or  for  what
    purpose but whether  there  is  a  real  possibility  that  matters  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities at home might be  reported  back
    by High Commission officials. The respondent appears to  have  accepted
    assurances from Sri Lankan officials without considering the weight  to
    be attached to them in the  light  of  the  reports  of  ill  treatment
    following return. Further, when assessing what weight a tribunal  might
    attach to  the  applicant's  evidence  the  respondent  has  failed  to
    acknowledge that he was found be at least  partially  credible  by  the
    immigration judge who heard his appeal in June 2010.  In  [13]  of  the
    letter of 18 February 2013 the respondent says that the  applicant  has
    previously been found not to be a credible witness and this  undermines
    any future accounts.  This does not take  into  account  the  fact  the
    Judge Lester accepted that the applicant had been involved  in  helping
    the LTTE and was questioned and beaten by the police and that his delay
    in claiming asylum had not involved deliberate deception on his part.

33.  When  these  factors  are  taken  together  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    applicant has shown that sufficiently anxious  scrutiny  has  not  been
    given to whether an appeal would have realistic  prospects  of  success
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that the evidence produced  has  not
    answered  the  concerns  highlighted  by  UTJ  Jordan   when   granting
    permission about the evidence relied on when  reaching  the  conclusion
    that there had been no problems in the past.  In reaching this decision
    I have not taken the High Court judgment I was referred to into account
    as it seems to me that it turned on its own particular facts.

34.  I grant this application for judicial review.   I  quash  the  decision
    finding that the applicant's further representations did not amount  to
    a fresh claim.  As accepted at the hearing before me, the  question  of
    costs should follow the event.  I therefore order the respondent to pay
    the applicant's costs to be assessed  on  the  standard  basis  if  not
    agreed.  The applicant's publicly funded costs are  to  be  subject  to
    detailed assessment in accordance  with  the  Community  Legal  Service
    (Funding) Order 2000.

35.  I make  an  order  under  r.14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  applicant.
    No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    him.   This  direction  applies  to  both  the  applicant  and  to  the
    respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.




H J E Latter
Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
