

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT  00346 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 12 June, 2013                    |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

               THE PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE BLAKE

                                   Between

                               sanjay boodhoo
                            mariA gonzales serano

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr.  Stephenson of McGill & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  Neither section 85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 nor the guidance in DR (Morocco)* [2005] UKAIT 38 regarding a  previous
version of section 85(5) of that Act has any bearing on an appeal under  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. In such an appeal,  a
tribunal has power to consider any evidence which it thinks relevant to  the
substance of the  decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a  matter
arising after the date of the decision.

(2)  Accordingly, evidence of  comprehensive  sickness  cover,  which  began
after the date of the decision appealed, fell to be considered by the First-
tier Tribunal judge, as it was plainly relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
decision, albeit that it arose after the date of that decision.

(3)  It is  particularly  important  that  the  Home  Office  should  engage
properly with observations of the Upper Tribunal made on  or  following  the
grant of permission to appeal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.   Maria Gonzales Serano is a Spanish national.  Sanjay  Boodhoo  is  a
      national of Mauritius who is her husband.  In April  2011  the  couple
      came to the  United  Kingdom  where  they  were  employed  as  English
      teachers.  It appears that Ms Serano was engaged under a contract  for
      services and would thus be considered self-employed.


   2.    On 22 August 2011  she  ceased  her  self-employed  activity  as  a
      teacher because she was pregnant and was about  to  give  birth.   She
      states that she intended to resume self-employment  in  January  2012.
      In the meantime in October 2011 the couple applied for proof of  their
      entitlement to reside as an EEA national and the third country  spouse
      of such a national.  They were entitled to  such  documentation  under
      the EEA Regulations 2006 if Miss Serano was a qualified person  within
      the meaning of those Regulations.


   3.    In November  2011  their  applications  were  refused  because  the
      Secretary of State was not satisfied that Miss Serano was a  qualified
      person.  The  decision  letter  explained  first,  that  she  was  not
      retained under a contract of employment during the time she was taking
      maternity leave. It was therefore considered  she  was  not  a  worker
      within the meaning of Article 7 (3) of Directive  2004/38/EC  and  the
      provisions of Article 11 (2) that  would  extend  the  validity  of  a
      residence card for a maximum period of twelve months as  a  result  of
      childbirth.

   4.    Although this would appear to be a surprising interpretation of the
      Directive, that discriminates against self-employed people,  there  is
      authority supporting that approach in the decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Jessy Saint Prix v Secretary of State for Work and  Pensions
      [2011] EWCA Civ 806, which is on appeal to the  Supreme  Court  [2012]
      UKSC 49. The Supreme Court has  made  a  reference  to  the  Court  of
      Justice where a decision is awaited.

   5.   A second basis for the refusal of the documentation was in  response
      to representations made that the couple were self-sufficient due to  a
      combination of their savings and  Mr  Boodoo's  continued  ability  to
      support the family through his  employment.   The  problem  with  that
      contention was that  the  couple  had  not  presented  evidence  of  a
      comprehensive sickness insurance cover as required by regulation 4 (1)
      (d) (ii) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations,
      2006.  Accordingly on 15 February 2012 this application was refused.

   6.  The couple appealed and the appeal came before  Judge  Smith  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal on 17 May 2012.  At that appeal  the  couple  were
      able to produce a comprehensive insurance  certificate  dated  11  May
      2012 effective from that date.  It was accepted that having regard  to
      their resources, if the certificate could be taken into account on the
      appeal, the couple were entitled to succeed.


   7.     The  presenting  officer  at  that  appeal  contended   that   the
      certificate could not be taken into account, relying on section 85A of
      the Immigration Nationality and Asylum Act 2002.  The  judge  was  not
      persuaded by that submission but concluded applying section  85(4)  of
      the 2002 Act in combination with the guidance given by the AIT  in  DR
      (Morocco) [2005] UKAIT 38 that the certificate could not be taken into
      account because it related to a post decision issue.  The  appeal  was
      accordingly dismissed.

   8.    The couple then appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  permission  to
      appeal was first refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  the  15  June,
      2012 but fortunately it was granted  on  7  August  2012  where  Upper
      Tribunal Judge  Peter  Lane  strongly  expressed  the  view  that  the
      certificate was admissible.   He  invited  the  Home  Office  to  make
      written representations as to why the  contrary  was  the  case.  Such
      representations were made on 31 August  2012.  The  papers  then  came
      before Mr Ockelton, Vice- President, on  10  January  2013  who  again
      strongly expressed the view that section 85A did not apply to  curtail
      the admissibility of evidence in an EEA appeal and  indicated  he  was
      minded to allow the appeal subject to any further representation  that
      the Home Office seek to make.

   9.    Those representations were made on 21 January  2013  and  make  two
      points. First , it is stated that Schedule 1 to  the  EEA  Regulations
      provides that sections 85 to  87  of  the  2002  Act  have  effect  in
      relation to an appeal under the Regulations as if it  were  an  appeal
      against an immigration decision under section 82 of that Act.  Second,
      it is submitted that section 85 gives the judge a  discretion  whether
      to  admit  evidence  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  exercise  his
      discretion  in  this  case  having  regard  to  the  fact  that   this
      certificate had only recently been  produced.   An  oral  hearing  was
      requested.

  10.  Shortly before that hearing helpful written submissions  were  lodged
      on behalf of the appellants, spelling out  why  the  judge  was  quite
      wrong to apply the decision of DR (Morocco) as that  decision  related
      to entry clearance appeals under an earlier version of  s.85  and  had
      nothing to do with EEA appeals.  Secondly, it was pointed  out,  there
      was a relevant decision in the case of SGC  and  others  (EEA-Date  of
      Decision-1999  Act)  Ireland  [2005]  UKAIT  179.  This  decision  was
      concerned with an earlier statute but at paragraph 25 the  AIT  looked
      ahead to the 2002 Act and  said:

         'At least for in-country appeals, section 85(4)  makes  clear  that
         the Tribunal must consider all relevant evidence including  matters
         arising after the date of decision  and  thus  must  determine  the
         facts as at  the  date  of  hearing  (LS  (Post-decision  evidence;
         direction; appeal ability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085)'.

  11.  On the 11 June, 2011 Mr Mullen wrote to the Tribunal indicating  that
      the Home Office now accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  ought
      to have  allowed  the  appeal  because  the  appellants  had  provided
      evidence of their entitlement to remain under the Regulations  at  the
      date of the appeal.


  12. Accordingly  the  appeal  did  not  proceed  in  a  contested  manner.
      Unfortunately the Tribunal was informed that the couple had  left  the
      United Kingdom at the end of 2012 to return to Spain  because  of  the
      continued uncertainty of their status.

  13. The first issue is whether there is still a valid  appeal  outstanding
      to be determined.  It is common ground  that  there  was  because  the
      departure of the couple has no impact in an EEA appeal: see regulation
      25(4) of the EEA Regulations 2006. Section 104 of the  2002  Act  does
      not apply to such appeals.


  14.  The second question is whether the First-tier Judge made an error  of
      law. It is common ground that he did. First, he sought  to  apply  the
      decision in DR (Morocco) to EEA appeals to which it had no application
      whatsoever; second he misapplied Section 85 (4) of the 2002 Act in its
      current form.  I accordingly find a material error of law.


  15. Although the determination of this appeal would not appear  to  be  of
      any immediate benefit to the couple since they have returned to  Spain
      it is important that  the  judge's  error  is  clarified  particularly
      having regard to the approach of the  Home  Office  in  opposing  this
      appeal from May 2012 until 11 June 2013.  I accordingly set aside  the
      judge's decision and re-make it.  I indicated that at the end  of  the
      hearing that the appeal would be allowed and I now  give  reasons  for
      that decision.

  16. I accept that the Schedule to the EEA Regulations brings section 85(4)
      of the 2002 Act into play in EEA appeals.  Section 85 (4)  is  in  the
      following terms:-


          'On an appeal under  section  82(1)...  against  a  decision  [The
   Tribunal] may consider
          evidence about any  matter  which  [it]  thinks  relevant  to  the
   substance of the decision,
          including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the  date
   of decision.'


      Although section 85(4) is subject to subsection 85(5), introducing the
      exceptions made  in  section  85(A),  none  of  those  exceptions  are
      applicable to an EEA appeal and need not be considered further in this
      decision.


  17. Construing the plain words of section 85(4) without regard  either  to
      the exceptions in section 85A  and/or  the  previous  guidance  in  DR
      (Morocco) relating to  a  different  version  of  the  statute  and  a
      different class of immigration decision,  the  section  permits  post-
      decision evidence to be received by the  Tribunal  about  "any  matter
      which the Tribunal thinks relevant to the substance of the  decision".
       The question of admissibility thus turns  on  whether  the  insurance
      certificate obtained in May 2012 was relevant to  the  appeal  against
      the February 2012 decision.


  18.  In my judgment the answer is plain. An appeal against  a  refusal  of
      residence  documentation  is  normally  concerned  with  whether   the
      appellant or his/her spouse is a qualified person.  A  claimant  is  a
      qualified person if as a matter of fact the requirements of EU law are
      met. It is trite law that this is not a status given by discretion  of
      the Secretary of State on an application duly made. The purpose of the
      residence documentation which the claimants seek is simply  evidential
      confirmation of their status. It is not a source of their rights:  see
      for example R v Pieck [1980] EUECJ 157/79.

  19. It is common ground that a self-sufficient person  who  has  resources
      and a comprehensive insurance certificate is a  qualified  person  for
      the purpose of the Directive.  Once the certificate had been  produced
      on 11 May 2012, there was no  basis  for  further  disputing  that  Ms
      Serano was a qualified  person.  The  previous  Home  Office  decision
      should have been withdrawn once the certificate had been produced  and
      its reliability accepted.  Instead a false point was  taken  that  the
      certificate  was  not  admissible  in  the  appeal.   It  plainly  was
      admissible because it was not merely relevant to the decision  to  the
      substance of the issue outstanding, it was determinative of it.


  20. It is extremely unfortunate that despite the observations of two  very
      experienced judges of the Upper Tribunal: Judge  Peter  Lane  and  the
      Vice President Mr Ockelton, as well as the previous  decision  of  the
      AIT cited at [10] above, this  appeal  continued  to  be  opposed  for
      thirteen months.  It is doubly unfortunate that  the  appellants  have
      been put to the expense of legal costs and have subsequently  departed
      the United Kingdom as a result of the persistent error of law made  in
      opposing this appeal.  Whether they have any remedy by way of  redress
      is not an issue arising in this appeal.


  21. The final Home Office attempt  to  justify  the  judge's  decision  in
      excluding the evidence as  a  matter  of  discretion  is  particularly
      bizarre. If the evidence was relevant to the issue on appeal there  is
      no discretion in the judge to exclude it.  For reasons  already  given
      it was not only relevant but decisive. The assessment of relevance  is
      an exercise of legal judgment rather than a discretion to admit.

  22.  If the Home Office wanted an opportunity to examine the  validity  of
      the certificate having regard to the late stage of its production,  it
      could and should have asked for a short adjournment for  enquiries  to
      be made.  It did not do so; indeed the  validity  and  effect  of  the
      certificate were accepted.

  23. Now the matter has been clarified I express  the  hope  that  such  an
      erroneous approach will not be taken in the future.  I am grateful  to
      Mr Mullen for his letter of the 11 June  and  his  assistance  at  the
      hearing of the appeal when these propositions were  examined  and  the
      matter resolved.

  24. For these reasons I re-make the decision by allowing it to the  extent
      of declaring that as of 11 May 2012 Ms Serano was a  qualified  person
      and she and her spouse were entitled  to  residence  documentation  in
      support of that proposition.



                               Signed


                               Date:  26 June 2013






                               Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal
