
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TS (interpreters) Eritrea [2019] UKUT 00352 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 May 2019                                |                              |
|Further submissions: 22 May 2019              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     ts
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)    An appellate tribunal will usually be  slow  to  overturn  a  judge's
    decision on the basis of alleged errors in,  or  other  problems  with,
    interpretation at the hearing before that judge (Perera v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1002).   Weight  will  be
    given to the judge's own assessment of whether the interpreter and  the
    appellant or witness understood each other.

(2)   Such an assessment by the judge should normally be undertaken  at  the
    outset of the hearing  by  the  judge  (a)  putting  questions  to  the
    appellant/witness and (b) considering the replies.  Although he or  she
    may not be able to speak the  language  of  the  appellant/witness,  an
    experienced judge will usually be  able  to  detect  difficulties;  for
    example, an unexpected or vague reply to a specific question that  lies
    within the area of knowledge of the appellant/witness or a suspiciously
    terse translation of what has plainly been a much longer reply given to
    the interpreter by the  appellant/witness.   Non-verbal  reactions  may
    also be factored into the judge's overall assessment.

(3)   Where an issue regarding interpretation arises  at  the  hearing,  the
    matter should be raised with the judge at the hearing so that it can be
    addressed there and then.  Even if the representatives do  not  do  so,
    the judge should act on his or her own initiative, if satisfied that an
    issue concerning interpretation needs to be addressed.

(4)   In many cases, the issue will be capable  of  swift  resolution,  with
    the judge relying upon the duty of the parties under rule 2(4)  of  the
    Procedure Rules of both of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers to  help
    the Tribunal to further the overriding objective of  dealing  with  the
    case fairly and justly.

(5)   A challenge by a representative  to  the  competence  of  a  Tribunal-
    appointed interpreter must not be made  lightly.   If  made,  it  is  a
    matter for the judge to address, as an aspect of  the  judge's  overall
    duty to ensure a fair hearing.  Amongst the matters  to  be  considered
    will be whether the challenge appears to be motivated by  a  desire  to
    have the hearing aborted, rather than by any genuine  material  concern
    over the standard of interpretation.

(6)   It will be for the judge to decide whether a challenge to the  quality
    of interpretation necessitates a check being made with a member of  the
    Tribunal's administrative staff who has responsibility for the  booking
    of interpreters.  Under the current arrangements for the  provision  of
    interpreters, it may be possible for appropriate enquiries to  be  made
    by the administrative staff of the Language Shop (a  quality  assurance
    service run by the London Borough of Newham in respect of the  Ministry
    of Justice's language contract), as to whether the  interpreter  is  on
    the register  and  whether  there  is  any  current  disclosable  issue
    regarding the interpreter.  The initiation of any such enquiries during
    a hearing is, however, a matter for the  judge.   In  practice,  it  is
    unlikely that it would be necessary or appropriate to take such action.
     In most cases, if the standard of interpretation is such as  seriously
    to raise an issue that needs investigating,  the  point  will  probably
    already have been reached where the hearing will have to  be  adjourned
    and re-heard by a different judge (using a different interpreter).

(7)   On an appeal against a judge's decision, even  if  it  is  established
    that there was or  may  have  been  inadequate  interpretation  at  the
    hearing before the judge, the appeal will be  unlikely  to  succeed  if
    there is nothing to suggest the outcome was adversely affected  by  the
    inadequate interpretation.  This will be the position where  the  judge
    has made adverse findings regarding the appellant, which do not  depend
    on the oral evidence (Perera, paragraphs 24 and 34).

(8)   It is important  that  Tribunal-appointed  interpreters  are  able  to
    discharge their functions, to the best of their abilities.  It is  part
    of the judicial function to enable an interpreter to do  this  by,  for
    instance, preventing a party or  representative  from  behaving  in  an
    intimidating or oppressive way towards the interpreter.   By  the  same
    token, the Tribunal and the parties are entitled  to  expect  that  the
    interpreter will interpret accurately, regardless of  what  he  or  she
    personally thinks of the evidence they are being required to translate.






                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. THE ROLE OF INTERPRETERS

 1. Court and Tribunal-appointed interpreters perform a vital role  in  our
    justice system.  They provide the means of  communication  between  the
    judge and the other parties and participants  in  proceedings  where  a
    litigant or witness cannot satisfactorily communicate in  the  language
    of the court or tribunal (usually English).  The present case  examines
    what should happen when, during a hearing, questions  arise  about  the
    accuracy of the  interpretation  being  provided  by  the  interpreter,
    whether it be from English to the language of the party or witness;  or
    from that language to English.



B. THE HEARING

 2. In the present case, the hearing took place before a Judge of the First-
    tier  Tribunal,  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  in  September  2018.   The
    appellant was challenging the decision of the respondent to refuse  her
    protection claim.  That claim involved the appellant being a citizen of
    Eritrea who said  she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  if
    returned to that country, because of her Pentecostal Christianity.  She
    left Eritrea in 2013, staying in Djibouti  from  then  until  September
    2016, when she embarked on a journey to Europe that eventually led  her
    to the United Kingdom, by way of Switzerland and France.

 3. The judge had this to say about what happened at the hearing:-

         "2.  The appellant had requested and was provided with  an  Ahmaric
             [sic] interpreter for the duration  of  this  appeal  hearing.
             Notwithstanding  the  provision   of   a   Tribunal   approved
             interpreter, at public expense,  the  appellant,  through  her
             solicitors, expended further public  funds  (courtesy  of  the
             legal aid fund) by having another interpreter present.   Those
             of us who sit in this Tribunal are well aware that  there  can
             sometimes  be  difficulties  and/or  even   limitations   with
             interpretation and so tend  to  be  alert  to  spot  any  such
             difficulties.  There are cases where an  appellant  wants  the
             services of an  interpreter  but  then  tends  to  respond  in
             English or partly in English  and  partly  in  his/her  mother
             tongue.  There are those cases  where  the  appellant  has  no
             difficulty understanding the interpreted  questions  in  chief
             but if and  when  difficult  questions  are  asked  in  cross-
             examination,  either  has,   or   feigns   having   difficulty
             understanding what is being asked.  Then there is a case  like
             the  instant  where  counsel  alleges  that  the  non-Tribunal
             interpreter  has  alleged  either  that  something  has   been
             misinterpreted or an answer has not been fully interpreted.

         3.   Both counsel and the Tribunal  Judge  find  themselves  in  an
             invidious position because they  cannot  act  as  the  referee
             between two different interpreters.  On two separate occasions
             [counsel]  asserted  that  she  had   "concerns"   about   the
             interpretation taking place, not in the sense that she alleged
             that anything said by the appellant had been misinterpreted or
             inaccurately interpreted, but on the  basis  that  she  feared
             that not everything said by  the  appellant  might  have  been
             fully interpreted.  My judicial faculties had not caused me to
             have the same "concerns".  These concerns  mainly  arose  when
             [the  Presenting  Officer]  began  to  cross-examine.   In  an
             attempt to  allay  any  such  concerns  I  directed  that  all
             questions must be short, concise and put in  a  simple  manner
             without any complicated or convoluted phrasing or words  being
             used.  [The Presenting Officer] wholly co-operated  with  that
             direction, although on one or two  occasions  he  dropped  his
             voice and  so  a  question  had  to  be  repeated  before  the
             interpreter could interpret it.

         4.   Notwithstanding the foregoing  approach  [counsel]  intervened
             again after a note  had  been  passed  to  her  by  the  other
             interpreter.  I was not shown that note.  [counsel] then  made
             an application that the hearing should in effect, be abandoned
             and  a  new  appeal  hearing  should  be  directed.   Although
             [counsel] did not expressly say so, the inference was that any
             new  appeal  hearing  should  take  place  with  a   different
             interpreter.  [counsel] put her application explicitly on  the
             basis that she had a concern that a  fair  hearing  could  not
             take place.  I asked her questions in an attempt to tease  out
             the  precise  basis  upon  which  she  maintained  that   that
             submission could be made out.

         5.   However, before I decided on that application and whilst I was
             trying to tease out the precise basis upon which it  was  put,
             [counsel] made a second application.  [counsel]  asked  me  to
             adjourn notwithstanding that her client was  part-way  through
             being cross-examined, so that she could take instructions from
             her client concerning matters relating to interpretation.  She
             expanded upon that by saying that she wanted a period of  time
             that would permit her (presumably with the  assistance  of  an
             interpreter)  to  go  through  each  question  asked  of   the
             appellant and each answer  given  by  the  appellant  so  that
             presumably, having taken such  instructions,  she  could  then
             assert to me that  this,  that  or  the  other  had  not  been
             interpreted completely and/or accurately.

         6.   I rejected her (second) application for the following reasons:

             (i)  The intervention came at a point where the appellant  was
                  part-way through cross-examination.  It is a  strict  rule
                  of procedure in our Courts and  Tribunals  that  witnesses
                  are  not  spoken  to  about  their  evidence,  by  anybody
                  whomsoever, whilst in the course of giving evidence.

             (ii) It is wholly inappropriate for a Tribunal judge to  enter
                  into some kind of refereeing situation to  choose  between
                  the  official  Tribunal   interpreter   and   some   other
                  interpreter who has passed a note to counsel (not seen  by
                  the judge) which, seemingly, acted as the catalyst for the
                  request that counsel should be able to go through each and
                  every question and answer with her client.  Presumably, it
                  was intended that counsel would then return to the hearing
                  and make assertions to me, notwithstanding that I would be
                  in no position to know whether they were  well-founded  or
                  ill founded.

             (iii)    The request and intervention came at a stage  in  the
                  cross-examination where  the  appellant  was  being  asked
                  questions which were only marginally relevant to the  main
                  issues in the appeal.  To be more specific, it arose at  a
                  stage where the appellant appeared to be giving  equivocal
                  evidence as to whether she had made a  particular  journey
                  from Switzerland to France alone  or  in  the  company  of
                  other people, and, if so, what people.   This  appeal  was
                  certainly not going to turn upon that issue.

             (iv) As always I was mindful  of  the  difficulties  that  can
                  arise  in  cases  where  interpreters  are  involved   and
                  considered that on the principal factual issues upon which
                  the appellant was being  questioned,  the  thrust  of  her
                  evidence, by the answers that she was  giving,  was  being
                  properly put across.  I  appreciate  that,  to  a  limited
                  extent, this means that the judge has to take a view about
                  the interpretation that  is  taking  place,  but  that  is
                  something which a judge in this  jurisdiction  has  to  do
                  week in and week out.  It is part of the essential  judge-
                  craft in this jurisdiction."

 4. At paragraph 8, the judge said that the time came when he:

       "formed  the  view  that  there  was  a  whiff  of  tactics  to  this
       manoeuvring  in  that  whatever  I  said  concerning  interpretation,
       [counsel's] response, on several occasions, was "let me make  a  note
       of that".  Those comments simply reinforced my view that there was  a
       whiff of manoeuvring going on to try and lay the ground for an appeal
       in the event of this appeal being unsuccessful".

 5. At paragraph 9, the judge provided additional reasons for his  decision
    not to adjourn; namely, that any deficiency in interpretation had  not,
    in  his  view,  caused  the  thrust  of  the  appellant's  case  to  be
    misunderstood; that  any  lengthy  or  complicated  question  had  been
    required to be split into simple component parts; that  the  judge  had
    clarified any apparently equivocal answer by  the  appellant,  via  the
    interpreter; and  that  the  concerns  expressed  to  the  judge  about
    interpretation were "vague and non-specific" in nature.

 6. The judge's decision then turned to  an  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    credibility.  The judge found this to be wanting.  In large  part,  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings were  based  upon  inconsistencies
    within and between her various written witness statements and interview
    record;  and  on  assertions  therein  which  the  judge  regarded   as
    nonsensical or contrary to the experience of the Tribunal.

 7. At paragraph 43(ii), however, it is apparent that  the  judge  rejected
    aspects of the appellant's oral evidence at the hearing, such  as  that
    she was given E300 by the father of her child, which  she  claimed  had
    she paid to an agent:-

         "It  would  have  been  totally  obvious  to  somebody   with   the
         appellant's guile, who had sojourned in Switzerland for about  four
         years, that there was no need whatsoever for her  to  pay  a  third
         party to assist her to purchase a train ticket to travel to France.
          I am in no doubt whatsoever that she would not have wasted E300 by
         paying it to a third party."

 8. At paragraph 43(iii), the judge concluded that -

         "Notwithstanding that the respondent accepted  the  assertion  that
         the appellant is a Pentecostal  Christian,  I  do  not  accept  her
         evidence that she intends to wear that  religion  upon  her  sleeve
         and/or to proselytise about it wherever she might find herself."

 9. The judge regarded that assertion as "self-serving evidence of the type
    only to be expected from somebody who claims that the  outcome  of  her
    asylum claim depends, at least  to  a  significant  extent,  upon  that
    evidence".

10. Overall, the judge  concluded,  at  paragraph  43(iv),  that  the  "The
    appellant's credibility and reliability as a witness is so  compromised
    that I am unable to place any weight upon it, save to the  extent  that
    it is corroborated by reliable testimony".  The  judge  then  explained
    why the supporting evidence from witnesses who attended the hearing did
    not materially assist the  appellant.   He  accordingly  dismissed  her
    appeal.

11. Counsel who had appeared for the appellant before the  judge  submitted
    written grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Ground  1  asserted
    that there had been procedural unfairness as a result  of  refusing  to
    adjourn the appeal hearing.  Reliance was placed upon the  decision  of
    McCloskey J in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC)
    where, at paragraph 5, it was said:-

         "5.  As a general rule, good reason would have to  be  demonstrated
             in order to secure an adjournment.  There are strong practical
             and case management reasons  for  this,  particularly  in  the
             contemporary  litigation  culture   with   its   emphasis   on
             efficiency and  expedition.   However,  these  considerations,
             unquestionably important though they are, must be tempered and
             applied with the recognition that  a  fundamental  common  law
             right, namely the right of every litigant to a  fair  hearing,
             is  engaged.   In  any  case  where  a  question  of  possible
             adjournment arises, this is the dominant consideration."

12. Ground 1 pointed to counsel's  note  of  the  hearing,  which  made  it
    evident that, at the conclusion of cross-examination of the  appellant,
    counsel had been allowed to confer with the appellant and the  Amharic-
    speaking interpreter provided by her instructing solicitor in order  to
    attend the hearing and assist counsel with  interpretation.   Following
    that conference, ground 1 asserted that the appellant's counsel had not
    put  "vague  and  non-specific  concerns"  to  the  judge   about   the
    interpretation.  Furthermore, the judge had failed to take into account
    the fact that the appellant herself had said at the  hearing  that  her
    answers to the Presenting Officer's questions were not being accurately
    interpreted.  Ground 1 said the judge "fails to address this at all  in
    his decision.  He proceeds on the simple basis that it was only on  the
    basis of  the  A's  interpreter  and  the  A's  legal  representative's
    concerns".

13. Ground 1 also submitted that the judge  had  taken  irrelevant  factors
    into account in deciding the adjournment applications; namely, that the
    consequence of abandoning the hearing would  be  wasted  costs,  public
    expense and a  burden  for  the  Tribunal  system;  that  some  of  the
    "problem" might have arisen from the  fact  that  the  appellant  spoke
    Tigrinyan; and that the judge had also stated  to  counsel  during  the
    hearing, when interpretation issues were raised, that "this is not good
    for your case as your client is meant to understand Amharic".

14. Ground 2 concerned an alleged failure by the judge to take into account
    relevant post-hearing evidence.  This was a witness statement, from the
    appellant's counsel, which was attached to the grounds of  appeal  that
    had also been sent to the First-tier Tribunal on 26 September 2016, for
    the urgent attention of the judge concerned, three working  days  after
    the hearing on 21 September.  The judge's decision was not  promulgated
    until 2 October 2018.

15. Counsel's witness statement contains the following:-

         "    ...

         2.   At the  hearing,  the  proceedings  were  interpreted  to  the
             Appellant by the Amharic-speaking court interpreter.

         3.    My  instructing   solicitors   had   instructed   their   own
             interpreter, Mr Beyene, to attend the hearing, to sit  at  the
             back of the court, take note of  the  proceedings,  and  check
             that the interpreting was accurate.

         4.   During the appellant's evidence, Mr Beyene passed  me  a  note
             which stated that the appellant and the court interpreter were
             not correctly understanding each other.

         5.   I took instructions from my client at the  conclusion  of  her
             evidence to the same effect.

         6.   I applied for an adjournment of the proceedings,  in  summary,
             on the basis that the  interpreting  was  inaccurate  and  the
             evidence could not be  relied  upon.   The  hearing  would  be
             unfair.

         7.   This application  was  refused  by  the  judge.   The  hearing
             therefore proceeded.

         8.   After the hearing had concluded, I left the court building and
             waited at the  bus  stop  which  is  on  Faggs  Road,  located
             immediately on the left, after  coming  up  from  Dukes  Green
             Avenue.  I was waiting there for  approximately  5-10  minutes
             for a bus to Hatton Cross tube station.

         9.   When I arrived at the bus  stop,  I  noticed  that  the  court
             interpreter from the hearing was at the bus stop.  I  did  not
             initiate any conversation with her.

         10.  A few minutes after  arriving  at  the  bus  stop,  the  court
             interpreter  approached  me  in  a   confrontational   or   an
             aggressive manner, and informed me of the following:

             (i)  My client had been  lying  because  she  had  interpreted
                  everything accurately during the hearing;

             (ii) Eritrea is safe and there is no danger there.  The war is
                  over, the borders are open and people are celebrating.  My
                  client faces no danger there at all;

             (iii)    she feels sorry for the judge who has  to  deal  with
                  these types of cases.

         11.  I did not respond, save for, at first, to remind  her  that  I
             had not accused her personally of not accurately interpreting,
             but I was acting on my client's instructions.

         12.  I was extremely concerned that this behaviour  as  it  clearly
             puts into question the  independence  of  the  court-appointed
             interpreter and, on any view, displays a lack of impartiality.



         13.  I would ask that this information be brought to the  attention
             of [the judge] before a decision in  respect  of  my  client's
             appeal is made, as, in my view, it directly impacts  upon  the
             fairness of the proceedings."

16. Ground 3 contended that the judge had made "multiple errors" in respect
    of the appellant's evidence including that  "nowhere  in  her  evidence
    [did she say] she paid E300 to an agent to travel from  Switzerland  to
    France".  Rather, the appellant's account was that the money  was  paid
    to make the journey from France to the United Kingdom,  which  required
    the services of an agent.

17. Ground 4 complained that the judge had failed  to  give  the  appellant
    fair notice that he  was  going  behind  the  concession  made  by  the
    respondent, concerning her Pentecostal Christianity.  There had been no
    suggestion that the respondent considered that the appellant would  not
    wish to proselytise.

18. Ground 5 submitted that the judge had failed to follow  the  vulnerable
    witness guidance, whilst ground 6 submitted that he had failed to  take
    into account or place relevant weight on  the  appellant's  answers  in
    respect of her knowledge of Eritrea, at her asylum interview.



C. GUIDANCE AND CASELAW ON INTERPRETERS

(a) Chief Adjudicator's Guidance Note No. 3 (May 2002)

19. In May 2002, the Chief Adjudicator, HHJ Henry Hodge  OBE  (as  he  then
    was) issued an Adjudicator Guidance Note No. 3, concerning interpreters
    at immigration appeal hearings.   The  Guidance  Note  had  since  been
    withdrawn.  It nevertheless contains the  following  passage  which  we
    take to be uncontroversial:-

         "No. 6   There is no objection to appellant's representatives (sic)
                bringing  in  their  own  interpreter.   Interpreting  is  a
                difficult job particularly when being done  under  pressure.
                An appellant's interpreter  however  must  only  communicate
                through the appellant's representatives.  If  there  is  any
                disagreement with  the  court  interpreter  the  appellant's
                interpreter can bring that to the representative's attention
                promptly.  It may be appropriate  to  have  the  appellant's
                interpreter  sit  relatively  close   to   the   appellant's
                representative."




(b) Perera v Secretary of State for the Home Department

20. In Perera v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ
    1002, the Court of  Appeal  was  concerned  with  a  challenge  to  the
    decision of an Adjudicator in which it was alleged that  the  Tribunal-
    appointed interpreter had committed errors of interpretation.  In fact,
    a challenge to the  use  of  the  interpreter  had  been  made  by  the
    appellant's solicitor (who spoke Sinhalese)  even  before  the  hearing
    commenced.  The solicitor had encountered the interpreter in connection
    with another appeal, where the solicitor considered the  interpretation
    provided to another adjudicator had been wrong.

21. The present adjudicator was unmoved by this submission and the  hearing
    commenced, using the interpreter.  The solicitor  subsequently  made  a
    statement in which he said that the interpreter was unable to interpret
    many of the questions put to the appellant and the witness from English
    to Sinhalese and vice versa.  The solicitor had intervened to point out
    that the interpreter was wrong; but the adjudicator "seemed to be quite
    irritated at my interventions".

22. The adjudicator's contemporaneous note recorded the intervention of the
    appellant's solicitor.  From her notes,  it  could  be  seen  that  the
    adjudicator had stated at the hearing that it was always difficult  for
    an interpreter, when there  was  someone  else  present  with  relevant
    language  knowledge.   As  far  as  the  adjudicator  could  tell,  the
    appellant and  the  interpreter  had  been  understanding  each  other.
    However, if there were to be a problem after lunch the adjudicator said
    that the appellant's solicitor was to identify it with the  interpreter
    manager in the hearing room "so we can understand the problem".

23. In her determination, the adjudicator said as follows:-

         "28.  Before  the  appeal  commenced  on  21  November   2002   the
             appellant's  representative  requested   that   the   retained
             Sinhalese interpreter be  changed  as  he  claimed  that  this
             interpreter had been involved  in  another  matter  where  the
             interpreter and the representative's client had not understood
             each other.  I noted the appellant's representative  had  made
             adverse comments about another interpreter in the language  of
             Sinhalese used at the appellant's interview.


         29.  In the event, when the appellant and his brother  came  before
             me to give evidence, I was satisfied that the interpreter  and
             each of the witnesses understood each other.   There  was  the
             occasional interruption by the appellant's  representative  to
             identify the interpreter had not  interpreted  him  correctly,
             particularly during  cross-examination.   During  a  break  in
             proceedings I checked with the manager  of  the  Interpreters'
             Section who confirmed the interpreter was  often  retained  by
             IAA to interpret in the language of Sinhalese and  there  were
             no  adverse  comments  on  her   record.    When   proceedings
             recommenced I requested the appellant's representative, if  he
             had any further comments to make about the  interpreter,  then
             the manager for the Interpreters' Section should be present so
             that the appellant's  representative  could  identify  exactly
             what the problem was with this Sinhalese interpreter.  In  the
             event, no further comment was made  and  the  matter  was  not
             referred to by the appellant's  representative  in  his  final
             submissions.


         30.  Both the appellant and  his  brother  confirmed  as  true  and
             correct the contents of their respective statements adduced in
             evidence.


         31.  Each of the witnesses was then examined orally before me.   My
             Record of Proceedings, now forming part of  the  appeal  file,
             sets out details of oral evidence, both as to questions  asked
             and answers given.


         32.  At the end of oral examination, at  the  second  part  of  the
             hearing, each of  the  representatives  gave  me  their  final
             submissions,  each  referring  to  all  the  salient   points.
             Details of those submissions are, again, set out in my  Record
             of Proceedings which now forms part of the appeal file."


24. Before the Court of Appeal, counsel for the appellant (whose appeal had
    been dismissed by  the  adjudicator)  submitted  that  further  enquiry
    should have been made by  the  adjudicator,  in  the  presence  of  the
    parties, as to the competence and qualifications  of  the  interpreter.
    Counsel referred to what was described as the "Guide  to  Adjudicators"
    of May 2002.  This appears to be a different document from the Guidance
    Note No.  3,  to  which  we  have  already  referred.   The  "Guide  to
    adjudicators" apparently said that where an interpreter  is  challenged
    "the ability and skill level  of  the  interpreter  present  should  be
    quickly verified [by the adjudicator] by speaking  to  the  Interpreter
    Team Leader".

25. Counsel submitted that it had been insufficient for the adjudicator  to
    raise the question with the manager, during lunch, as  to  whether  the
    interpreter had any adverse comments recorded  against  her.   Overall,
    the adjudicator's reaction to the  issues  raised  by  the  appellant's
    solicitor during the hearing had been inadequate and  the  standard  of
    interpretation was not so as to enable the witnesses to  present  their
    evidence in persuasive fashion and to enable the  adjudicator  properly
    to assess it.

26. Pill LJ  gave  the  leading  judgment.   He  rejected  the  appellant's
    complaints about interpretation:-

         "24. Before expressing  my  conclusion  upon  the  complaint  about
             interpretation,  I  consider  the   context   in   which   the
             Adjudicator's findings of fact and conclusions were made.  The
             Adjudicator's findings adverse to the Appellant were based  on
             a number of factors.  I have summarised these in paragraphs  4
             to  6  of  this   judgment.    The   Adjudicator   relied   on
             inconsistencies in accounts given in the statement of evidence
             form (SEF), at interview and in a written statement as to  the
             alleged  raid  on  the  house  in  December  2001,  which   Mr
             Grodzinski not unfairly describes  as  the  core  event.   The
             inconsistencies  set  out  at  paragraphs  45  to  47  of  the
             determination do not depend on the oral evidence given at  the
             hearing before the Adjudicator.  The finding  in  relation  to
             whether the JVP were violent does not depend on evidence given
             at that hearing but on an answer when interviewed on  13  June
             2002.  While a fairly detailed written complaint was  made  by
             the solicitor  about  the  quality  of  interpretation,  by  a
             different interpreter, on that occasion, no complaint was made
             in relation to the statement that the JVP never used violence.
              It has not been suggested on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  how
             these inconsistencies are to be explained, and the Adjudicator
             was entitled to have regard to them.


         25.  Mr Jones stresses that this was a case in  which,  because  of
             the other major difficulties faced by the  Appellant,  it  was
             necessary to give his oral evidence at the  hearing  the  most
             careful consideration and there was a risk, it  is  submitted,
             that the quality of the  interpretation  may  have  made  that
             impossible.  If one point was misunderstood  as  a  result  of
             poor interpretation, it cannot be known what the Adjudicator's
             conclusion would have been but for that error.  I bear in mind
             the importance of looking at "all the evidence in the  round",
             as submitted by Mr Jones.  The Adjudicator claimed to rely  on
             the oral  evidence.   In  relation  to  what  the  Adjudicator
             described as "a very blatant  inconsistency  between  the  two
             brothers'  accounts"  of  the  raid  in  December  2001,   the
             Adjudicator is claimed to have taken account of only  part  of
             the Adjudicator's report in  the  brother's  case  when  other
             parts would have assisted the Appellant.


         26.  In my judgment, the Appellant has not been prejudiced in  this
             case as a result of the need to interpret between English  and
             Sinhalese and the way it was done.  I attach importance to the
             Adjudicator's own assessment, expressed in her contemporaneous
             note and  in  her  determination,  that  the  interpreter  and
             witnesses understood  each  other.   For  the  reasons  given,
             adverse  consequences  do  not  flow  from   the   Adjudicator
             recording, at one point in her note, that UNP were in power at
             a time when they were not in  power.   Even  if  there  was  a
             misunderstanding  on  one  point,  it  does  not  affect   the
             Adjudicator's findings  on  other  points  or  create  a  real
             possibility that, but for that point, conclusions  might  have
             been different.  Cogent  reasons  were  given  which  did  not
             relate to the oral evidence at the  hearing.  In  finding  the
             inconsistency between the two brothers' accounts,  it  is  the
             written  statements  of  the  brothers,  both  of  which  were
             submitted to her, that the Adjudicator appears to have  relied
             on.


         27.  I am not persuaded that the interpretation at the hearing  was
             other than of an adequate standard.  Moreover, the Adjudicator
             having made an  enquiry  with  the  appropriate  manager,  the
             solicitor was given an opportunity to pursue with the  manager
             any concern he had.


         28.  While I acknowledge that a concerned solicitor  may  be  in  a
             difficult position, the complaint has, in the context of  this
             case, a lack  of  substance,  especially  in  the  absence  of
             further  action  by  him.   The  one  complaint  about   which
             particulars are given has been analysed with the help  of  the
             note  now  available.   There  are  no  particulars  of  other
             specific failures of the interpreter, either in statements  or
             by way of contemporaneous  note,  to  give  substance  to  the
             general complaint made.  I add that I am very doubtful whether
             further action by the solicitor would have revealed a state of
             affairs which required further action by the Adjudicator.

         29.  I also consider the complaint in the context of  the  evidence
             and findings in  the  case,  which  I  have  summarised.   The
             Appellant had a fair hearing, in my judgment.  I see  no  risk
             that the Adjudicator did not have the opportunity properly  to
             assess the evidence of the witnesses or that her findings  can
             be impugned by  reason  of  any  fault  in  interpretation  or
             procedure."

27.  Judge LJ added the following remarks:-

         "32. It is well-understood that if the  litigant  cannot  speak  or
             comprehend the language in use at the proceedings in which  he
             is involved, he needs an interpreter.  His  physical  presence
             at the hearing is not enough. It may however be  worth  adding
             that the  court's  responsibility  to  do  justice  cannot  be
             performed if an interpreter  is  not  available  when  one  is
             needed, or when the interpreter who is  available  is  not  of
             adequate competence.  The court, no  less  than  the  litigant
             disadvantaged in the use of English, needs an interpreter.

         33.  Interpreters perform their duties to the best of  their  skill
             and understanding. There are bound to be  occasions  when  the
             translation of words from one language  into  another  may  be
             less than exact, and ideas, and  concepts,  expressed  in  one
             language, cannot always pass from and  into  another  language
             without some change, perhaps simply of emphasis.

         34.   When  a  responsible  legal  representative  expresses   some
             dissatisfaction about the quality of  the  interpretation  and
             the skills of the interpreter, that plainly gives  rise  to  a
             concern which the court, or in this instance the  Adjudicator,
             should immediately address.  That  is  what  this  Adjudicator
             did. The  responsibility  for  deciding  whether  or  not  the
             proceedings should continue with the existing interpreter,  or
             whether  the  interpreter  should  be   discharged   and   the
             proceedings restarted, falls not on the legal representatives,
             but on the Adjudicator. For the reasons given by  Pill  LJ,  I
             agree that no sufficient basis for impugning  the  quality  of
             the interpretation in the present proceedings has been  shown,
             and there is nothing which suggests that the  outcome  of  the
             proceedings from the appellant's point of view  was  adversely
             affected by inadequate or unskilled interpretation."

28. Neuberger LJ agreed with both judgments.



(c) SJ (Hearing Interpreters") Iran

29. In SJ ("Hearing Interpreters") Iran [2004] UKIAT 00131, the Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal allowed an appeal on the following basis:-


         "3.  The grounds of appeal are extensive.  In fact they really are
             too long but they do raise a point of central  concern.   They
             complain about the conduct of the interpreter.   It  is  quite
             plain that the interpreter's competence was challenged  during
             the hearing by a person instructed by the  appellant.   It  is
             also plain that the Adjudicator went to  considerable  efforts
             to  maintain  order  in  his  hearing  room  and  protect  the
             interpreter from  being  criticised  in  an  intimidating  and
             unfair way.

         4.   We have evidence presented in a proper form from  counsel  at
             the hearing and the interpreter  who  was  instructed  by  the
             appellant to check on the quality of the interpreter  provided
             by the Appellate Authority.  It is clear  from  reading  these
             statements that the  interpreter  responded  to  criticism  by
             lowering her voice so that her  interpretation  could  not  be
             heard.  Whilst we have  a  great  deal  of  sympathy  for  the
             interpreter taking this course it was wrong.  Hearings in  the
             Appellate Authority are almost always conducted in public  and
             that means they have to be conducted in a way that members  of
             the public and people with a particular interest in  the  case
             can  understand  what  is  happening.    By   permitting   the
             interpreter to interpret too quietly for other people to  hear
             the Adjudicator erred.

         5.   Justice must be seen to be done and the only way this can  be
             remedied is for the appeal to be heard again  by  a  different
             Adjudicator."



(d) Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Bench Book (2005)



30. In 2005, Hodge J (as he had become) issued a Bench Book  for  the  then
    newly created Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Paragraph 8.12  of  the
    Bench Book had this to say on the subject of interpreter difficulties:-

         "8.12    The interpreter will inform the judge of any  difficulties
                that he is encountering.   Sometimes,  the  appellant's  own
                interpreter, who has come to  the  hearing,  will  tell  the
                appellant's representative that the court interpreter is not
                doing a good job.  The judge will need to find  out  exactly
                what these alleged  deficiencies  are,  and  ask  the  court
                interpreter if he is aware of any problem.  He should record
                any alternative renditions of a word or phrase given by  the
                court interpreter  and  the  appellant's  interpreter.   The
                witness will, of course, also have a view on this.   If  the
                difficulty is due  to  the  interpreter  and  appellant  not
                speaking the same dialect, then of course  it  will  not  be
                possible to continue hearing the oral evidence,  and  unless
                another interpreter is available, the case will have  to  be
                adjourned.  On the other hand, the judge will  be  reluctant
                to abort the proceedings where the court interpreter insists
                that there is no problem, and the alleged difficulties  seem
                to be a delaying tactic.

         8.13.    More often, the interpreter will have  difficulty  because
                the  questions  put  to  the  witness  are  too   long   and
                complicated, or because the witness is replying too  rapidly
                and volubly.  The judge should ask  that  the  questions  be
                simplified or broken down into manageable chunks,  and  that
                the witness slow down  and  give  the  interpreter  time  to
                translate the answers sentence by sentence.   If  there  are
                still  unduly  protracted  exchanges  between  witness   and
                interpreter, the judge should inquire into the  reason.   It
                may  be  that  the   interpreter   is   trying   to   obtain
                clarification from the witness in order to give  a  sensible
                translation.  But if the witness's answers do  not  seem  to
                make sense, the interpreter should still translate  them  as
                they are.  It is up to the representatives (or the judge) to
                pursue areas of doubt emerging from the answers."



D. CURRENT ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERPRETERS IN COURTS AND TRIBUNALS ETC

31. Ms Fitzsimons has provided a considerable amount of helpful information
    on the subject of interpreters.   This  has  been  supplemented  by  Mr
    Lindsay.  Both make reference to what is said about interpreters in the
    Best Practice Guide to Asylum  and  Human  Rights  Appeals  (Henderson,
    Moffatt    and    Pickup)    which    is     to     be     found     at
    https://www.ein.org.uk/bpg/chapter/34#toc2.

32.  A  National  Register  of  Public  Service  Interpreters  (NRPSI)  was
    established in 1994, administered by the Institute of  Linguists,  with
    the support of the Home Office and the Ministry of Justice (as  it  now
    is).  The Best Practice Guide says:-

         "It  is  often,  not  unnaturally,  assumed   by   appellants   and
         representatives - and perhaps by some  judges  -  that  only  NRPSI
         interpreters are used for court work by the Tribunal.  This is  not
         the case.  The Tribunal administration has made efforts to  improve
         the quality of interpreters in recent years,  but  it  remains  the
         position that Tribunal interpreters do not need  to  have  relevant
         qualifications or be members of the NRPSI."

33. From 31 October 2016, interpretation services for all courts, tribunals
    and prisons have been supplied under contract with thebigword Group Ltd
    and Clarion UK Ltd.  The bigword  Group  Ltd  provides  face  to  face,
    telephone and video remote interpreting services for spoken  languages,
    whilst Clarion UK Ltd provides sign language services.

34.  The  qualifications  and  experience  required  of  interpreters  vary
    depending on the category of the booking and the  language  service  in
    question required.  The Ministry  of  Justice  Guide  to  Language  and
    Translation Services in Courts  and  Tribunals  differentiates  between
    "complex written", "complex other" and "standard" services.   There  is
    also differentiation  between  languages:  "standard  languages"  (41);
    "special services" (7 non-spoken languages); and  "languages  permitted
    exceptional qualifications requirements"; that  is  to  say,  languages
    without DPSI.  There are 152 such languages,  which  fall  outside  the
    standard languages category.  The acronym DPSI refers to  the  "Diploma
    in Public Services Interpreting".  The upshot is that where a  language
    falls under the "exceptional qualification requirements",  interpreters
    are not required to have a DPSI.  This appears to be on the basis  that
    such languages are less frequently spoken.

35. The Language Shop (London Borough of Newham) runs a  quality  assurance
    service in respect of the Ministry of Justice's language contract.  The
    workings of this are described in  a  document  entitled  a  "guide  to
    quality assurance of the MOJ Language  services  contract",  which  "is
    intended to raise standards and keep them high,  resulting  in  a  more
    reliable, accurate safe provision".  The Language Shop  guide  provides
    for a complaints procedure, that can be made to the  supplier  directly
    or to the Language Shop, but not to both.  The Language  Shop  holds  a
    register of linguists on behalf of the MOJ. Only those linguists  whose
    details are included on this register are  permitted  to  work  on  MoJ
    bookings made under the language services  framework.   If  a  linguist
    fails any part of the quality assessment  they  must  be  suspended  or
    removed from the register.  Assessments are carried out  via  so-called
    "mystery shopping" assessments, spot check  assessments  and  in-person
    assessments.

36. Amharic is one of the "languages permitted  exceptional  qualifications
    requirements (languages  without  DPSI)".   The  qualifications  for  a
    standard booking in respect of an interpreter in such  a  language  are
    set out at Annex E to the MoJ Guide.



E. LEGAL AID FOR INTERPRETERS TO ASSIST APPELLANTS' REPRESENTATIVES

37.  Ms  Fitzsimons   has   also   provided   information   regarding   the
    qualifications of interpreters who are funded by the Legal  Aid  Agency
    in order to assist an appellant's representative.   The  result  of  Ms
    Fitzsimons' investigations  is  that  there  appear  to  have  been  no
    specific requirements regarding  interpreters  in  this  regard  before
    September 2018.  In relation to matters opened in  or  after  September
    2018,  however,  the  Standard  Civil  Contract   Specification   makes
    provision about the qualifications of interpreters.  Paragraph 2.48  of
    the Specification states that the representative may  not  instruct  an
    individual  to  provide  interpretation  services  in  connection  with
    contract work unless the individual holds at least one of a  number  of
    specified   qualifications.    These   include   "Basic    Interpreting
    Qualification", Community Interpreting Levels 2, 3 and  4  and  the  UK
    Border Agency Certificate.

38. Paragraph  2.50  provides  that  this  requirement  may  not  apply  in
    "exceptional circumstances", which include where there would  otherwise
    be undue delay and/or increased costs; where  the  client  requests  an
    interpreter of a specific gender and such a request  cannot  reasonably
    be  accommodated  otherwise  than  by  the  use  of   a   non-qualified
    interpreter; and where there is a rare language or dialect which cannot
    reasonably be accommodated otherwise than by the use of a non-qualified
    interpreter.

39.  In  such  cases,  the  representative  "must  be  satisfied  that  the
    interpreter has a suitable level of expertise and prepare a  file  note
    setting out the justification".

40. In the present case  (which  was  opened  before  September  2018)  the
    appellant's solicitors engaged  Mr  Beyene,  through  an  agency.   The
    agency stated that Mr Beyene had worked for them for twelve  years  and
    had twenty years' experience as an interpreter.



F. GENERAL PRINCIPLES

41. There is no reason  of  which  we  are  aware  to  regard  the  current
    contractual arrangements for the provision of interpreters at  tribunal
    hearings as providing anything other than an appropriate set of quality
    controls, designed to ensure that appellants and witnesses who  require
    an interpreter to give their evidence can  do  so  (and  be  questioned
    about it) in a way that satisfies  the  requirements  of  justice.   In
    particular, the rationale for  permitting  "exceptional  qualifications
    requirements" instead of a DPSI is cogent.   The  role  played  by  the
    Language Shop is plainly important, both as regards its general  checks
    on registered interpreters and also in dealing with specific complaints
    about  an  interpreter.   In  short,  the  present  system  provides  a
    satisfactory  level  of  confidence  that,   as   a   general   matter,
    interpreters who are engaged by the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  to
    translate at hearings are adequately qualified to undertake that  task.



42. Although it is impossible to provide authoritative answers to the range
    of questions concerning issues with interpreters that may  nevertheless
    arise from time to time at hearings it is,  nevertheless,  possible  to
    set out the following general principles.

43. As the judgments in Perera show, an appellate tribunal will usually  be
    slow to overturn a judge's decision on the basis of alleged errors  in,
    or other problems with,  interpretation  at  the  hearing  before  that
    judge.  Weight will be given to the judge's own assessment  of  whether
    the interpreter and the appellant  or  witness  understood  each  other
    (Perera, paragraph 26).

44. Such an assessment by the judge should normally be  undertaken  at  the
    outset of the hearing  by  the  judge  (a)  putting  questions  to  the
    appellant/witness and (b) considering the replies.  Although he or  she
    may not be able to speak the  language  of  the  appellant/witness,  an
    experienced judge will usually be  able  to  detect  difficulties;  for
    example, an unexpected or vague reply to a specific question that  lies
    within the area of knowledge of the appellant/witness (such  as  asking
    the person concerned as to how and by what route they travelled to  the
    hearing centre); or  a  suspiciously  terse  translation  of  what  has
    plainly been a much longer  reply  given  to  the  interpreter  by  the
    appellant/witness.  Non-verbal reactions may also be factored into  the
    judge's overall assessment.  It is difficult to be any  more  specific;
    we are, here, very much in the realm of judge craft.

45.  Where  an  issue  regarding  interpretation  arises  at  the  hearing,
    including  the  situation  where  an  interpreter  appointed   by   the
    appellant's representatives, and present at that hearing, considers the
    Tribunal-appointed interpreter has inadequately translated  a  question
    or answer, the matter should be raised with the judge at the hearing so
    that it can be addressed there and then.  Even if  the  representatives
    do not do so, the judge should act on his or  her  own  initiative,  if
    satisfied  that  an  issue  concerning  interpretation  needs   to   be
    addressed.

46. In many cases, the issue will be capable of swift resolution, with  the
    judge relying upon the duty of the  parties  under  rule  2(4)  of  the
    Procedure Rules of both of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers to  help
    the Tribunal to further the overriding objective of  dealing  with  the
    case fairly and justly.  For instance, it may be that clarification  of
    a  particular  word  or  phrase,  which  is  thought  to   be   causing
    difficulties, will enable matters to proceed smoothly.  In some  cases,
    as Hodge J envisaged, breaking questions up into short component  parts
    will be sufficient (as the judge attempted to do in the present  case).



47. A challenge by a  representative  to  the  competence  of  a  Tribunal-
    appointed interpreter must not be made  lightly.   If  made,  it  is  a
    matter for the judge to address, as an aspect of  the  judge's  overall
    duty to ensure a fair hearing.  Amongst the matters  to  be  considered
    will be whether the challenge appears to be motivated by  a  desire  to
    have the hearing aborted, rather than by any genuine  material  concern
    over the standard of interpretation.

48. It will be for the judge to decide whether a challenge to  the  quality
    of interpretation necessitates a check being made with a member of  the
    Tribunal's administrative staff who has responsibility for the  booking
    of interpreters.  The submission to that effect, recorded in  paragraph
    17 of Perera, was based on the now-withdrawn Guidance Note of 2002.

49. Under the current arrangements, it  may  be  possible  for  appropriate
    enquiries to be made by the administrative staff of the  Language  Shop
    as to whether the interpreter is on the register and whether  there  is
    any  current  disclosable  issue  regarding   the   interpreter.    The
    initiation of any such enquiries during a hearing is, however, a matter
    for the judge.  In practice, it is unlikely that it would be  necessary
    or appropriate to take such action.  In most cases, if the standard  of
    interpretation is such as  seriously  to  raise  an  issue  that  needs
    investigating, the point will probably already have been reached  where
    the hearing will have to be adjourned and re-heard by a different judge
    (using a different interpreter).

50. On an appeal against a judge's decision, even if it is established that
    there was or may have been inadequate  interpretation  at  the  hearing
    before the judge, the appeal will be unlikely to succeed  if  there  is
    nothing to suggest the outcome was  adversely  affected  by  inadequate
    interpretation.  This will be the position where  the  judge  has  made
    adverse findings regarding the appellant, which do not  depend  on  the
    oral evidence (Perera, paragraphs 24 and 34).

51. It is  important  that  Tribunal-appointed  interpreters  are  able  to
    discharge their functions, to the best of their abilities.  It is  part
    of the judicial function to enable an interpreter to do  this  by,  for
    instance, preventing a party or  representative  from  behaving  in  an
    intimidating or oppressive way towards the interpreter.   By  the  same
    token, the Tribunal and the parties are entitled  to  expect  that  the
    interpreter will interpret accurately, regardless of  what  he  or  she
    personally thinks of the evidence they are being required to translate.





G. DISCUSSION

52. With these principles in mind,  we  return  to  the  specifics  of  the
    appellant's case.  It will be evident from what we have said that there
    is a good deal in the judge's decision that is indicative  of  what  we
    regard as best practice.  The judge, who is experienced in these cases,
    formed the view that any deficiencies in interpretation which may  have
    taken place were not  such  as  to  have  "caused  the  thrust  of  the
    appellant's  case  to  be  misunderstood,   altered   or   inadequately
    expressed" (paragraph 9(i)).

53. On the other hand, it is clear from what the judge said in paragraph  2
    of his decision that  he  regarded  the  presence  of  the  interpreter
    instructed by the appellant's representatives as generally  problematic
    and, in particular, as an  unnecessary  expenditure  of  public  funds.
    That view appears to have coloured the  judge's  attitude  towards  the
    concerns which counsel for the appellant expressed,  on  the  basis  of
    what she was being told by the appellant's interpreter  about  the  way
    that  the  Tribunal-appointed  interpreter  was  translating  the  oral
    evidence.

54.  We also accept that the judge failed to have regard to the  fact  that
    the concerns regarding interpretation  were  not,  in  fact,  emanating
    solely from the appellant's interpreter but that the appellant herself,
    who understood some English, had said to the  judge  that  her  answers
    were not being accurately interpreted.  Whilst, as we  have  explained,
    an appellate tribunal will  generally  be  slow  to  interfere  with  a
    judge's conclusion that issues regarding interpretation had no material
    effect on the overall thrust of the evidence, the judge  does  need  to
    deal with the nature of  the  complaints  being  made.   Here,  it  was
    material that the complaints were coming  from  two  different  sources
    (namely, the appellant and the interpreter engaged by the  solicitors).



55. The appellant's grounds of application assert that the judge was  wrong
    to refuse the adjournment application by reference to the fact that the
    abandonment of the hearing would cause wasted costs, public expense and
    a burden for the Tribunal system.  As we have seen,  the  grounds  also
    complained  that  the  judge  indicated  that  some  of  the  "problem"
    encountered by the appellant with the  interpreter  might  have  arisen
    from the fact that the appellant speaks Tigrinyan and  that  the  judge
    said during the hearing that "this is not good for your  case  as  your
    client is meant to understand Amharic".

56. It does not appear that the judge was given an opportunity  to  comment
    upon what counsel said in the grounds about  his  alleged  comments  on
    this matter.  We therefore place only limited weight on this aspect  of
    the grounds,  notwithstanding  that  the  exchanges  were  said  to  be
    recorded in counsel's note of the hearing.

57.  However, in view of  the  fact  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness and had failed to prove  that  she
    was a citizen of Eritrea, the complaints  being  made  at  the  hearing
    about the quality of the translation to and from Amharic assume greater
    prominence.  We agree with the appellant's grounds, to the effect  that
    the judge's primary task at this point was to determine  whether  there
    were genuine difficulties with the Amharic-speaking interpreter, rather
    than considering whether the appellant spoke other languages  than  the
    one in which she was seeking to give her evidence.

58. In large part, the adverse credibility findings of the judge were based
    on inconsistencies and other  deficiencies  that  he  detected  in  the
    written evidence, as opposed to the oral evidence given at the hearing.
     As we have said above, by reference to the  judgments  in  Perera,  an
    appellate tribunal is likely to be unpersuaded to  disturb  a  judicial
    decision because of problems of oral  interpretation  at  the  hearing,
    where the reasoning of the judge does not materially  depend  upon  the
    oral evidence.

59. In the present case, the grounds take issue with the  apparent  finding
    of the judge at paragraph 43(ii) of the decision that the appellant had
    "a proclivity to lie and practise deception", on  the  basis  that  the
    judge did not accept the appellant had paid E300 to an  agent  to  take
    her from Switzerland to France.

60. Reading paragraph 43(ii), it is by no means apparent that  this  was  a
    finding that the judge did, in fact, make.  It is possible to read  his
    findings as involving the appellant (a) employing the  services  of  an
    agent to take the appellant from Switzerland to France, and (b)  paying
    an agent E300 to take the appellant to the United Kingdom.

61. Overall, so far as concerns the challenge in ground 1 on the  basis  of
    the judge's refusal to adjourn in the light  of  the  alleged  problems
    regarding interpretation at the hearing,  we  find  the  matter  to  be
    finely balanced.  Without ground 2, we  would  be  minded  to  conclude
    that, in all the circumstances, the judge  did  not  create  procedural
    unfairness by refusing to adjourn.

62. Ground 2, however, puts things in a very different light.  Despite what
    we  have  just  said,  it  was  apparent  that  both  the   appellant's
    interpreter and the appellant herself were having difficulties with the
    Tribunal-appointed  interpreter's  translations.   As  we   have   said
    earlier, each of the participants at a hearing needs to have confidence
    that the interpreter is faithfully attempting to translate to the  best
    of his or her ability and that the performance of  the  interpreter  is
    not influenced by any animosity towards the appellant or  witness  with
    whom they are conversing at the  hearing.   An  interpreter,  like  any
    other participant in the hearing, is entitled to have their  own  views
    about the appellant  or  a  witness.   But,  just  as  with  the  other
    professional participants at that hearing,  the  interpreter  needs  to
    maintain a firm demarcation between his or her views  and  the  job  in
    hand.

63. It is on this basis that we  must  examine  counsel's  statement  about
    events at the bus stop, following the hearing.  There is no  reason  to
    doubt the contents of the statement, made only some 72 hours after  the
    events in question.  Mr Lindsay did not attempt to suggest otherwise.

64. The uninvited comments of the interpreter to counsel raise  very  grave
    doubts as to the interpreter's independence and impartiality.  That  in
    turn raises serious questions as to whether the interpreter  was  doing
    her best to translate what the appellant was saying to the judge.  Seen
    in this light, the complaints of the appellant's interpreter and of the
    appellant herself at the hearing assume significant force.

65. Regrettably,  it  does  not  appear  that  counsel's  statement  of  24
    September ever found its way to the judge.  Had it  done  so,  we  have
    little doubt that the judge would have decided not to issue a  decision
    in the appeal but, instead, would have adjourned the proceedings for an
    entirely fresh hearing.  In the circumstances,  that  is  clearly  what
    justice demanded.  Since  it  did  not  happen,  we  must  repair  that
    deficiency.

66. For this reason, we do not  consider  it  necessary  to  address  those
    grounds which take issue with the credibility findings of the judge  in
    relation to the witness statements and other non-oral evidence.


H. DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law.   We  set
the decision aside and remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
heard de novo by a different judge and interpreter  (details  of  which  are
contained on the Tribunal file).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                      Signed                     Date

                         30 August 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum

