

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  NM (documented/undocumented Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT
00356(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 14 and 30 January 2013                |                            |
|                                         |............................|
|                                         |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     NM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr B Ali of Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






(1)     The distinction made in previous  country  guidance  in  respect  of
    Kuwaiti Bidoon, between those who are  documented  and  those  who  are
    undocumented, is maintained, but the relevant  crucial  document,  from
    possession of which a range of benefits depends, is the security  card,
    rather than the "civil identification documents"  referred  to  in  the
    previous country guidance in HE [2006] UKAIT 00051. To that extent  the
    guidance in HE is amended.

(2)     The evidence relating to the documented Bidoon does  not  show  them
    to be at real risk of persecution or breach of  their  protected  human
    rights.

(3)     The evidence concerning the undocumented Bidoon does  show  them  to
    face a real risk of persecution or  breach  of  their  protected  human
    rights.

(4)     It must be assumed that Bidoon who did  not  register  between  1996
    and 2000, and hence did not obtain security cards, are as a consequence
    undocumented Bidoon, though this must be seen in  the  context  of  the
    evidence that most Bidoon carry security cards.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.       The appellant, who claims to be a Bidoon  from  Kuwait  born  on  5
    August 1961, appealed to a First-tier judge against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision of 1 March 2011 to remove her as  an  illegal  entrant
    from the United Kingdom.  The judge dismissed her appeal,  but  it  was
    subsequently concluded at a hearing on 23 September 2011  that  he  had
    erred in law.  As a consequence it  was  ordered  that  the  appeal  be
    remade on the merits  on  all  issues  except  that  two  matters  were
    accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State:  first,  that  the
    appellant's brother S is an undocumented Bidoon, and secondly that S is
    the appellant's full brother as confirmed in  a  DNA  report.   It  was
    common ground that the fact that S was an undocumented Bidoon  did  not
    mean that the appellant was an undocumented Bidoon and that that was  a
    matter that would require to be proved.

2.       It was subsequently concluded that the appeal would  be appropriate
    for country guidance on the issue of risk to the Bidoon in Kuwait,  and
    the matter was set down for hearing on that basis.

3.       In terms of the ambit of the hearing,  Mr  Deller  argued  that all
    issues were at large and that matters had  not  been  narrowed  in  any
    respect at the Case Management hearing.  We consulted  our  notes  from
    that hearing, and Mr  Ali  accepted  that  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant was an Iraqi national was still a matter which could  be  and
    was being argued by the Secretary of State.




Summary of the Appellant's Claim

4.       The essence of the appellant's claim  to  international  protection
    is that she fears oppression there, on account of what has happened  to
    her husband and because of her  and  her  family's  status  as  Kuwaiti
    Bidoon.  She said that her husband had been  arrested  in  1991,  1997,
    2005 and 2011 and was still detained.

5.       In 1991 he was arrested when serving in the  Navy  and  was accused
    of being aligned with the Iraqi military.  He was released after a year
    as part of a general amnesty.  He was arrested in  1997  for  illegally
    working, and released after  six  months.   The  2005  arrest  was  for
    distributing leaflets about promotions and  sales  in  shops.   He  was
    released in March 2011 and re-detained three weeks later.  Her son,  K,
    was currently seeking asylum in Italy.  She produced various documents,
    including  her  birth  certificate  and  marriage   certificate.    Her
    husband's brother, A, had been in the United Kingdom since 2003.

Oral Evidence of Mr Shiblak

6.       We heard oral evidence from the expert Mr Abbas  Shiblak  who  is a
    research  associate  and  area  specialist   of   the   Department   of
    International Development Refugee Studies Centre at the  University  of
    Oxford.  He identified his signature on his report  and  was  happy  to
    give evidence on the basis of this report.

7.       With regard to the appellant specifically, there was  a  section in
    his report from page 143 onwards concerning the documents.  Nothing  he
    had heard today would lead  him  to  change  what  he  said  about  the
    appellant's evidence, though he had  not  seen  a  translation  of  the
    marriage certificate and, as he had said at paragraph 11 of the report,
    on the basis of the documents referred to there, nothing he  had  heard
    from the appellant today was such as to cause him to change his opinion
    about what he said about her documents and her case.

8.       With regard to the Home Office questions put  to  him  in  light of
    his report and his responses to them, he was  asked  whether  he  would
    wish to comment further.  He said that he had been working  since  1991
    in connection with the social and legal status of refugees, focusing on
    statelessness including the Bidoon.  He said that with respect to  them
    in particular there was a gap between the law and  its  application  in
    Kuwait which was greater than in other countries.  If a particular  law
    had been passed it should not be  taken  to  imply  that  it  had  been
    implemented and it would either have been done patchily or not at  all.
    What was said by the Kuwaiti authorities was taken in good faith by the
    Home Office.  They gave promises but did not fulfil.  For example, with
    regard to healthcare, it was said by the Home  Office  that  in  recent
    years this matter had been resolved, but in fact the Bidoon did not get
    access to free government schools, reference being made  to  the  human
    rights report of June 2012 and the OGN of last  week.   In  the  latter
    report the Home Office went beyond the  official  government  views  by
    consulting the community and INGOs who had acknowledged that healthcare
    was not available free of charge and it had to  be  private,  and  they
    were not allowed to work.  They could not have  birth  certificates  or
    marriage certificates.  It was a very autocratic  tribal  system.   For
    example, last week MPs had  criticised  the  head  of  the  agency  for
    illegal residents who had said it was not within his domain but  within
    the domain of the Interior Ministry which was linked  to  the  head  of
    state, the Emir.  If a Bidoon was blacklisted for a job it would affect
    everything and would affect his family also.  Mr Shiblak estimated that
    those without security clearance had increased in number.  It had  been
    thought that it was 3,000 but the OGN  at  paragraph  3.6.26  said  the
    number was far higher.

9.       As regards the announcement of eleven  privileges/benefits  and the
    question of whether they had  been  implemented,  the  answer  was  no.
    Understandably the NGOs including Human  Rights  Watch  hoped  that  it
    would materialise in the near future but it had not done.  With  regard
    to education, they were told they could go to  government  schools  and
    some families sent their children to register, but they were asked  for
    civil ID which they did not  have.   Likewise  with  respect  to  birth
    certificates, they had had the same impression, but when they  went  to
    do it they were sent to the Ministry of Interior.   They  had  a  ready
    made form for them to fill in in which they had to show the country  of
    origin, hence it would show they were not Kuwaiti Bidoon, so there were
    ways of putting blocks on benefits.

10.     He was asked whether  as  of  today  there  were  any  changes which
    justified reversing the  previous  country  guidance  decisions  in  BA
    [2004] UKIAT 00256 and HE [2006] UKAIT 00051, and he  referred  to  the
    most recent Human Rights Watch report and the OGN.

11.     When cross-examined by Mr Deller it was put to  Mr  Shiblak  that at
    several points in his comments he seemed to think that the Home  Office
    were too quick to accept the official  Kuwaiti  government  version  of
    events, especially with regard to the Kuwaiti government.  He said that
    it was a problem with the Kuwaiti  government.   They  had  produced  a
    study in 2010 with sections about good practice, but it was  still  too
    early and they had to wait for effective implementation.  He was  asked
    whether there was any reason why the Kuwaiti government would say  they
    were making progress with respect to the Bidoon if they were  not.   He
    said that they had given an answer and the main  worry  in  Kuwait  was
    security.  The Bidoon had previously comprised 80% to 85% of  the  army
    and they were thought to be a security risk for Kuwait, though many had
    fought for Kuwait so that was not the  case,  he  thought.   It  was  a
    question of individuals and not tribal risk.  The issue of security was
    the security of the ruling family.  They did not want  the  Bidoon  any
    more and sought to reduce or eradicate the number of Bidoon in  Kuwait.
    Many were active in trying to put pressure on the government to  change
    its mind, including MPs.

12.     Mr Deller asked why, if this was the case, would they bother  to say
    that they were taking steps and whom they  were  trying  to  please  Mr
    Shiblak said it was the international community  and  to  avoid  Bidoon
    pressure and protests.  He was asked  why  the  authorities  would  not
    simply put it all down to security and said for example they had  given
    the figure of 34,000 people who were registered in the 1965 census  and
    had talked about offering them nationality in the law of 2000 and  they
    had promised they would naturalise the Bidoon, at the rate of  2,000  a
    year.  Until recently this promise was  shelved.   There  was  no  more
    naturalisation for the Bidoon.  There had been a  few  hundred  in  the
    initial few years and those were the wealthy and powerful.   They  said
    that they would give it to people who had done  military  service,  but
    the problems were with the detail.  They had to have been registered in
    1965 to have served for 30 years and to have family.  In  effect,  this
    would apply to very few people.  The official  figures  showed  108,000
    Bidoon and the total population in Kuwait was some 800,000.

13.     Mr Shiblak was asked how the Bidoon  were  regarded  by  the general
    population of Kuwait.  He said that discrimination against  the  Bidoon
    was institutional rather than by the public.  He was asked  whether  it
    was the case therefore that they  were  not  seen  generally  as  Iraqi
    collaborators and said that that was the line the government took.   In
    fact, most of the military were stopped at the Iraqi checkpoint and had
    been given a choice of being shot or  joining  them,  hence  they  were
    coerced into doing it.  He was asked whether the  propaganda  from  the
    government had stuck in the population's mind and said  that  some  had
    perhaps but not the majority.  With regard to the recent protests, most
    of those in the opposition took the side of the Bidoon.  Loyalty to the
    Emir was very important in Kuwait.

14.     He was asked where  the  pressure  came  from  in  Kuwait  to change
    things and he said it came from the opposition and Bidoon protests  and
    the international community.  He was asked whether there was  a  reason
    why the Kuwait  government  needed  to  be  bothered  by  international
    opinion and said if you followed this path Kuwait would not be seen  as
    a democracy and there were MPs who voiced opposition and wanted  Kuwait
    to be a constitutional monarchy.  When it was suggested that Kuwait had
    reason to feel under threat internationally given the problems  in  the
    region he said yes, there were concerns about the Muslim Brotherhood.

15.     He was referred to  the  specific  case  of  the  appellant  and the
    document about her husband who had been given a lifetime  sentence  for
    collaboration, and he was asked how that chimed with him being  in  and
    out of prison for lesser offences.  Mr Shiblak said that they  had  put
    hundreds in jail after 1991 as collaborators and planned to deport them
    in masses and UNHCR had stepped in.   No  other  countries  could  take
    them.  100,000 had fled to neighbouring countries.   Some  people  from
    1991, 200 or 300 were in prison indefinitely.  He did not know how they
    allowed the appellant's husband out.  It could be personal  favours  or
    to send him to collaborate with  intelligence  for  a  while  after  he
    failed to do the job properly.

16.     We asked him whether he knew of any cases  of  such  release  and he
    said yes, it could be a reaction when a summary court realised  he  was
    not in fact involved or someone intervened on his behalf.  In one  case
    he had come across, a person had been released to spy among the  Bidoon
    and had failed  and  was  recalled.   He  had  no  idea  of  any  other
    examples.

17.     He had now seen the original documents, having previously  only seen
    photocopies.  He said this was one of the most fully  documented  cases
    he had seen.  Up to the mid-1980s the  Bidoon  were  able  to  register
    civil marriages so it was not surprising.

18.     On re-examination the witness was asked  about  a  reference  he had
    made to an assassination attempt on the Emir and he said he thought  it
    was in 1986 and Bidoon bodyguards were killed.  The  number  of  Bidoon
    were said to be about 108,000.

19.     At that point it became necessary to adjourn for  lack  of  time and
    to enable more focused skeleton arguments to be prepared specifying the
    background evidence relied on and focusing more clearly on  the  issues
    in dispute.  It was agreed that the representatives  would  have  until
    close of play on 28 January to put in further written submissions and a
    further hearing date for closing oral submissions was fixed for 11am on
    30 January for half a day.

The Country Evidence: Introduction

20.     Kuwait was formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, but after  World War
    I it emerged as an independent Sheikdom under  the  protection  of  the
    British Empire.  Kuwait became fully independent in 1961.  It is now  a
    constitutional hereditary emirate.  Its population is said  in  the  US
    State Department Report of 2011 (published 23  May  2012)  to  be  3.44
    million, of whom 1.1 million are citizens.  In 1959, in preparation for
    achieving full independence from Britain, Kuwait issued law  number  15
    governing Kuwaiti nationality.   Article  1  of  the  law  declared  as
    Kuwaiti citizens  those  who  had  settled  in  Kuwait  and  maintained
    residence there since 1920.  Under Article 4 Arabs resident  in  Kuwait
    for at least fifteen  years  (twenty  years  for  non-Arabs)  could  be
    naturalised, provided that they were Muslim, knew Arabic and had lawful
    means of earning a living.  Those eligible for naturalisation  included
    children born to a Kuwaiti mother and a stateless father  (a  provision
    repealed in 1980), children born to a Kuwaiti  mother  and  an  unknown
    father or a father who failed to establish his paternity  by  law,  and
    individuals recommended by the Ministry of the Interior.

21.     After independence the Kuwaiti  government  formed  a  committee  to
    register  and  review  claims  for  nationality,  but  this  body   was
    dismantled  in  1969.   Thereafter,  claims  relating  to   citizenship
    remained matters of administrative determination.  There is no right of
    appeal to the courts.  In 2000 the National Assembly passed law  number
    20 permitting naturalisation of  individuals  registered  in  the  1965
    census  and  their  descendants.   The  law  limited  the   number   of
    naturalisations to 2000 per year.  Naturalisations can only take  legal
    effect through ministerial decree.  Since law number 20 was passed  the
    yearly maximum of 2000 naturalisations has never been met.

22.     At the time  when  the  nationality  law  was  enacted  in  1959 the
    authorities sought to register all residents within Kuwait and identify
    those eligible for nationality.  It  appears,  however,  that  many  of
    those living in outlying areas, primarily of Bedouin origin, either did
    not learn about this or neglected to register their claims.  Some  were
    illiterate and persons who  kept  no  written  records  faced  especial
    difficulties in proving that they met the legal requirements of the new
    law.   Others  were  simply  uninterested  in  the   new   concept   of
    nationality, failing to foresee the  rights  and  benefits  that  would
    accrue to citizens in later decades as Kuwait's  wealth  increased  (it
    has been described as the fifth  richest  country  in  the  world)  and
    government service has expanded.

23.     The particular  category  of  Kuwaiti  residents  with  whom  we are
    concerned in this appeal are  those  known  as  the  Bidoon  (variously
    spelled Bidoun, Bidun, Bedoon).  They originate  from  three  different
    categories, as set out in the Human Rights Watch report  "Prisoners  of
    the Past: Kuwaiti Bidoon and the Burden of Statelessness" 12 June  2011
    (the HRW report) a report to which we  are  particularly  indebted  and
    which is also significantly relied on in the UKBA Operational  Guidance
    Note on Kuwait of January 2013.

24.       The  first  category  of  Bidoon  comprises  persons   who claimed
    citizenship under Kuwait's nationality law but whose  ancestors  failed
    to apply or lacked necessary documentation  at  the  time  of  Kuwait's
    independence.  It is said that among this group are the descendants  of
    nomadic clans who regularly traversed the borders of  modern  day  Gulf
    States but settled permanently in Kuwait prior to  independence.   This
    group of people has never held the citizenship of any other country.

25.     The second group  is  composed  of  former  citizens  of  other Arab
    states (such as Iraq, Syria and Jordan) and their descendants who  came
    to Kuwait in the 1960s and 1970s to work in Kuwait's  army  and  police
    forces.  It is said (Longva; "Walls Built on Sand: Migration  Exclusion
    in Society in Kuwait" 1997) that the Kuwaiti  government  preferred  to
    register these people as Bidoon rather than to reveal this  politically
    sensitive recruitment policy.  Some of these people settled  in  Kuwait
    with their families and never left.

26.     The third category of Bidoon  is  composed  of  individuals  born to
    Kuwaiti mothers and Bidoon fathers.

The HRW Report

27.     Following passage of the nationality law, Kuwait's government  still
    granted the Bidoon residency rights, equal employment opportunities and
    full  access  to  social  services,  including   free   education   and
    healthcare, so in effect they were treated as equal to Kuwaiti citizens
    except for their lack of voting rights.  They were informed  that  they
    remained eligible to present  claims  for  nationality  and  they  were
    issued  with  temporary  documents  that  described  them  as  "without
    nationality" (in Arabic: Bidun Jinsiyya, from  which  the  term  Bidoon
    (without) derives).

28.     However, between 1960 and 1987 the Kuwaiti  government  amended  the
    nationality law seven times, each time introducing further restrictions
    on eligibility.  In 1960 there was a restriction limiting the number of
    naturalisations that could take place each year to 50, including a 1980
    amendment  removing  a  Kuwaiti  woman's  ability   to   transmit   her
    citizenship to her children.  There was also an amendment in 1981 which
    specified that only Muslims could qualify for Kuwaiti nationality.

29.     The position of tolerance towards non-citizens  began  to  shift  in
    1980 when the war between Iran and Iraq  threatened  Kuwait's  internal
    stability and the country became a target  of  terrorist  attacks.   As
    Longva (supra para 76) has  commented,  the  ambiguous  status  of  the
    Bidoon at that time provided a human pool into  which  Iraqi  refugees,
    draft dodgers and infiltrators could easily blend after getting rid  of
    their identity papers.  In 1985 the then ruler  of  Kuwait  escaped  an
    assassination attempt when a bomb detonated in one of the cars  forming
    his motorcade, and later that year the government changed the  Bidoon's
    status from that of legal residents  without  nationality  to  "illegal
    residents".  It is relevant, however, to note that during the 1980s the
    Bidoon constituted between 80% and 90% of the Kuwaiti army.

30.     There were further difficulties for the Bidoon following  the  Iraqi
    invasion of August 1990  and  the  subsequent  war.   Before  then  the
    official number of Bidoon resident in Kuwait was  around  250,000,  but
    many who fled the country during the war  were  refused  entry  at  the
    Kuwaiti border when they sought to return.  They had intended to escape
    to villages and other areas  in  Iraq  which  did  not  require  travel
    documents from persons arriving from  Kuwait.   Many  Bidoon  lived  in
    refugee camps along the Iraq-Kuwait  border  for  up  to  eight  months
    following the liberation from occupation, and after the end of the  war
    official figures placed the number of Bidoon in Kuwait at approximately
    125,000.

31.     The Kuwaiti government maintains that the vast  majority  of  Bidoon
    are actually nationals of other countries and  therefore  do  not  have
    legitimate claims to Kuwaiti nationality.  In effect this amounts to  a
    denial that they are stateless.

32.      The  Central  System  to   resolve   Illegal   Residents'   Status,
    established by ministerial decree in  November  2010,  is  the  current
    administrative  body  responsible  for  reviewing  Bidoon   claims   to
    nationality.  This  body,  like  its  predecessor,  to  which  we  have
    referred above, is widely known as  "the  Bidoon  committee".   It  has
    exclusive authority to determine all matters touching upon  nationality
    or official documentation for the Bidoon.  The key document  in  Kuwait
    is the civil identification  card  which  Kuwaiti  citizens  and  legal
    foreign residents receive.  The Bidoon are not entitled to such  cards.
    These cards are necessary in order to rent or purchase real  estate  or
    cars, open bank  accounts,  enrol  in  private  universities  and  some
    private schools, hold legal employment, and receive birth, marriage  or
    death certificates.  It is said in  the  HRW  report  that  while  both
    government  authorities  and  private  entities  have  created  limited
    exceptions, the requirement of civil  ID  cards  effectively  bans  the
    Bidoon from many forms of employment and public services.

33.     The Bidoon committee issues Bidoon who registered between  1996  and
    2000, a cut-off date set by ministerial decree,  with  security  cards,
    which are informally known as "green  cards".   The  cards  identify  a
    holder with their name, address and birth date, but  it  is  stated  on
    them that the card does not serve as proof of identity and that it  may
    be used only for specified purposes, though exactly what those purposes
    are remains unclear.  We set out below situations where  possession  of
    such a card is significant.  The cards have to be renewed either yearly
    or once every two years depending on the class of  card.   Some  Bidoon
    report that they could renew their cards and those of  their  offspring
    simply by presenting their previous cards and documents  proving  their
    registration in the 1965 census or  residence  in  Kuwait  before  that
    time.  Other Bidoon said that they had to undergo interviews each  time
    they wished to renew their cards.

34.     In  November  2010  Kuwait's  Supreme  Council  of  Higher  Planning
    announced the results of a study which found that  there  were  106,000
    people of "unspecified nationality" in the country.  It was  said  that
    of these, 34,000 remained valid candidates for citizenship while 68,000
    had "other origins".  Such people would have a limited time in which to
    "correct their  status",  by  which  officials  meant  that  they  were
    required to produce passports or other  evidence  of  citizenship  from
    other countries.  Those who failed to do could face deportation.

35.     It is said in the HRW report  that  the  unregistered  Bidoon,  i.e.
    those who are not able to  renew  security  cards,  face  even  greater
    hardships.  Some unregistered Bidoon told Human Rights  Watch  that  in
    the past they had found ways to obtain passports from other  countries,
    but at some point suspected or discovered  that  these  passports  were
    counterfeit.  Those Bidoon who presented counterfeit passports in order
    to keep government jobs or receive birth or marriage certificates,  and
    later discovered that they could not renew these passports, found  that
    their files with the committee had been closed and they could not renew
    their committee-issued security cards.   They  therefore  now  remained
    illegal residents without even the limited  protection  of  a  security
    card.  The same must apply to other unregistered Bidoon who have  never
    obtained security cards in the first place.

36.     In order to bypass the civil ID requirement  and  access  government
    services, including civil  documentation  (birth,  marriage  and  death
    certificates), Bidoon must obtain clearance from the Bidoon  committee.
    Bidoon who have requested clearance from the  committee  have  reported
    that the committee frequently denied their applications, in some  cases
    citing unspecified "security restrictions" and in other  cases  issuing
    letters stating that the applicant had  other  citizenship  and  should
    "correct their status" by producing evidence of this citizenship.

37.     From 1986 onwards the government began to  restrict  access  by  the
    Bidoon to passports, granting them only to  individuals  with  official
    permission  to  travel  abroad  for  medical  treatment,  education  or
    religious purposes or to Bidoon serving in the  army  and  the  police.
    Later that year the authorities began to require  that  all  government
    employees provide proof of Kuwaiti or foreign citizenship or lose their
    jobs.  In 1987 the Interior Ministry ceased to issue or renew  driver's
    licences to Bidoon except to those in police or military service and at
    the same time ceased to allow the Bidoon to register car  ownership  in
    their names.  The kind of temporary passports currently granted to  the
    Bidoon are only for  the  purpose  of  travel  for  education,  medical
    treatment or religious pilgrimage, and typically remain valid only  for
    the trip cited in the individual application.  An individual who wishes
    for a passport must obtain clearance from  the  Bidoon  committee.   An
    item from 'Gulf in the Media'  of  21  May  2012  says  that  temporary
    Kuwaiti passports issued to stateless  residents  for  travel  purposes
    will be restricted to holders of 1965 census documents and children  of
    Kuwaiti women.

38.     Prior to 1987 all  Bidoon  received  free  education  at  government
    schools and,  until  1993,  free  healthcare  on  a  par  with  Kuwaiti
    citizens.  They had freedom of employment and formed a substantial part
    of Kuwait's army and police forces.  However, the position now is  that
    in order to register in a government school or the state university  or
    hold employment legally, an individual must present a  civil  ID  card.
    The Bidoon who register with the Bidoon committee  and  therefore  hold
    security cards can register their  children  in  private  schools,  for
    which the government pays fees for  some  students.   The  annual  fees
    range between the equivalent of US $860-1550 per child  and  there  are
    extra charges for textbooks and uniforms.

39.     In 2004 the Kuwaiti government established a charitable fund to  pay
    educational expenses for children in need, including but not limited to
    Bidoon children.  This fund, it is  said  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    report, pays primary and secondary school fees for many Bidoon students
    as well as expatriate children  who  wish  to  attend  Arabic  language
    schools.  It is commented that while the government has taken steps  to
    provide Bidoon children access  to  free  elementary  education,  after
    removing this right a generation ago, it has failed to guarantee access
    as a right for all children  in  its  jurisdiction.   Children  at  the
    primarily Bidoon schools who fail their examinations as well  as  those
    whose parents have security offences registered in their names, do  not
    receive  school  funding,  including  primary  school.   Nor  does  the
    government take any steps to enforce elementary school  attendance  for
    Bidoon children.  Kuwaiti  activists  and  school  administrators  whom
    Human Rights Watch interviewed said that the charitable  fund  did  not
    meet the needs of all children.  Examples of  this  are  given  in  the
    report.  The point is also made that the government  does  not  provide
    Bidoon children who lack security cards with  educational  funding.   A
    girls' school administrator told Human Rights Watch that the government
    was setting more conditions before people could obtain funding and  the
    number of students was  going  down.   Kuwait  University,  the  higher
    education institution founded  and  operated  by  the  state,  requires
    students to be of "specified nationality"  as  opposed  to  unspecified
    nationality or status, and the  university  admissions  page  makes  it
    clear that the children of two-status parents may not register.

40.     There have been various attempts to reform the situation.  In  March
    2011 government officials announced to local media that they  would  be
    granting a package of civil, social and economic rights to the  Bidoon,
    among  them  the  right  to   civil   documentation   including   birth
    certificates, marriage registration and passports,  and  the  right  to
    education and healthcare.  It is  said  in  the  HRW  report  that  the
    proposed reforms have not been implemented, but  in  a  subsequent  HRW
    report, "World Report 2012: Kuwait", 22 January 2012, it is said,  with
    regard to the government promise of  benefits,  including  free  health
    care; free education at private schools  that  primarily  serve  Bidoon
    children; birth, marriage and death certificates; and  improved  access
    to jobs, that Bidoon have confirmed receiving many of  these  benefits,
    but continue  to  cite  problems  accessing  employment  and  increased
    difficulty in receiving passports.

41.      In  2009  members  of  the  Parliament  reviewed  the  "Draft   Law
    concerning the Civil, Legal and  Social  Rights  of  Stateless  People"
    which would grant greater civil and social rights to the Bidoon,  which
    among other things required the grant to all registered individuals, as
    well as their descendents born in  Kuwait,  of  a  right  to  permanent
    residency and identification documents.  However, the bill continues to
    define the Bidoon as "illegal residents" of Kuwait and fails to provide
    a mechanism for legal review of Bidoon claims to nationality.

42.     As regards employment and property, under  Kuwaiti  law  only  those
    with legal resident or citizen status can legally hold employment.   It
    is said in the HRW report that the government has  carved  out  limited
    exceptions and allowed Bidoon to  hold  certain  government  jobs  but,
    although previously Bidoon men constituted a significant percentage  of
    Kuwait's army and police forces, these  forces  ceased  to  accept  new
    Bidoon applicants in 1986.  Some Bidoon officers already employed  were
    permitted to keep their jobs whilst others lost their employment.   The
    Bidoon may not own property in Kuwait, as article 6 of  Law  No.  5  of
    1959 states that any person seeking to register property ownership must
    prove their nationality either by producing their passport  or  through
    another valid document.  This also causes difficulties for  Bidoon  who
    wish to own and operate their own businesses.

43.     It is said in  the  HRW  report  that  in  response  to  public  and
    international criticism, the government  has  announced  that  it  will
    waive the requirements of the law and allow certain ministries to  hire
    Bidoon  employees.   In  addition,  local  activists  report  that  the
    government has relaxed enforcement of laws prohibiting  private  sector
    employers from hiring illegal residents and that inspections of private
    companies for Bidoon employees have become rare.  It is said to be  the
    case  therefore  that  private  employers   have   grown   increasingly
    comfortable about hiring stateless persons despite their lack of  legal
    status, in recent years.  It remains the case, however, that the Bidoon
    have no legal protection for their right to work.  Also, without formal
    employment  the  Bidoon  remain  excluded  from  benefits  accorded  to
    citizens in  permanent  positions  such  as  salary  increases,  social
    security, job security and end-of-service benefits.  Also  restrictions
    on property ownership affect the Bidoon's ability to open  and  operate
    their own businesses.  One person gives an example of how he is able to
    manage this by the fact of his company being registered in his mother's
    and his wife's names (his mother and his wife are Kuwaiti citizens).

44.     Until 1993 the Bidoon residents of Kuwait  received  free  treatment
    at public clinics and hospitals.  However, the government  subsequently
    began to require them to pay user fees.  In  1999  government-regulated
    health insurance plans replaced user fees.  Bidoon who  carry  security
    cards can purchase low-cost  health  insurance  through  a  government-
    administered program.  However, several  Bidoon  interviewed  by  Human
    Rights Watch said that this insurance did not  adequately  cover  their
    healthcare costs and that they could not afford medication  or  surgery
    recommended by medical professionals.  Bidoon  without  security  cards
    reported that  they  were  denied  access  to  government  clinics  and
    hospitals altogether.

45.      Many  Bidoon  purchase  health  insurance  through  the  government
    system, which charges a fee of the equivalent of US $21 for one year of
    coverage or $39 for two years.  In addition, insurance holders pay  the
    equivalent of $3.50 for visits to government clinics and the equivalent
    of  $7  for  hospital  visits.   However,  several  Bidoon   who   were
    interviewed said that their insurance did not  cover  all  prescription
    medication and medical testing, such as X-rays and scans,  nor  did  it
    cover certain types of surgery.  It seems that Bidoon without  security
    cards (unregistered Bidoon) will not be treated by government hospitals
    and  clinics  and  have  to  seek  services  from   expensive   private
    hospitals.

Mr Shiblak's Written Evidence

46.     In his report dated 21  August  2012  Mr  Shiblak  in  many respects
    endorses what is said in the Human Rights Watch report.  He  emphasises
    that the Bidoon are considered by the Kuwaiti government to be "illegal
    residents" rather than stateless persons.  He says that they are barred
    from access to government services such as those offered free of charge
    to Kuwaiti nationals including education and medical care, and that the
    only option left to the Bidoon families in education is to  send  their
    children to private schools which they cannot afford.   Unlike  Kuwaiti
    nationals they do not have free  medical  care  and  do  not  have  the
    financial capabilities of foreigners working in Kuwait who  can  afford
    private medical care and to send their children to private schools.

47.     He refers to the  limited  help  offered  in  recent  years  by  the
    government to some Bidoon families through  local  charities  to  cover
    school fees at primary level and to cover part of  primary  healthcare.
    He makes the point that both the charities involved in this are limited
    in their  effectiveness  and  both  suffer  from  lengthy  bureaucratic
    processes and a lack of resources.  As regards education, the charities
    help some but not all Bidoon in paying the fees for primary schools  up
    to primary level.  The level of students in  the  classrooms  in  these
    schools is nearly double the number in government schools and they  are
    poorly supervised and resourced.  He says that the Bidoon  are  subject
    to systematic discrimination and  punitive  measures  that  make  their
    future uncertain.  The majority  of  them  live  in  virtual  exile  in
    squalid housing projects.  He refers to law 22 which was issued in 2000
    which was aimed at granting nationality to the Bidoon  who  could  meet
    its very restrictive requirements, including being  registered  in  the
    1965 census, while leaving the issue of proof on the  Bidoon  who  were
    largely illiterate indigenous Bedouins at  the  time.   The  government
    also limited the time for applying  for  naturalisation  and  left  the
    decision to the total discretion of the intelligence services  with  no
    right of appeal in a court.  It was estimated that  no  more  than  20%
    were able to fulfil the restrictive conditions laid down by  this  law.
    Nor was there any clear guideline on how to apply the  law.   He  makes
    the point that the government can always use a process which involves a
    person  being  blacklisted  on  security  grounds  which  automatically
    exclude the Bidoon from being naturalised without giving any reason  or
    being open to challenge in a court of law.  The Bidoon committee  deals
    with all applications on a completely discretionary basis.  Nationality
    was granted to a few who were well-connected as a  personal  favour  to
    those who were not necessarily  Bidoon.   Early  in  January  2012  the
    Kuwaiti government decided to deport any Bidoon and to a sack a  number
    of them still working in the army  if  they  participated  in  protests
    against their treatment.  This followed earlier  protests  in  December
    2010 going through to May 2011.   Many  were  injured  and  around  300
    Bidoon were arrested.  Torture remains prevalent  in  Kuwaiti  prisons.
    Mr Shiblak makes the point that despite threats of  deportation,  there
    is nowhere for the Bidoon to be sent to.  All the  countries  to  which
    the Kuwaiti government claims the Bidoon belong refute such claims  and
    refuse them entry to their territories.  These countries include  Iraq,
    Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria and Iran.

UKBA OGN

48.     As we have noted, the UK Border Agency's Operational  Guidance  Note
    on Kuwait of January 2013 borrows quite heavily from the  Human  Rights
    Watch report that we have paraphrased in some detail above.  The report
    notes  the  history  of  the  Bidoon  in  Kuwait  and  the   continuing
    discrimination against the Bidoon in areas such as education.  It notes
    that Bidoon without security cards did not have access  to  educational
    funding.  It says, quoting the US State Department Human Rights  Report
    for 2011, that the  government-administered  charity  fund  to  educate
    needy children paid school fees for all Bidoon children  (approximately
    2,000) who applied for assistance during 2009 to 2010.   The  point  is
    made, however, that the government had failed to  guarantee  access  to
    free  elementary  education  as  a  right  for  all  children  in   its
    jurisdiction.  At paragraph 3.6.18 it is said that by providing  mostly
    educational institutions for citizens and Bidoon  children  with  lower
    educational standards  at  primarily  Bidoon  schools,  the  government
    failed  to  uphold  its  obligations  under  the   Convention   Against
    Discrimination in Education, and also, by restricting  free  government
    schools to Kuwaiti citizens only, the government failed to ensure  that
    Bidoon children, including those who lacked security cards, had  access
    to free and compulsory primary education, as required by Article 26  of
    the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

49.     There is reference at paragraph 3.6.19 to the government  approving,
    in June 2010, a new disability  law  which  offered  larger  disability
    grants, reduced working hours and improved housing loans  for  citizens
    and Bidoon with mental or  physical  disabilities.   The  law  required
    government employers with workforces of 50 people or more to recruit at
    least 4% of  their  workforce  from  vocationally-trained  people  with
    special needs, and also allowed citizens  with  disabilities  or  those
    with children with disabilities to receive larger than  normal  housing
    grants and earlier pensions.  Although the  Bidoon  were  not  normally
    entitled to receive housing grants,  the  new  provisions  incorporated
    Bidoon with disabilities.  This information is again taken from the  US
    State Department Human Rights Report of 2011.

50.     At paragraph 3.6.23 it is said that lack of  legal  status  impacted
    on every area of life for undocumented Bidoon.  They were subjected  to
    numerous infringements of their civil  and  human  rights.   They  were
    generally unable to obtain essential status documents.  This meant that
    they could not legally own property and their family relationships were
    effectively illegitimate.  Those adults who did  succeed  in  obtaining
    Kuwaiti ID cards reported that the renewal process  was  tantamount  to
    interrogation, and the authorities made the  process  as  difficult  as
    possible.  Consequently, some Bidoon resorted to the use of counterfeit
    passports.
51.     It said at  paragraph  3.6.24  that  the  Bidoon  were  subjected to
    various types of  discrimination.   The  government  had  attempted  to
    address this in some areas but the process required applicants to prove
    residency prior to 1965 and therefore still excluded the great majority
    of Bidoon.  Due to their lack of legal status they had no right to work
    and were consequently disproportionately  affected  by  poverty.   They
    were not allowed to participate in the  political  process  and,  being
    disenfranchised, they were unable to improve their  conditions  through
    political  pressure,  except  by  public  protest  or   demonstrations.
    Undocumented Bidoon were constantly at risk of arrest or  detention  on
    grounds of being stateless or illegal residents.

52.     The OGN also considers  the  use  of  "security  blocks"  which were
    originally  used  to  deny  nationality  to  those  Bidoon  who  fought
    alongside  Iraq  during  the  1991  occupation.   The  security   block
    prevented access to a variety  of  government  services  and  made  the
    acquisition of nationality almost impossible.   Refugees  International
    were told by human rights organisations that 850 individuals  had  been
    security blocked due to perceived collaboration with  the  Iraqis,  but
    that the list was likely to be greater than 3,000.  It  was  said  that
    some believed  the  list  was  as  many  as  30,000  people.   Refugees
    International in  their  report  "Without  Citizenship:  Statelessness,
    Discrimination and Repression in Kuwait" published  13  May  2011,  and
    quoted in the OGN argued that no application for nationality should  be
    denied due to a security block unless  it  was  demonstrated  that  the
    person actively supported Iraq during  the  1991  invasion.   Activists
    were  publicly  warned  by  the  government   that   participation   in
    demonstrations could result in a  permanent  security  block  on  their
    nationality files and  possible  deportation.   Refugees  International
    learned that since Kuwait could not deport the  stateless  individuals,
    because no other country had an obligation to accept them, it would use
    "deportation" jails.  If ordered to be deported  a  Bidoon  could  thus
    spend years in jail awaiting an "amnesty" that might or might not come.

53.     In early 2011  unrest  in  Kuwait  over  calls  for  reform  and the
    situation  of  the  stateless  Bidoon  manifested  itself   in   public
    protests.  Hundreds of stateless residents took to the  streets  on  18
    February 2011 to demand  their  rights  and  dozens  were  treated  for
    injuries in local hospitals and dozens  more  were  detained  by  state
    security.  According to Human Rights Watch, none of the  detainees  had
    been brought before judges.  In response to the protests the government
    promised benefits including free healthcare, free education at  private
    schools that primarily served  Bidoon  children,  birth,  marriage  and
    death certificates, and  improved  access  to  jobs.   The  Bidoon  had
    confirmed receiving many  of  these  benefits  but  continued  to  cite
    problems accessing employment and  increased  difficulty  in  receiving
    passports.  This information, quoted in the OGN, comes from  the  Human
    Rights Watch World Report  of  2012  on  Kuwait.   There  were  further
    protests in October 2012, which led to a number of  larger  gap  needed
    detentions.

54.     The OGN confirms what is  said  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch report
    about "security flags" on the files  of  some  members  of  the  Bidoon
    community which causes their access to basic amenities,  employment  in
    particular, to be severely curtailed and often removed completely.  The
    Bidoon committee has said that these flags are attached to the files of
    those who had been convicted of a crime, or who collaborated with Iraqi
    forces during the invasion.  It is claimed by human rights  groups  and
    members of the Bidoon community that they are used arbitrarily  by  the
    Kuwaiti government and are often used to disincentivise members of  the
    community from political activism.  Removal of such  flags  is  at  the
    discretion of the Bidoon committee and the security services, does  not
    appear to be time limited and is not subject to judicial supervision.

55.     At paragraph 3.6.35 of the OGN, it is said that  whilst  some Bidoon
    have been able to make  successful  lives  for  themselves  in  Kuwait,
    others have suffered severe  discrimination  and  significant  problems
    remain.  It is said that a grant  of  asylum  will  be  appropriate  in
    individual cases, and many of the Kuwaiti undocumented Bidoon will fall
    within that category, though a few may not, if for  example  they  have
    had access to employment, the health services and education  in  Kuwait
    and have hence been able  to  rise  above  the  general  discrimination
    suffered by the undocumented Bidoon.  The report goes on  to  say  that
    documented Kuwaiti Bidoon experience significantly fewer problems  than
    undocumented Bidoon though they still suffer discrimination as a direct
    result of their familial and tribal affiliations.   However,  they  are
    able to work and to access education, healthcare and employment and  it
    is considered that the discrimination is not so severe as to amount  to
    persistent and serious ill-treatment.

56.     There is an item in the Secretary of State's bundle from  the Kuwait
    Times headed "Naturalisation of 35,000 Bidoons Pending DNA Tests".   In
    this article, which is dated July 2012, it is  said  that  the  Central
    Agency for Illegal  Residents  transferred  to  the  criminal  evidence
    general department 35,000 files for stateless  residents  who  will  be
    called for DNA tests to confirm paternity as part of the naturalisation
    procedures.  It is said that so far 12,000  cases  have  been  referred
    from the Central Agency since it started its work in 2010 for tests  to
    issue birth certificates and prove lineage for stateless residents.  It
    is said that the Central Agency was established a number of  years  ago
    in order to  resolve  the  issue  of  the  large  number  of  stateless
    residents in order to determine who was living  in  Kuwait  before  the
    earlier census was carried out in 1965 and  thus  become  eligible  for
    naturalisation, in addition to residents who allegedly came  afterwards
    and disposed of their passports  so  they  might  seek  citizenship  in
    Kuwait.  It is also said that last year the Agency adopted measures  to
    grant the Bidoon several rights, including  obtaining  marriage,  birth
    and death certificates and that the Agency had been given  a  five-year
    ultimatum to resolve the decades-long issue that was often a source  of
    criticism of Kuwait by international human rights groups.

The Submissions of the Parties

57.     At the renewed hearing on 30 January 2013 we had  an  application by
    Mr Ali to amend his grounds to enable him to argue breach  of  Articles
    6, 8 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights  in  conjunction
    with Article 14.

58.     Mr Deller suggested that to an  extent  this  was  an  obvious point
    flowing from the asylum basis of the  claim  and  though  the  flagrant
    denial point was novel, it did not cause him difficulty.

59.     We put to Mr Deller a concern that  we  had  about  the  findings of
    fact and matters that  had  not  been  put  to  the  appellant  or  the
    witnesses.  We reminded him that it was the case that the  findings  of
    fact of the previous Tribunal had not been preserved  and  points,  for
    example,  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  husband's  detention   and
    inconsistencies were matters Mr Ali would have to grapple with, but  it
    was unclear for example how Mr Deller proposed to deal with  the  point
    concerning the son's visit visa.

60.     Mr Deller thought it was difficult when factual  findings  were  set
    aside but questions and answers were a matter of record.  That was  how
    he asked the Tribunal to proceed.  They were a matter  of  record  from
    the earlier hearing and did not need to be asked again.

61.     As regards his closing submissions Mr Deller noted what was said  in
    the Practice Direction that it was  not  necessary  to  follow  country
    guidance cases unless there were  good  reasons  not  to  do  so.   The
    situation now was somewhat akin to the position when  HE  [2006]  UKAIT
    00051 was decided.   There  were  clearly  continuing  problems  and  a
    relevant question was whether there had been positive developments such
    as to cross the threshold.  The Tribunal in HE had said that  what  had
    occurred subsequently was not enough to depart from the guidance in  BA
    [2004] UKIAT 00256.

62.     There was a wealth of material which was  encapsulated  in  the OGN,
    and it was clear that the position was still not  very  good.   Section
    3.6 of the OGN had been complimented by  the  expert.   Hopefully  that
    addressed  previous  concerns  about  objectivity.   There   was   much
    criticism of the slow progress in dealing  with  the  position  of  the
    Bidoon including applications for nationality and, since HE, complaints
    made by the Bidoon about being dealt with rather harshly.  The Tribunal
    would have to decide whether there had been  progress  or  whether  the
    situation was stalled.

63.     The OGN rather tied Mr Deller's  hands  and  it  was  the  case that
    generally speaking an undocumented Bidoon had a pretty good  chance  of
    success in an asylum claim.  There would always be exceptions,  as  for
    example in the case of Somalia.

64.     With  regard  to  updating  HE  it  was  necessary  to  consider the
    evidence as a whole.  Mr Ali's skeleton referred to tokenism,  and  the
    problem of the difficulties confronting  the  Bidoon  not  being  taken
    seriously.  The expert had said why the regime  would  take  notice  of
    others.  Everyone needed allies.  With regard to the wider point  taken
    by Mr Ali that the documented Bidoon were no better off because of what
    they were required to do to make a living in Kuwait, it was relevant to
    consider  who  they  were,  namely  a  transnational  element  of   the
    population.  Much had been made of  the  slowness  of  the  process  of
    obtaining nationality and it was relevant to note what was said  in  EM
    (Lebanon) [2008] UKHL 64 and in ST [2011] UKUT 252 (IAC).   It  was  an
    exercise in obtaining and documenting nationality in  contrast  to  ST.
    People were  not  being  documented  where  they  had  the  right,  for
    political reasons.  Here it was  more  ephemeral  and  it  was  unclear
    whether the entitlement existed and there was a question of eligibility
    for the nationality.  The Kuwaiti authorities  were  entitled  to  take
    care, and it was a different question  if  a  claimant  had  got  other
    documentation when it would be a question of  them  being  entitled  to
    Kuwaiti nationality and being denied.  If it was said that there was  a
    persecutory denial of the nationality right, that was the only  way  in
    which the appellant could succeed on the  basis  of  ST,  and  a  small
    number of people had negotiated the hurdles, so it was not a  targeting
    of the Bidoon in Kuwait  but  there  was  a  need  for  a  case-by-case
    approach.  There was no need to show all members of the group would  be
    persecuted in the same way and race was  clearly  a  Convention  reason
    here and particular social group also.

65.     With regard to the question of flagrant breach  of  human  rights of
    the Bidoon, Mr Deller argued that this needed a careful reading of what
    that  meant.   Clearly  Article  3  was  non-derogable.   It  was  more
    complicated where a signatory was entitled to derogate, and the  breach
    occurred in a non-signatory state.  In such a case  there  was  a  very
    high threshold as explained in  EM  (Lebanon).   It  was  necessary  to
    assess what exactly was going on in  order  to  see  if  the  line  was
    crossed.  It was a question of the resolution of claims to  nationality
    which had to be looked it.   It  was  a  civil  right  but  subject  to
    domestic laws and international  treaties.   The  United  Kingdom,  for
    example, could deny nationality if  the  circumstances  permitted.   It
    could also confiscate a passport subject to domestic remedies.  It  was
    a question of whether there was an  established  claim  to  citizenship
    being denied or a path which  was  being  slowly  dealt  with  and  the
    question of why it was slow.  It could be a question of not  dedicating
    the necessary resources at a speed to satisfy critics  of  the  system.
    It was helpful to have the views of the receiving state where possible.

66.     With regard to breaches of Articles 3, 6  and  14  as  contended, Mr
    Deller said it was a question of a discriminatory basis and the reasons
    for the asylum claim indicated Article 14 as a reason  why  the  others
    were engaged.  If it was a flagrant denial it was  discriminatory,  but
    it was necessary to look at what specific qualified rights were  relied
    on.  It should be questioned whether the argument could be said  to  be
    made out in general.   If  a  flagrant  denial  was  claimed  then  the
    existence of exceptions was always  problematic  for  that  submission.
    There was the question whether the documented Bidoon were still treated
    in a discriminatory manner.  If they could  not  do  anything  then  it
    would be a question of being potentially documented as another  matter.
    RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 was clear as to what was being  protected,
    the right to hold or not hold a political opinion.   The  existence  of
    Bidoon roots per se would always have to  be  established  and  it  was
    always a matter of individual circumstances  which  would  lead  to  an
    appeal being won or lost in a Bidoon asylum claim.  It was not entirely
    an intra-Kuwait problem.  The RT issue could arise on  the  facts  with
    people who obtained passports but there was a question of investigating
    an individual's mindset and acting discreetly could  have  a  different
    context in different situations.  If it was said that  their  obtaining
    of passports was a criminal action then that would have to be shown  to
    be a crime.  It should be questioned  why  a  person  would  not  be  a
    national of the country for which they had a passport, but  where  they
    had a Bidoon heritage.  The existence of such a subgroup, some of  whom
    had acted against their will, could be an RT point.  It  could  not  be
    said that all Kuwaiti Bidoon were refugees.  There were exceptions  and
    they needed to be explored.

67.     The Tribunal would need to address the question  of  the interaction
    between   the   Kuwaiti   government   and   the   Bidoon    and    the
    registered/documented point.

68.     As regards the individual appeal, Mr Deller stated  that  there were
    some changes from the original situation.  The  relationship  with  the
    brother was now accepted and the relevance of his asylum claim  to  the
    factual basis of the appellant's claim and  his  history  also.   There
    were evidential conflicts in this case.  There were  conflicts  between
    the family's stories and the appellant's story.  To a large extent  the
    case was about what had happened to the appellant's husband in  Kuwait.
    There  was  a  significant  attempt  to  point  to   the   Bidoon/Iraqi
    collaboration issue and the question of the population's view  and  the
    expert's evidence on this.  The initial arrest and conviction were  for
    collaboration with a foreign power and then there was the later release
    and the narrative of subsequent  re-arrests  and  detention.   The  Red
    Cross documentation helped the appellant's account and was relevant  to
    her own treatment.  Her documentation  helped  and  hindered.   In  the
    skeleton at [2] reliance was placed on this to show  her  Bidoon  roots
    and it could be said to be difficult to come  by  if  she  was  Bidoon.
    There were credibility issues concerning her husband and the chronology
    of his time in prison.  It was only the findings of fact of  the  judge
    that were set aside.

69.     There was the question of the son's visa application and  him saying
    the appellant was in Iraq at some point which all created doubts.   The
    burden was on the appellant.

70.     The history of the region was relevant.  Borders had  suddenly  been
    created and a question arose as to what links the Bidoon had  with  the
    part of the region which was now a nation.  There was some evidence  of
    removal to a no-man's land  between  Iraq  and  Kuwait.   The  evidence
    mentioning Iraq had to be put into its proper context in respect of the
    appellant's claim.  It was a question of whether the  Bidoon  preferred
    to be Bidoon.  Origin in the particular territory did not presume  that
    a person belonged there.  It was necessary to consider the  possibility
    that the appellant was Iraqi.  It could be that the positive factors in
    her favour helped to decide it.  There were concerns about parts of the
    evidence and there were gaps in the evidence.  The Red Cross  documents
    concerning the husband's imprisonment needed to be considered and  were
    relevant to the husband's position and the question of whether any risk
    to him extended to her on the basis of shared characteristics or  their
    relationship.

71.     The appeal should be dismissed.

72.     In his submissions Mr Ali commented that  he  and  Mr  Deller agreed
    that the undocumented Bidoon in Kuwait, subject to  exceptions,  should
    succeed in their asylum claims.  The country guidance in BA and HE  was
    still good.

73.     With regard to the background evidence, the  OGN  provided  a fairly
    accurate summary, and the expert concurred with it.  Reference was made
    in particular to paragraphs 3.6.10 and 3.6.12-16  and  also  3.6.23-26.
    This evidence showed  institutional  and  societal  discrimination  and
    emphasised the across-the-board denial of basic rights.  It was  argued
    that there was a real distinction between being  documented  and  being
    registered.  If a person were documented then they had access to rights
    which foreign guest workers and most Kuwaitis would have.  It  was  the
    case that some Bidoon had been  naturalised  as  citizens,  though  the
    numbers had not been published, it seemed there had been a few  hundred
    a year in the last few years.  They were seen as foreigners.  They  may
    have been there since the 1950s or  1960s  or  even  earlier,  and  had
    previously been treated as citizens.  The civil ID  card  was  crucial.
    "Documented" and "undocumented" were not synonyms for the  "registered"
    and "unregistered" distinction.  Some had obtained false passports.  In
    the light of  the  Arab  Spring  they  had  been  singled  out  by  the
    government.

74.     The US State Department Report also provided a useful  summary.  The
    issue of the eleven privileges had been put to the expert by Mr  Deller
    and in fact it was said that they had not been implemented but had been
    suspended.  There were over 80,000 citizenship applications  by  Bidoon
    still pending.

75.     Mr Ali  attached  significance  to  the  Human  Rights  Watch report
    "Prisoners of the Past: Kuwaiti Bidoon and the Burden of Statelessness"
    12th June 2011 at tab 5 of volume 2.  He also attached  weight  to  the
    Refugees International Report of 6 March 2012 at the volume  3  tab  3.
    This endorsed what was said in  the  Amnesty  International  and  Human
    Rights Watch Reports.  Only documented Bidoon were given  an  ID  card,
    either as a foreign guest worker or as a Kuwaiti.  If not, a person was
    undocumented.  If a person was not registered with the Bidoon committee
    then they were probably in the worst situation.

76.     The RT (Zimbabwe) principle was clear.  If a person was  required to
    deny  something  fundamental  to  their  identity/existence  to   avoid
    persecution, then this was unacceptable.  It was the  appellant's  case
    that all the  Bidoon  in  Kuwait  were  persecuted.   Documentation  or
    citizenship was the only route to escape.

77.     On the ST  point  Mr  Ali  disagreed  with  Mr  Deller.   There were
    100,000 people who were citizens before 1990.  It was  a  dictatorship.
    There was an expectation of progress, but it was opaque,  as  could  be
    seen in the OGN, and the process was stationary.  Wasta, or  influence,
    helped as anywhere.  There was no serious process, and ST applied.  The
    Bidoon had  done  what  they  were  required  to  do  but  the  Kuwaiti
    government could not care less.  What had been done had  been  done  to
    appease international criticism.  It was clear that there was  a  brisk
    trade in false documents which people were forced to engage in, and  it
    would be remarkable if this were not a criminal offence.  The  Tribunal
    in IK (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00312 had not accepted that a person should
    lie in order to escape persecution.  In  order  to  access  rights  the
    process denied fundamental rights.

78.     The amendment to the grounds to enable Mr  Ali  to  argue  breach of
    Article 6 outright or in conjunction with Article 14 had been  accepted
    and this was a sequential argument, and if the Tribunal agreed with the
    primary argument it could be academic, but if it did not agree with the
    primary position it was of relevance.  A flagrant breach was  the  same
    thing as a nullification of rights and the evidence about this  was  as
    set out.  There was no access to those rights as a matter of  law,  not
    practice, and it had been legislated.  The facts spoke for  themselves.
    Mr Ali referred in particular to paragraph 28  of  his  skeleton.   The
    courts could not  review  the  Bidoon  committee's  findings  and  this
    amounted to a flagrant breach.  This linked into the Article 13  issue.
     There was no remedy, let alone an effective one.  It was a question of
    breach of basic rights which affected an  entire  class  of  people  in
    Kuwait including children whose mothers were Kuwaiti if  their  fathers
    were Bidoon.  The Article 14 argument was a subset of this argument.

79.     With regard to the points made by Mr Deller concerning  the  lack of
    speed  of  the  regime,  it  was  a  matter  of  self-interest  and   a
    dictatorship.  It was a question of whether the deliberate decision  by
    the Kuwaiti government to a class of  around  100,000  people  to  deny
    rights was a flagrant one.  There would be an exception if on the facts
    of the case a  person  was  able,  via  wasta  etc.,  to  manage.   The
    evidential burden was on the Secretary  of  State  to  discharge.   The
    factual presumption must be that they were all  refugees  as  had  been
    found in the case of Kosovans earlier  in  Gashi  [1996]  UKIAT  13695.
    There was therefore a legal precedent.

80.     With regard to the particular situation of  the  appellant, reliance
    was placed on what was said in the skeleton about this.  She  had  been
    born in the  1960s  when  circumstances  were  different  and  she  was
    entitled to  such  documents  as  birth  certificates  and  vaccination
    certificates, and her  documents  should  therefore  be  seen  in  that
    context.  The Tribunal had heard the appellant and  her  brother-in-law
    give evidence.  The Red Cross had visited her husband in prison.   That
    was the starting point.  He was and is  in  Kuwait.   His  brother  had
    accepted that he had lied to the Immigration Judge and the explanations
    had been accepted.  It had not been a voluntary decision to leave.  The
    relationship of the brother was accepted and he was a refugee.  Her son
    had tried to come to the United Kingdom from Italy.  People said a  lot
    of things to get to the United Kingdom.  The evidence should  be  taken
    as a whole.  The negatives were peripheral and the  core  was  credible
    and the burden had been discharged.  If the Tribunal  agreed  then  the
    appellant would win whether he  was  documented  or  not.   The  appeal
    should be allowed.

81.     We reserved our determination.

Discussion

82.     The above evidence reveals the existence of  distinct  categories of
    people in Kuwait.  Leaving aside foreign nationals working  temporarily
    in Kuwait, permanent residents consist first of  those  with  civil  ID
    cards who are citizens and are entitled to all the benefits  that  flow
    from that, including the right to purchase property,  legally  register
    as an employee and enrol in most  school  or  educational  institutions
    free, and also be entitled to  free  healthcare.   Their  numbers  will
    include former Bidoon who have been granted citizenship.

83.     The second category consists  of  Bidoon  who  hold  security  cards
    (also known as  "green  cards").   These  are  people  who  registered,
    presumably with the Bidoon committee, between 1996  and  2000.   It  is
    said in the HRW report that most  Bidoon  carry  security  cards.   The
    document is not proof of ID, and does not make it clear on its face  to
    what the holder is entitled.  However, it can be seen from the evidence
    that Bidoon who hold security cards  are  theoretically  issued  travel
    documents in the form of "temporary passports", though in practice this
    is only for the purpose of travel for education, medical  treatment  or
    religious pilgrimage and typically remain valid only for the trip cited
    in the individual's application.  In addition,  according  to  the  HRW
    report, many Bidoon  children  attend  private  schools  which  provide
    Arabic language instruction and serve primarily  Bidoon  students,  and
    though there are annual fees ranging between the equivalent of US  $860
    to $1,550 per child, and parents pay extra for textbooks and  uniforms,
    in 2004 the  government  established  a  charitable  fund  to  pay  the
    educational expenses of children in need which pays primary and  second
    school fees for many Bidoon students as well as expatriate children who
    wish to attend Arabic language schools.  Those schools are inferior  to
    government schools, and the  fund  does  not  meet  the  needs  of  all
    children, and several families interviewed stated  that  they  received
    funding for some but not all of their children.  Only  Bidoon  students
    with Kuwaiti citizen mothers may enrol in universities.   This  broadly
    accords with the evidence of Mr Shiblak as recorded  at  paragraphs  97
    and 98 above.  In general we found his evidence, both written and oral,
    to be helpful.

84.     As regards healthcare, Kuwaiti citizens receive free healthcare  and
    Bidoon with security cards can purchase health  insurance  through  the
    government system which charges a fee of the equivalent of US $21 for a
    year of coverage or $39 for two years, with small charges for visits to
    government clinics and hospital  visits.   Several  Bidoon  interviewed
    said that this insurance does not cover all prescription medication and
    medical testing.  Nor does it cover certain types of surgery.

85.     As regards employment, though  under  Kuwaiti  law  only  those with
    legal resident or citizen status can legally hold  employment  (so  not
    including  green  card  holders),  the  government  has  made   limited
    exceptions and allowed Bidoon to hold certain government jobs,  and  in
    addition it is reported that the government has relaxed enforcement  of
    laws prohibiting private sector employees from hiring illegal residents
    and inspections of private companies for Bidoon employees  have  become
    rare.   Accordingly,  private  employers   have   become   increasingly
    comfortable about hiring stateless people despite their lack  of  legal
    status in recent years, but it remains the case that the Bidoon have no
    legal protection for their right to work.

86.     We have mentioned above the HRW report of 22 January 2012,  in which
    it is said that many  Bidoon  have  confirmed  receiving  many  of  the
    benefits promised by the government  including  free  healthcare,  free
    education at private schools  primarily  serving  Bidoon  children  and
    birth, marriage and death certificates and improved access to jobs, but
    there are  ongoing  problems  in  accessing  employment  and  increased
    difficulty in receiving  passports.   It  is  unclear  quite  how  that
    impacts on the evidence we have set out above.  It  must,  however,  be
    recorded as a step in the right direction, as must  the  naturalisation
    procedures set out at paragraph 107 above.

87.     The third category consists of the unregistered Bidoon, as they  are
    described in the HRW report, i.e. those who are not able to renew their
    security cards or people who have never obtained security cards.   This
    group of people are denied all the benefits that are available to those
    with security cards,  as  set  out  above.   Thus  they  cannot  obtain
    passports of any kind, they  are  not  provided  with  any  educational
    funding and they are denied access to government clinics and  hospitals
    altogether.  Thus they are not even able to  purchase  low-cost  health
    insurance through  the  government-administered  program.   Their  only
    recourse  is  to  seeking  medical  services  from  expensive   private
    hospitals, which is clearly extremely problematic given  their  limited
    ability to find work.

88.     It is important that we are clear  about  the  relevant terminology.
    The Tribunal in BA  distinguished  between  undocumented  Bidoon,  i.e.
    those who did not have civil identification documents,  and  documented
    Bidoon, i.e. those  who  had  been  documented  as  citizens  of  other
    countries, mainly Saudi Arabia and Syria.  This  documentation  enabled
    them to obtain residency permits and other official papers.

89.     In HE the Tribunal noted the distinction drawn in BA,  and expressed
    the view that "civil identification documents" would include  residence
    permits and other official papers issued by  the  Kuwaiti  authorities,
    but would not include attendance cards, such as that held by HE,  since
    it specified that it was not an identity  card,  or  birth  certificate
    where the parents were not Kuwaiti nationals or legal residents.

90.     The March 2011 COIR, at paragraphs 19.32-19.34  draws  a distinction
    between  documented  Bidoon  (those  registered  with   the   Executive
    Committee for Illegal Residents (the Bidoon Committee)  by  June  2000)
    and undocumented Bidoon (those not so registered).

91.       Human  Rights  Watch  (HRW)  in  their  report  of  12  June 2011:
    "Prisoners of the Past: Kuwaiti Bidun and the Burden of  Statelessness"
    employ the categorisation of registered and unregistered Bidoon.   This
    essentially mirrors the categorisation in the  COIR,  as  Human  Rights
    Watch categorises the registered Bidoon as those  who  registered  with
    the Bidoon Committee between 1996 and 2000 as  stateless  residents  of
    Kuwait with claims to Kuwaiti nationality.   In  effect,  according  to
    HRW, from registration flows  access  to  a  security  card,  and  from
    possession of a security card flows potential access to civil documents
    such as birth, marriage and death certificates and  passports.   It  is
    clear from this report, which we have found to be  especially  helpful,
    that  registration  is  the  gateway  to   relevant   and   potentially
    significant documents.  However, since it is clear that a person may be
    refused renewal of their security card, and  the  evidence  shows  that
    possession of a security card is crucial for access  to  the  range  of
    benefits set out at  paragraphs  38-45  above,  we  conclude  that  the
    distinction between documented  and  undocumented  Bidoon  remains  the
    point of significance, albeit on the basis of possession of a  security
    card rather than "civil identification documents" as held in HE.

92.     The situation of the undocumented Bidoon on the basis of  this  more
    recent evidence appears to  be  essentially  similar  to  that  of  the
    undocumented Bidoon as assessed in HE in terms of the significant  lack
    of access to basic benefits and rights.

93.     According to Article 9 of the Qualification Directive:

         "1.    Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1A  of the
             Geneva Convention must:


             (a)     be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition
                  as to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights,
                  in particular the rights from which derogation  cannot  be
                  made under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for
                  the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms;
                  or


             (b)     be an  accumulation  of  various  measures,  including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).


           For  discrimination  to  amount  to  persecution,  measures  must
    involve persistent and serious ill-treatment without  just  cause,  and
    must be of  a  substantially  prejudicial  nature  and  must  affect  a
    significant part of the  individual's  or  group's  existence,  to  the
    extent that it would make  their  life  intolerable  if  they  were  to
    return.  Though, as we have set out above, we accept that that  remains
    the position with the undocumented Bidoon, we do not consider that  the
    evidence we have  set  out  above  shows  that  the  position  for  the
    documented Bidoon is materially different from the situation considered
    in  HE.   We  do  not  consider  that  the  evidence  concerning  them,
    discriminatory though in a number of respects their  situation  is,  is
    such as to cross the threshold and amount to persecution.

94.     In this regard we bear in mind the points made in  his  skeleton  by
    Mr Ali about RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  He argues at  paragraph  26
    of his supplementary skeleton argument that in most cases the Bidoon in
    Kuwait have to commit criminal offences by obtaining  and  using  false
    passports and holding themselves as citizens of one state or another in
    order to become documented Bidoon.  We do not think the  evidence  goes
    this far.  There is reference in the HRW report  at  page  13  of  that
    report to "some unregistered Bidoon" telling HRW that in the past  they
    had found ways to obtain passports from other countries,  and  at  some
    point suspected or discovered these  passports  were  counterfeit,  and
    when they presented counterfeit passports  and  found  they  could  not
    renew them, they discovered that their files with the Bidoon  committee
    had been closed and they could not renew  their  security  cards.   The
    fact that some Bidoon in the past had  obtained  passports  from  other
    countries cannot properly be extrapolated into  a  conclusion  that  in
    most cases the Bidoon have to commit criminal offences by obtaining and
    using false passports.

95.     We do not consider that the  evidence  shows,  as  contended  in  Mr
    Ali's skeleton, that on the basis of the principles in RT  the  Bidoon,
    in order to avoid persecution and inhuman and/or  degrading  treatment,
    have to deny who they are, that is  to  say  their  race  and/or  their
    Kuwaiti nationality or their particular social group.  In contrast,  it
    seems clear that many Bidoon actively seek  to  establish  or  to  have
    accepted their Kuwaiti nationality and the argument  that  most  Bidoon
    seek to establish Kuwaiti nationality  by  obtaining  and  using  false
    passports in significant numbers is not made out.

96.     Mr Ali also places reliance on what was said by the Tribunal  in  ST
    (ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG  [2011]  UKUT  252
    (IAC).  He places particular reliance on what was said at paragraphs 75
    to 81 in the context of Article 15(2) of the Universal  Declaration  of
    Human Rights and the impact on a person  of  arbitrary  deprivation  of
    nationality.  Mr Ali argues that a refusal to determine the nationality
    applications of the Bidoon is persecution because of  the  consequences
    for them as a direct consequence of this failure.

97.     ST was concerned, among other things, with the  deprivation  of  the
    appellant's ID card and the issue of the right to return in the context
    of an arbitrary deprivation of nationality.  It  is  unclear  what  the
    position  of  the  Kuwaiti  authorities  is  concerning  return  of   a
    documented Bidoon, and it is also important to bear in  mind  that  the
    authorities' position is that significant numbers of the Bidoon in fact
    have nationalities of other  countries,  and  that  investigations  are
    ongoing, albeit very slowly, to  establish  their  backgrounds  and  to
    decide whether or not they are entitled to nationality.  The  limit  of
    200 people a year being considered in this context is hardly indicative
    of an  urgent  process,  but  we  do  not  find  anything  in  ST  that
    particularly assists the argument that has been made  in  this  regard.
    Clearly, as we have set above, the documented Bidoon are entitled to  a
    range of what might be described as benefits which, although they  fall
    some way short of the entitlements of citizens, are  nevertheless  such
    as in our view not to amount to persecution.  The fact  that  they  are
    denied citizenship does  not,  in  our  view,  amount  to  persecution,
    particularly bearing in mind also the tortuous but nevertheless ongoing
    process of evaluation carried out by the Bidoon committee.

98.     Nor do we consider that the evidence  identifies  flagrant  breaches
    of protected rights as identified in EM (Lebanon) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  64.   We  have  noted  in  passing
    breaches of various international conventions that are part and  parcel
    of the discriminatory attitude towards the Bidoon in Kuwait, but we  do
    not consider that,  as  was  said  in  EM,  that  the  right  "will  be
    completely  denied  or  nullified  in  the  destination  country".   We
    therefore do not accept this argument.

99.     Nor do we accept that the refusal of the Kuwaiti state to  determine
    the nationality of Bidoon other than in a very slow way  amounts  to  a
    flagrant and disproportionate breach of  their  right  to  enjoy  their
    rights to family life and private life under Article 8 and  have  their
    civil rights determined under Article 6(1) of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  We do  not  consider  that  the  discrimination  that
    exists is such as to give rise to a breach  of  their  Article  13  and
    Article 14 rights for the reasons set out above.

100.   Our conclusion  is  therefore  that  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    documented Bidoon  does  not  show  that  they  are  at  real  risk  of
    persecution  or  breach  of  their   protected   human   rights.    The
    undocumented Bidoon, however, do face a real risk  of  persecution  and
    breach of their human rights.

101.   The distinction made in  previous  country  guidance  in  respect  of
    Kuwaiti Bidoon, between those who are  documented  and  those  who  are
    undocumented, is maintained, but the relevant  crucial  document,  from
    possession of which a range of benefits depends, is the security  card,
    rather than the "civil identification documents"  referred  to  in  the
    previous country guidance in HE [2006] UKAIT 00051. To that extent  the
    guidance in HE is amended.

102.   The evidence relating to the documented Bidoon does not show them  to
    be at real risk of persecution  or  breach  of  their  protected  human
    rights.

103.   The evidence concerning the undocumented Bidoon  does  show  them  to
    face a real risk of persecution or  breach  of  their  protected  human
    rights.

104.   It must be assumed that Bidoon who did not register between 1996  and
    2000, and hence did not obtain security cards,  are  as  a  consequence
    undocumented Bidoon, though this must be seen in  the  context  of  the
    evidence that most Bidoon carry security cards.

105.   We turn to the facts of the appeal before us.  We have  set  out  the
    oral evidence of the appellant and her brother-in-law A in an  appendix
    to this determination.

106.   At the screening interview the appellant said that she had never  had
    her own national passport as Kuwait did not give Bidoon passports.  She
    had travelled on a passport provided by the agent.  She  did  not  look
    inside it except very briefly.  The agent had taken away the  passport.
    A boarding pass in someone else's name was found in  her  bag  but  she
    said she did not know anything about it  but  thought  that  the  agent
    might have put it there.  She produced birth certificates  for  herself
    and her husband, both of which  had  blank  spaces  under  the  heading
    "nationality".  The fact that they had birth certificates, which  might
    seem surprising in light of some of the background evidence we have set
    out, is explained by Mr Shiblak on the basis that they would have  been
    obtained at a time when the Bidoon were entitled to birth certificates,
    the position having hardened subsequently.  In the screening  interview
    she said that  her  husband  was  currently  in  jail  in  Kuwait.   At
    interview she said that he had been in prison since 2005.  He had  been
    imprisoned for distributing leaflets collected  from  different  stores
    about promotions or sales in the stores and he was imprisoned  on  this
    account because he was Bidoon and not entitled to work.  He had been in
    the navy previously as at that time Bidoon were allowed  to  work.   He
    had first been arrested in 1991 and he was  accused  of  being  aligned
    with the Iraqi military but after a year in  prison  he  was  released.
    That was because they had announced forgiveness for prisoners  at  that
    time.  He was next arrested in 1997  when  he  was  illegally  working,
    selling sheep, and released after six months.  His next arrest was  the
    arrest in 2005.  He said that he had never been  politically  involved.



107.   She said she had never had a green card in Kuwait.  She thought  that
    probably her husband had applied for one for her  though  she  had  not
    witnessed him doing this.

108.   As regards the leaflets for which her husband was arrested  she  said
    that the government denied the leaflets were about shops  and  said  it
    was something against the government.  She herself had been  taken  and
    questioned in 2007 in a raid but released on the same day and  had  not
    been questioned or arrested subsequently.  A number of  family  members
    had provided from their savings the US $10,000 which  was  the  agent's
    fee for bringing her to the United Kingdom.

109.   At interview the appellant was also asked about family in the  United
    Kingdom and named her brother S, who had come to the United Kingdom  in
    2006 and claimed and was granted asylum on the basis of being Bidoon.

110.   She was also asked about the sponsorship by her brother-in-law  A  of
    K in 2010 and said she did not know anything about this.  She  accepted
    that K was  her  son.   She  thought  his  visa  application  had  been
    declined.  She had earlier been asked whether any of her  children  had
    applied to come to the United Kingdom and said no, and  she  said  that
    according to her knowledge none of them applied.  She  did  not  recall
    which country K had applied for.  She said that their  friends  applied
    for her son but it failed.  She did not know when the  application  was
    made but it was made to help him leave the country.  She had asked them
    to make this application.  She thought that  a  birth  certificate  had
    been used when his application was made but it was different from  hers
    in that it was a casual paper with details rather than being documented
    by the government.  She had been given her son's birth  certificate  by
    the midwife.  She was referred to the  visa  application  form  of  the
    person who had applied who had said his mother was born in  Iraq.   She
    said it was not true.

111.   The determination in the appeal of S is to be found  in  the  bundle.
    The judge noted discrepancies in his evidence, albeit not  major  ones,
    and accepted on the lower standard that he had established that he  was
    an undocumented Bidoon.

112.   Also in the bundle is the determination in the case  of  A.   He  was
    found credible and it was accepted that he had been persecuted  in  the
    past on account of his Bidoon ethnicity  and  had  been  deported  from
    Kuwait along with a number of  family  members.   The  hearing  of  his
    appeal took place in July 2004.  At paragraph 6 of the determination it
    is noted that he confirmed that his brother S was still  in  prison  in
    Kuwait and they would contact him by telephone when the prison  allowed
    this.  He had last spoken to him a year ago.  He said that S's wife and
    children were in Basra.

113.   In his witness  statement  A  confirmed  that  the  appellant  is  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  He referred to an incident in 2011 when  he  went
    to Kuwait to see his brother S (the appellant's husband) and stayed  at
    the time at his brother K's house.  S had been  released  a  couple  of
    weeks earlier but while A was in Kuwait there was a raid on  K's  house
    and K and S were taken by the state security service that  day,  K  was
    questioned and released the next day but S was returned to the  central
    prison.  A also confirmed that he had sponsored K, his  brother's  son,
    to come to the United Kingdom from Italy.  He said that in terms  of  K
    describing himself as Iraqi, although he himself  did  not  know  about
    this at the time he found out about it subsequently and K told  him  an
    agent had advised him to say he was Iraqi so as to obtain a visa.

114.   In her oral evidence the appellant said that she had  been  sent  the
    marriage certificate which she  had  now  produced  by  her  sister  in
    Kuwait.  She also produced a census document with translation and  also
    a receipt for that document and a  document  entitled  "certificate  of
    good manners and well behaviour" concerning her husband S who,  it  was
    said, had been taken into custody on 5  April  1991  and  was  sent  to
    prison on 5 April 2011 having been indicted  of  collaboration  with  a
    foreign state.  The certificate had been given on his  request  because
    he was of good manners  and  well  behaved.   He  had  been  sent  that
    document by A.  She confirmed that her husband  had  been  arrested  on
    three occasions, in 1991, 1997 and 2005.  He had  again  been  released
    for less than a month in 2011 and then re-arrested until now.  She  was
    referred to the reference in the certificate to the 1991 matter being a
    question of collaboration with a foreign state and stood by her answers
    at interview.

115.   When A gave oral evidence before us he accepted that it was  not  the
    case that the appellant and the children had been in Basra as  she  had
    refused to be deported there because  her  husband  was  in  prison  in
    Kuwait and hence she was returned.  As regards  why  he  had  said  his
    brother was in prison in 2005,  as  recorded  at  paragraph  6  of  his
    determination, he said that his brother was in prison then but  he  did
    not accurately know the dates  when  his  brother  was  in  prison  and
    released as his brother had been in prison many times and the period of
    time was quite long.  When we asked A about his  confirmation  that  in
    2004 S was in prison he said it was his understanding that he could  be
    in prison at that time but he was not very  sure,  though  he  accepted
    that when he had said that  at  his  hearing  it  was  close  to  being
    contemporaneous.

116.    It  will  be  clear  therefore  that  there  are  some   unexplained
    discrepancies in the evidence, such as regards the periods of time when
    the appellant's husband was in prison, the claim by  her  son  when  he
    applied to enter the United Kingdom that  he  was  Iraqi,  the  varying
    accounts of the appellant being in Basra and the curious and  anomalous
    nature of the good conduct certificate of the appellant's husband.   On
    the other  hand  there  are  the  preserved  findings  that  S  is  the
    appellant's full brother and is an undocumented Bidoon.  Such documents
    as the appellant has produced do  not  show  that  she  is  documented,
    relating as they do to a period when, as we have noted above, we accept
    that documentation of that kind was made available to the Bidoon.   Any
    damage to the appellant's credibility due to the discrepancies we  have
    identified does not go to refute her claim to be unregistered,  nor  to
    her claim to be from Kuwait, not  Iraq.   Consequently,  in  accordance
    with our conclusions on the background evidence set out above, we  find
    that as an undocumented Bidoon she succeeds  in  her  claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention and under Article 3 of the Human Rights  Convention.
    Her appeal is therefore allowed on both those bases.






Signed
       Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

                                  APPENDIX

1.       In her oral evidence the appellant was  referred  to  her statement
    signed on 8 January 2013 and  confirmed  that  the  contents  had  been
    explained to her and she  was  happy  to  adopt  it  as  her  evidence.
    Likewise with respect to her earlier statement of 14  April  2011,  the
    contents had been explained to her and she was happy to adopt it as her
    evidence today.

2.       With regard to the  most  recent  statement,  she  was  referred to
    paragraph 10 and was asked what she meant by saying  that  her  husband
    was currently being treated badly.  She said that she had meant to  say
    that he was very tired in the prison.  The question  was  repeated  and
    she did not understand it.  Mr Ali then asked her  what  bad  treatment
    had she been told he was experiencing and she said he was  tortured  or
    hit by the staff in the prison and due to his mental situation  he  was
    very tired.

3.       She was referred next to the documents, copies of which were  to be
    found at pages 116 to 129 of the bundle.  It  was  confirmed  that  the
    expert had seen the copies but not the originals.  With regard  to  the
    birth certificate at page 116, she had obtained this from  the  Kuwaiti
    state.   The  document  at  page  164,  for  which  at  that  stage  no
    translation had been provided, was her marriage certificate.   She  was
    asked why it had arrived more recently than the other documents and she
    said that it was because she left some of  the  original  documents  in
    Kuwait.  She had been sent it by her sister in Kuwait through DHL.  Her
    sister was NF.  It was put to her that the DHL envelope referred to  NM
    and she said that this was  her  sister's  full  name  and  M  was  her
    surname.

4.       She was shown the document  at  page  124-5  (census  document with
    translation) and said it was included with the other documents sent  to
    her and the same was true  of  the  documents  at  page  126-7  (census
    receipt with translation).  The document  at  page  128-9  (certificate
    with translation) had been sent to her by her brother-in-law A.

5.       When cross-examined by Mr Deller the witness was asked  whether she
    had any more information about her son K's asylum application in  Italy
    and she said no but she knew he was  in  Italy.   He  was  waiting  for
    papers there and was working.

6.       It was put to her that in her  statement  she  had  said  that  she
    thought it might have been said that she was in Iraq when  K  made  his
    visa application and said she was from Iraq.  It was put  to  her  that
    she had said the agent told him to say that and she was asked  how  she
    knew what the agent had said had to be done.  The  appellant  had  some
    difficulty in understanding the question but when it was  repeated  she
    said it was through a telephone call and he  (her  son)  had  explained
    everything to her later on.

7.       She was referred to paragraphs 35 to 37 of the refusal letter,  and
    it was put to her that it was strange that in the  screening  interview
    she had not said she had been questioned by  the  authorities  and  she
    said she had not been asked.  She was asked whether she had not thought
    it was important to her case that she personally had been  of  interest
    and she said no.  She knew later that it was very important but at that
    time she was very tired.

8.       She was asked  whether  she  could  confirm  when  her  husband was
    arrested and she asked whether this was a reference  to  the  first  or
    second time.  She was asked to name each time if there  had  been  more
    than one.  She said that 1991 was the first time and  the  second  time
    was 1997, for seven months and then in 2005 and the last  time  was  in
    2011 when he  had  been  released  for  less  than  a  month  and  then
    rearrested until now.

9.       She was asked whether she knew what  the  last  re-arrest  was for,
    and said she did not know: she had been in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    agreed that she had been speaking to him on  the  telephone  and  after
    arresting him they had contacted her on the telephone.   She  said  she
    knew  he  had  been  arrested  but  the  reasons  and  other   relevant
    information she had no idea about.

10.     She agreed that she had provided the documents at page  128  and 129
    which  was  a  Ministry   of   Interior   General   Administration   of
    Rehabilitation Institutes Central Prison Administration Certificate  of
    Good Manners and Well Behaviour in her husband's name together with its
    translation.  It was put to her that this document said that  the  1991
    matter was a question of collaboration with a foreign state  which  she
    agreed.  It was put to her that the account she had given of  his  2005
    arrest was that he was arrested for handing out leaflets or promotional
    material.  She was referred to her answers at questions 15  and  16  at
    interview and said that she stood by  that.   She  also  stood  by  her
    answer to question 21.  He had been released after a year in prison and
    had then been arrested in  1997  for  illegal  working.   He  had  been
    working as a shepherd in the market then.

11.     Mr Ali had no questions on re-examination.

12.     We had a few questions for the appellant.   She  agreed  that  A was
    her brother-in-law and that he had come to the United Kingdom in  2003.
    He had knowledge of her husband.  She was asked how he had knowledge of
    her husband's position and said as he was his brother so he had known a
    lot of things about him.  She was asked whether it was  correct  for  A
    when he gave evidence to the court in 2004 to say that her husband  was
    in prison in 2003 and she said no, not in 2003, and she had no idea why
    he said that.  She had never lived in Basra.  With regard to  A  having
    told the court that she and the children were in Basra when her husband
    was in prison, she said actually she had not gone to  Basra.   She  had
    been supposed to be deported there with her children  but  it  had  not
    happened as her husband was not  with  her.   She  had  never  been  to
    Basra.

13.     There was no re-examination.

14.     The next witness was A, the appellant's husband's  brother.   He was
    referred to his statement dated 19 April 2011.  He  was  aware  of  the
    contents which had been explained to him in Arabic  and  was  happy  to
    adopt it for today's hearing.

15.     He was referred to the evidence he had given in his  appeal  hearing
    in 2004 when he had said, as recorded at paragraph  6  of  the  judge's
    determination, that he confirmed that his brother S was still in prison
    in Kuwait, that he himself was last in Kuwait on 16 March 1993 and  was
    able to contact S by telephone and the  prison  allowed  it.   He  last
    spoke to him about a year ago  when  S's  wife  and  children  were  in
    Basra.  He did not maintain that that was true.  He had  been  deported
    together with his brothers to Basra, but as regards the  appellant  and
    the children they had refused to accept her so she was returned because
    she refused to be deported to Basra as her husband  was  in  prison  in
    Kuwait.  Because of her refusal she was returned.  He was asked whether
    he had said this in 2004 and had spoken to his brother in 2003  a  year
    previously.  He said that he remembered he contacted his brother on the
    telephone but could not remember whether he was in prison then.  It was
    read to him what was said at paragraph 6 of the  determination  and  he
    said his brother was in the prison in 2005.  He was asked why  then  he
    had given the impression recorded and  said  that  since  he  had  left
    Kuwait there was no connection between them, but when  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom he started to communicate with his brothers.   That  was
    why he did not accurately know the dates when  his  brother  S  was  in
    prison and released, as his brother had been in prison many  times  and
    the period of time was quite long.

16.     He was referred to the documents at pages  60  to  63  of  the first
    bundle and was asked how he got them and said he got them  through  the
    British Red Cross.  He had a case with  them  in  order  to  track  the
    situation of his brother.  As regards the two emails at  page  166  and
    how they were generated, he said this was also through the British  Red
    Cross.  He had  contacted  them  and  asked  them  for  these  specific
    documents and they had referred him to  the  Amnesty  organisation  for
    whom they were an agent, and they had contacted his brother in  Kuwait.
    They had gone to Kuwait to meet him but were not allowed to.  They  had
    done their best but were unsuccessful.  Then they had contacted him and
    told him they were not able to see him and he had asked them to see his
    other brother K in Kuwait as he had more information than  the  witness
    did about S's case.

17.     With regard to paragraph  7  of  his  statement,  the  reference  to
    meeting his brother in Kuwait in 2011, he had asked him how he had been
    treated in prison and he had said he told  him  he  had  been  tortured
    frequently at different times, specifically by  hitting.   A  group  of
    people would come into the cell and torture him  and  other  prisoners.
    He was asked whether S had said why they were doing this and he said it
    was because they were Bidoon, or according to the case  they  had  been
    arrested for.  He was asked whether the Kuwaiti authorities told S  any
    details of the offence for which they had arrested him and he said that
    as S had been arrested many times, once because of  collaborating  with
    the  Iraqi  government.   On  the  last  time  they  accused   him   of
    distributing   specific   leaflets   against   the   government   while
    distributing sales and promotions and job  leaflets.   It  was  on  the
    information that he was an anti-government agent.

18.     He was referred to the document at page 128 of tab  2  of  bundle 1.
    This was the Certificate of Good Manners and Well Behaviour referred to
    above at paragraph 10.  He recognised it from the last time he  was  in
    Kuwait.  S had been released from the prison and he had  met  him.   He
    was released on 8 March 2011 and rearrested on 2 April.   He  had  been
    arrested from their home, that is to say the home of their  brother  K.
    He had obtained this document via K.  K had applied to get it from  the
    prison and that was how he had obtained it.

19.     He agreed that it seemed from the wording of  the  document  that it
    had been requested by Salem, but he himself had received it via K.   He
    had needed it to hand it to the British Red Cross organisation.

20.     Mr Ali referred to documents that the witness had  with  him  and it
    was agreed that there was no need to produce  documents  to  prove  the
    visits to Kuwait, which was accepted.

21.     The witness was asked when he had provided  the  certificate  to the
    representatives and said he could not remember.  He had given it to the
    appellant and she had  given  it  to  the  solicitors.   He  could  not
    remember accurately.  He had obtained it in 2011.  He was asked whether
    it was before or after the hearing before Judge Grant in May  2011  and
    he said to his understanding it was after  that  date.   He  remembered
    very well that he had shown the judge his passport with the  Red  Cross
    documents and they were the only documents he had shown.

22.     He was asked about the new document at 64A tab 1 (a  tracing enquiry
    letter from the Home Office) and how he got it and he said  he  got  it
    via the British Red Cross.

23.     When cross-examined by Mr  Deller  the  witness  said  that  he left
    Kuwait to claim asylum on 16 March  1993.   He  had  been  deported  to
    Iraq.  His evidence was that S was meant to be  deported  at  the  same
    time.  He was asked to clarify his evidence as to why the appellant and
    the children were in Iraq.  He said that as they were Bidoon  they  had
    all been got together in a specific area to be  alone  over  there  and
    this place was on the border between Kuwait and Iraq,  a  sort  of  no-
    man's land.  They were there for about three days but the appellant and
    her children refused to go there with them as her husband was not  with
    her.  He had been there with his mother and brother.  During that  time
    his father was in Iraq.  They had been ordered to go inside Iraq.   His
    brother had brought a sponsor who helped them to get inside Iraq.  This
    was his brother M.  He had a total of three brothers and five  sisters.
    His brothers were all in Europe now except for K in  Kuwait  and  S  in
    prison there.  He and the other brother M had left Kuwait on  16  March
    1993.

24.     He had been there when the Kuwaiti authorities  raided  their  house
    in April 2011.  They had been sitting in  the  reception  area  of  K's
    house when suddenly they were attacked by a group from the  authorities
    who captured S specifically and beat him and took  K  also.   They  had
    tried to capture and arrest him but he had told them he was  a  British
    citizen.  They had released K after two days but kept S until now.   He
    had left the house and stayed in a hotel and came back  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

25.     He was asked whether, before he established  his  British  identity,
    he had had any idea as to what the raid was about and said  he  had  no
    idea.  Later on they had  known  that  the  authorities  were  after  S
    specifically.  He was asked what they were accusing  him  of  then  and
    said until now there had been no specific reason and that was why  they
    had contacted Amnesty International to find out  what  he  was  accused
    of.  The authorities who detained S had been lightly armed.

26.     In re-examination he was asked where  M  was  and  said  he  was  in
    Canada where he was married to a  Canadian  lady  having  followed  her
    there.  Three of his sisters were in Canada, one in Germany and one  in
    Norway and were all naturalised.

27.     We referred the witness back to what he had  said  in  2004  at  the
    hearing that S was still in prison in Kuwait in  2003.   He  said  that
    that was probably for a very short time even  for  a  few  weeks.   His
    period in prison was not long and his telephone contact was always with
    K and only rarely with S.  With regard to him being recorded as  having
    said that he spoke to S when the prison allowed he said that  was  true
    but he was in prison for a short period of time, but he  was  not  very
    sure of that.  It was suggested that he was sure in 2004 and he said he
    had contacted S by telephone in 2003 and he was in prison for  a  short
    time.  As to what S was in prison for, he  said  he  did  not  remember
    exactly but he could be arrested just by walking in the  streets  as  a
    Bidoon and it was probably  for  a  short  time.   As  to  why  he  had
    confirmed in 2004 that S was still in prison, he said that  it  was  to
    his understanding that he could be in the prison at that  time  but  he
    was not very sure.  He had been eighteen years away from  his  brothers
    without any connection or communicating with them and it  was  hard  to
    remember dates.  He agreed, however, that what he had said in 2004  was
    near-contemporaneous to events in 2003.

28.     Mr Ali had no further questions.



