
[pic]


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Khan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
(right of appeal - alternative remedy) IJR [2015] UKUT 00353 (IAC)

                                                        Heard at Field House


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of

                                SAQIB ZIA KHAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr R. Pennington-Benton and Ms J. Lowis, instructed
                      by Farani Javid Taylor solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal
                      Department

Although each case must be determined on its own facts,  in  cases  where  a
person seeks to dispute the  Secretary  of  State's  assertions  as  to  the
availability of an  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appropriate
course is for such person to lodge a notice of appeal  with  the  First-tier
Tribunal requesting that it determine this issue.  Given  the  existence  of
this  suitable  alternative  remedy,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
circumstances that the Upper  Tribunal  will  exercise  its  discretion  and
grant relief to a person who seeks to raise this same  issue  before  it  in
judicial review proceedings brought against the Secretary of State.


                                  JUDGMENT
                         handed down on 15 June 2015


Judge O'Connor:

Introduction


   1. This is an application for judicial review of a decision made  by  the
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  on  24  May  2013  -  the
      application having been lodged on 22 August 2013 and permission having
      been granted after a hearing, by order of Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman
      dated 16 August 2014.


Background

   2. The chronology is as follows: The Applicant is a citizen  of  Pakistan
      born in 1983. He first entered the United Kingdom as a student  on  12
      July 2007 and his leave was subsequently extended so  as  to  be  last
      conferred until 30 July 2012.


   3. On 4 April 2012 the Applicant made an application for leave to  remain
      as  a  Tier  1  (Post  Study  Work)  Migrant.  This  application   was
      accompanied by details of a debit card bearing the  Applicant's  name,
      which was valid until 30 April 2012. As of the  date  of  making  this
      application  the  Applicant  was  not  in  possession  of  his  degree
      certificate, production  of  which  was  required  in  order  for  the
      Applicant to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  As  a
      consequence, the covering letter  to  the  aforementioned  application
      made a request that:

        "[t]he Home Office does not take a decision  upon  the  Applicant's
        application until he has received his  degree  certificate  and  is
        able to forward it on to the UK Border Agency.


        It is by no fault of our client that he is unable  to  provide  the
        relevant certificate at  this  date  and  therefore  it  is  kindly
        requested  that  the  Home  Office  uses  their  discretion  whilst
        considering this application."

   4. On the 2 May 2012 the Applicant's solicitor wrote  to  the  Respondent
      stating:


        "Our client has been informed by his bank that as  his  Visa  Debit
        card has expired and that (sic) any attempts to take  payment  from
        the card details enclosed within the application will be declined


        We would be grateful if you could please  contact  us  as  soon  as
        possible in order to allow us to provide  you  with  his  new  card
        details in a secure manner."


   5. On 27 July 2012, and  prior  to  the  Respondent  seeking  to  process
      payment for the application made on 4  April  2012  or  the  Applicant
      having provided new payment details to the Respondent,  the  Applicant
      sought to vary his grounds of application - using  Form  FLR(O).  This
      application was not accompanied by the specified fee of �842.


   6. In response the Secretary of  State  wrote  to  the  Applicant  on  21
      September 2012 in the following terms:

        "The specified fee has  not  been  paid  in  connection  with  your
        attempted application which you made by post on 27 July 2012. We do
        not consider that an exception to the requirement to  pay  the  fee
        applies in this case, and therefore your application is invalid and
        we are returning your documents."


   7. On 21 November 2012 the Applicant made a further application for leave
      to remain on Form FLR(O), this time accompanied by the specified fee.


   8. This application was refused by the Respondent in the  decision  under
      challenge of 24 May 2013 in which, having first refused to  grant  the
      Applicant leave to remain, the Respondent stated:


        "An application was made  on  your  behalf  on  21  November  2012.
        However, your  leave  to  remain  expired  on  30  July  2012.  You
        therefore did not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  your
        application.


        Your application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom has been
        refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay here.  There
        is no right of appeal against this refusal."


The underlying claim


   9. By this claim the Applicant does not seek to bring a challenge to  the
      substance of the Respondent's decision of the 24 May 2013 refusing him
      leave to remain, but rather it is asserted  that  he  is  entitled  to
      bring an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal against such decision.


Availability of an alternative remedy

  10.  The  possibility  of  the  Applicant  having  an  alternative  remedy
      available to him was raised for  the  first  time  by  myself  at  the
      hearing of 9 February 2015 i.e. after  permission  had  been  granted.
      Given that neither party had  previously  paid  any  thought  to  this
      issue, the hearing of 9 February was adjourned so to enable them to do
      so and, if thought necessary, to amend their respective  cases.  As  a
      consequence,  both  parties  put  in  lengthy  supplementary  skeleton
      arguments.

  11. The jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal is  dictated  by  statute.
      Section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      provided (prior to its amendment by the  Immigration  Act  2014)  that
      where an immigration decision is made in respect  of  a  person,  such
      person may appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  -  subject  to  defined
      exceptions which are of no relevance in the instant matter.

  12. By section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act an immigration decision includes a
      decision refusing to vary a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
      United Kingdom, if as a result of that  refusal  such  person  has  no
      leave to enter or remain. Consequently,  when  a  person  applies  for
      leave to remain during the currency of existing leave but  receives  a
      negative decision after such leave expires (excluding  the  effect  of
      section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971) that person  has  a  right  of
      appeal   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal:   SA   (Section   82(2)(d):
      interpretation and effect) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00083.

  13. The Applicant broadly submits that:  (i)  the  issue  of  whether  the
      Respondent's decision of 24 May 2013 is an immigration decision  is  a
      matter  to  be  determined  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  instant
      proceedings; and, (ii) that this issue should  be  determined  in  his
      favour because he had  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  he  made  his
      application on 21 November 2012 - his leave having been extended after
      30 July 2012 by operation of section 3C of the 1971 Act. Consequently,
      the decision of 24 May  2013  is  of  a  type  identified  in  section
      82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act.


  14. The Respondent submits that: (i) the issue of whether the decision  of
      24 May 2013 is an immigration decision is apt only  for  consideration
      by the First-tier Tribunal and not by the Upper Tribunal  in  judicial
      review proceedings; and, (ii) in any event,  the  Applicant  does  not
      have a right of appeal because he did not have leave to remain  as  of
      21 November 2012 and, consequently, the refusal of such application on
      24 May 2013 does not fall within the auspices of section 82(2)(d).

  15. The parties agree, correctly, that it was, and still is, open  to  the
      Applicant to file a notice of appeal with the First-tier  Tribunal  in
      relation to the decision of 24 May 2013, requesting  that  it  resolve
      the dispute identified above i.e. whether the decision of 24 May  2013
      was an immigration decision carrying with it a right of appeal.

  16. I observe that this was exactly the course taken by the  appellant  in
      Basnet (Validity of application - respondent)  [2012]  UKUT  00113,  a
      case with a factual matrix similar to that in  the  instant  case.  Mr
      Basnet had applied for a variation of his leave to remain  on  13  May
      2011, this being prior to the expiry of his leave. After the expiry of
      such leave the Secretary of State treated Mr Basnet's  application  as
      invalid because the  specified  fee  had  not  been  paid.  A  further
      application was made to the Secretary of State shortly thereafter,  on
      22 June 2011, which was  subsequently  refused.  The  decision  letter
      relaying such refusal advised Mr Basnet that he had no right of appeal
      against that decision. Despite this, he filed a notice of appeal  with
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  the   First-tier   Tribunal   thereafter
      concluding that it had no jurisdiction to consider the appeal.

  17. Undeterred by this Mr Basnet appealed to the Upper Tribunal. The Upper
      Tribunal  (Blake  J  and  UTJ  Macleman),  sitting  in  its  appellate
      capacity, set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal; accepting
      on the facts of the case that Mr Basnet did have  a  right  of  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision pursuant to section 82(2)(d)
      of the  2002  Act  because  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
      demonstrate that the  original  application  made  by  Mr  Basnet  was
      invalid and therefore, by operation of section 3C of the 1971 Act,  Mr
      Basnet still had leave to remain at the time of making his application
      of 22 June.

  18. Despite Mr Pennington-Benton's acceptance  that  it  is  open  to  the
      instant Applicant to file a  notice  of  appeal  with  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be  entitled  to
      consider whether the decision of 24 May carries with  it  a  right  of
      appeal, he submits that this should not lead  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      declining to exercise its discretion to grant  the  Applicant  relief.
      The reasons it is said that this  is  so  are  numerous,  but  can  be
      usefully divided into two categories:


          i)   Those deployed in support of an over-arching submission that
             the Applicant does not have an alternative remedy available to
             him; and, if this submission is  not  met  favourably  by  the
             Tribunal, then,
         ii) Those prayed in aid of the assertion that the failure  of  the
             Applicant to exhaust his alternative remedy should not lead to
             the Upper Tribunal exercising its discretion so as  to  refuse
             the relief sought.


  19. I shall consider these in turn. As to the former, it is said that:


          i) The notice of decision of 24 May 2013  is  invalid.  Requiring
             the Applicant to lodge an appeal with the First-tier  Tribunal
             in such circumstances would necessitate him waiving his  right
             to a valid notice of decision i.e. one which accords with  the
             requirements of the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003
             ("the Notice Regulations"). He  should  not  be  compelled  to
             waive such right, nor is he willing to do so;
         ii) Any decision by the First-tier Tribunal  to  extend  the  time
             limit for appealing is discretionary. It cannot be  said  with
             any degree of certainty that time would  be  extended  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal and, consequently, it cannot be said  that
             the Applicant has an alternative remedy;
        iii) In the instant judicial review the  Applicant  seeks,  amongst
             other things, a declaration that "[his] first application  was
             valid and remains  outstanding"[1].  This  is  a  remedy  that
             cannot be achieved in the First-tier Tribunal.


  20. The first and second of these contentions can be taken together and  I
      consider them  on  the  hypothetical  basis  most  beneficial  to  the
      Applicant i.e. that  the  decision  of  24  May  2013  is  capable  of
      attracting a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


  21. If this is assumed to be so, it is plain that the Respondent's  notice
      of decision of 24 May fails to comply with  the  requirements  of  the
      Notice Regulations  because  it  fails  to  identify  the  Applicant's
      entitlement to bring an appeal in relation to it.

  22. In OI (Notice of decision: time  calculations)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
      00042 the Tribunal gave consideration  to  the  issue  of  whether  an
      appellant required an extension of time for lodging an appeal with the
      Tribunal in circumstances where, inter alia, the  notice  of  decision
      bore a misleading statement as to the time limit for bringing such  an
      appeal. The Tribunal observed as follows at [15]:

        "The Notices Regulations are clearly made for the benefit of  those
        who receive the notices, and as a result the Tribunal has regularly
        held that an applicant or appellant may waive a requirement of  the
        Regulations  by  submitting  a  notice  of  appeal  even   if   the
        Regulations have not been fully complied with. But an applicant  is
        entitled to require compliance  with  the  Regulations,  and  if  a
        notice has not been served by  one  of  the  methods  specified  in
        Regulation 7(1), it has not been lawfully served  at  all,  and  in
        that case time has not yet  begun  to  run  against  any  intending
        appellant."

  23. Two matters of relevance to the instant application can immediately be
      extracted from the decision in OI: first, if a decision notice  issued
      by the Secretary of State is required to, but does  not,  comply  with
      the requirements of the Notice Regulations then time for  bringing  an
      appeal  against  such  decision  does  not  begin  to  run  until  the
      requirements of the Regulations have been  complied  with;  second,  a
      recipient of a decision notice  failing  to  comply  with  the  Notice
      Regulations can, nevertheless, bring an appeal before the Tribunal  by
      waiving the need for the Respondent to comply with the requirements of
      such regulations.


  24. The former of these conclusions entirely disposes of  the  Applicant's
      submission identified in paragraph 19(ii) above -  as  Mr  Pennington-
      Benton  recognised  during  the  course  of  the  hearing.   In   such
      circumstances I intend to say no more about  that  submission  herein.




  25. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that the decision in OI  goes  further,
      and establishes as a matter of legal principle that a person cannot be
      compelled to waive his or her right  to  a  notice  of  decision  that
      complies  with   the   requirements   of   the   Notice   Regulations.
      Consequently, it is said, the Applicant does not have  an  alternative
      remedy available to him.


  26. Although reference is made in paragraph 15 of OI to an applicant being
      entitled to require  compliance  with  the  Notice  Regulations,  this
      statement must be viewed in the context in which it was made  and  the
      issue before the Tribunal i.e. when and whether time  had  started  to
      run for the purposes of bringing an appeal in relation to  a  decision
      notice that was defective, inter alia, for its failure to comply  with
      the requirements of such regulations.


  27. There is nothing in reasoning or conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in  OI
      that impinges on the issue now  before  me.  In  particular  there  is
      nothing said in OI in relation to the consequences  for  an  applicant
      who chooses not to waive compliance with the Notices  Regulations  but
      instead seeks to enforce such compliance by way of an application  for
      judicial review in order to obtain the very thing that could have been
      obtained by waiving the need for compliance in the first place.


  28. This is not to compel the Applicant to waive that which he is entitled
      to, but to recognise that it is his choice as to whether he waives the
      need for the Respondent to comply with the  Notices  Regulations.  The
      availability of such a choice is, in my view, a matter relevant to the
      exercise by the Upper Tribunal of  its  discretion  whether  to  grant
      relief in judicial review proceedings.

  29. As to Mr Pennington-Benton's final submission on the issue of  whether
      the Applicant has an  alternative  remedy,  this  is  no-more  than  a
      recasting of the submissions I have  already  dealt  with  above.  The
      issue of whether the "first application" i.e. that of 4 April 2012, or
      indeed the application "as modified by the 27 July 2012  application",
      remained  extant  and  was  still  pending  as  of  the  date  of  the
      application of 21 November 2012, is one  of  the  questions  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal will be required, and is  entitled,  to  determine
      when considering whether the decision of 24 May 2013 is an immigration
      decision.


  30. If I am wrong in what I say  in  the  preceding  paragraph  then  this
      ground, by necessity, must be  a  challenge  to  the  decision  of  21
      September 2012. Rule 28(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 requires an application for  judicial  review  to  be  made
      promptly or in any event no later than 3  months  after  the  date  of
      decision to which the application relates. The instant application was
      not lodged until the 22 August 2013. This is a serious and significant
      delay. No satisfactory explanation for  the  delay  in  bringing  such
      proceedings has been provided and, in particular, I  do  not  consider
      that waiting for the outcome  of  further  applications  made  to  the
      Respondent provides adequate explanation for such delays. In  all  the
      circumstances I  do  not  extend  time  for  lodging  judicial  review
      proceedings in relation to the  decision  of  21  September  2012,  if
      indeed such decision is under challenge.


  31. In my conclusion, the Applicant  clearly  has  an  alternative  remedy
      available to him in relation to the issue of whether the  decision  of
      24 May 2013 is an immigration decision. He  can,  if  he  so  chooses,
      lodge an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against such  decision.  In
      these circumstances the First-tier Tribunal is entitled, and would  be
      required, to consider whether the  decision  of  24  May  2013  is  an
      immigration decision. If it concludes in  the  Applicant's  favour  on
      this issue it will go on to hear the substance of his  appeal  against
      such decision.

  32. Moving on to the alternative  submission  that  if,  contrary  to  the
      Applicant's assertions, he does have an alternative  remedy  then  the
      Upper Tribunal should, nevertheless, not exercise its discretion so as
      to  refuse  him  relief.   In  this  respect  Mr   Pennington-Benton's
      contentions can be summarised thus:

           i) The existence of an alternative remedy is not an absolute bar
              to judicial review;
          ii) The "tribunalisation" of judicial review partially erodes the
              rationale for requiring a person to exercise  an  alternative
              remedy prior to bringing judicial review proceedings;
         iii) There is significant factual  and  legal  uncertainty  as  to
              whether a right of appeal exists in any given  case.  It  is,
              therefore, not unreasonable to expect an Applicant  to  issue
              judicial review proceedings rather than  lodge  a  notice  of
              appeal to the First-tier Tribunal;
          iv) Requiring a person to lodge a notice of appeal with the First-
              tier  Tribunal  in  order  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
              determine whether that person has a  right  of  appeal  risks
              adding a further layer of costs  and  delay,  the  former  of
              which is not recoverable. In such circumstances it  is  "much
              better for the individual to seek judicial review proceedings
              in the first place.";
           v) There are numerous cases similar to the instant one where the
              courts  have  granted  relief  sought  in   judicial   review
              proceedings notwithstanding  the  possibility  of  an  appeal
              being brought to the First-tier Tribunal. An expectation  has
              arisen that such claims will be dealt with  in  the  judicial
              review system;
          vi) In the instant application the issue of whether there  is  an
              alternative remedy was raised for the first  time  after  the
              grant  of  permission.  It  would  be  unfair  in   all   the
              circumstances to decline to grant the Applicant relief on the
              basis of the existence of such remedy.


   33. Taking these in turn. Mr Pennington-Benton is clearly correct in his
       submission that the existence of an alternative  remedy  is  not  an
       absolute bar to obtaining relief by  way  of  judicial  review.  The
       question of whether there is a suitable alternative remedy arises in
       the context of  the  exercise  of  the  Tribunal's  discretion.  Any
       consideration as to how  such  discretion  should  be  exercised  is
       necessarily fact sensitive.


   34.  Nevertheless,  where  a  specialist  statutory  regime   has   been
       established by Parliament, there would need to be special reasons or
       exceptional circumstances  to  circumvent  that  regime  and  permit
       relief to be obtained on an application for judicial review:  see  R
       (on the application of) Willford v Financial Services Agency  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 677 and, in an immigration context; RK (Nepal) v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 359.

   35. What constitutes 'exceptional circumstances' cannot be  exhaustively
       defined. However, in assessing  whether  an  alternative  remedy  is
       convenient, expeditious and effective (per Simon Brown LJ in  R  (on
       the Application of) Devon County Council ex parte  Barker  [1995]  1
       All ER 73) and not clearly  unsatisfactory  (per  Moore-Bick  LJ  in
       Willford at [20]), regard must be had to the nature and  context  of
       the decision, the statutory regime, the reach  of  the  remedy,  the
       need for fact finding and the convenience of the process offered  by
       the alternative remedy.


    36. Mr Pennington-Benton submits, in reliance on the Court  of  Appeal's
        decision in E1 (OS Russia) [2012] EWCA Civ 357, that in cases  where
        the Secretary of State's notice of decision is invalid  the  "normal
        response" of the Court or Tribunal should be to quash the notice. It
        is important to observe, however, that this  was  not  said  in  the
        context of  there  being  a  suitable  alternative  judicial  remedy
        available.[2] In the instant case the First-tier  Tribunal  has  the
        power  to  conclude  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
        accordance with the law. The issue to be considered  is  whether  in
        such  circumstances  the  Upper   Tribunal   should,   nevertheless,
        determine this  same  matter  in  the  context  of  judicial  review
        proceedings. Properly analysed, nothing in the decision  of  E1  (OS
        Russia) speaks to this issue.


   37. Moving on, I do not accept that  it  is  correct  to  say  that  the
       "tribunalisation" of judicial review has, to  any  material  extent,
       eroded the rationale for  requiring  an  alternative  remedy  to  be
       pursued prior to the bringing judicial review proceedings.


   38. Although, as Mr Pennington-Benton alludes to in his submissions,  it
       can no longer be suggested that judges in the forum of the  proposed
       alternative  remedy  i.e.  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  have  greater
       expertise in  the  particular  area  of  law  in  issue  than  those
       determining the applications for  judicial  review  i.e.  the  Upper
       Tribunal, the existence of such expertise in  the  statutory  appeal
       process has played only a small, if any, part in the  rationale  for
       requiring an alternative remedy to be pursued prior  to  lodging  an
       application for judicial review.


   39. In R v Panel on Take-overs and Mergers ex p Guinness PLC [1990] 1 QB
       146 (at [177E]) Lord Donaldson MR identified, when  considering  the
       relevance of an alternative remedy,  that  the  "rationale  for  the
       court's self-imposed fetter upon  the  exercise  of  discretion"  in
       judicial review proceedings was "twofold":


              "First, the point usually arises in the context of  statutory
             schemes and if Parliament directly or indirectly has  provided
             for an appeals procedure, it is not for the court to usurp the
             functions of the appellate body. Second, the  public  interest
             normally dictates that if the judicial review jurisdiction  is
             to be exercised, it is to  be  exercised  very  speedily  and,
             given the constraints imposed on limited  judicial  resources,
             this necessarily involves limiting the number of cases..."


   40. In Willford Lord Justice Moore-Bick also observed  that  allowing  a
       claim for judicial review to proceed in  circumstances  where  there
       existed a statutory procedure for  contesting  the  decision  risked
       "...undermining the will of Parliament" (at [23]). This is  a  point
       which applies with equal force whether it is the Upper  Tribunal  or
       High Court giving consideration to applications for judicial review.




   41. On a more practical level, although the procedure in judicial review
       claims can be adapted to allow for the determination of  a  disputed
       question of fact, the court in  such  claims  "does  not  habitually
       decide issues of fact on contested evidence  and  is  not  generally
       equipped to do so...": Anifrijeva  v  London  Borough  of  Southwark
       [2003] EWCA Civ 1406.  "The basic rule is  that  where  there  is  a
       dispute on evidence in a judicial review application,  then  in  the
       absence of cross-examination, the facts in the defendants'  evidence
       must be assumed to be correct...": R (Mcvey) v  Secretary  of  State
       for Health [2010] EWHC 437 (Admin) at [35] - this, of course,  being
       in contrast to the position in the statutory appeal regime.


   42. Turning to the third reason deployed by Mr Pennington-Benton  as  to
       why it is said that  this  Applicant,  and  other  applicants  in  a
       similar position to him, should not be required to avail  themselves
       of the alternative remedy of lodging a notice  of  appeal  with  the
       First-tier Tribunal, I have great difficulty in  understanding  why,
       assuming it is right to say that there is a significant factual  and
       legal uncertainty as to whether a right  of  appeal  exists  in  any
       given case, this should point  towards  judicial  review  being  the
       appropriate route to decide such a point.


   43. The First-tier Tribunal is well equipped, and often does, deal  with
       factually and legally complex issues and appeals  and  there  is  no
       good reason advanced as to why, even in the face of such factual and
       legal complexity, it cannot determine  whether  the  Respondent  has
       made an immigration decision.


   44. If the First-tier Tribunal declines jurisdiction and it  is  thought
       by an appellant  that  such  decision  is  unlawful,  then  adequate
       remedies are available. A jurisdictional decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal contained in a determination  made  after  the  appeal  has
       passed the duty judge "screening" stage, is appealable to the  Upper
       Tribunal:  Ved  and  another   (appealable   decisions;   permission
       applications; Basnet) [2014] UKUT 00150 (IAC). If such a decision is
       made prior to the appeal passing  the  'screening'  stage,  then  an
       appellant can pursue an application for judicial review against  the
       First-tier Tribunal.


   45. Mr Pennington Benton's submission regarding the impact of complexity
       of ascertaining whether a person  has  a  right  of  appeal  is,  it
       appears, partly borne out of what is said to be a potentially unfair
       consequence for a defined group of persons i.e.  (i)  those  persons
       who receive a decision from the Secretary of State  which  indicates
       that there is no right of appeal against it, (ii)  who,  because  of
       the legal and factual complexities of determining whether a right of
       appeal exist, are either unsure or believe the Secretary of State to
       be incorrect on this issue, (iii) who  thereafter  lodge  an  appeal
       with the First-tier Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal  refuse  to
       admit  such  appeal  and  (iv)  who  still  wish  to  challenge  the
       underlying decision made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  but,  as  a
       consequence of the time taken in pursuing  the  alternative  remedy,
       are now out of time to do so.


   46. There is an obvious and complete answer  to  this  submission,  that
       being the Upper Tribunal's power to extend time for the  lodging  of
       the application for judicial review; the existence of which entirely
       negates any potential unfairness in the scenario  postulated  by  Mr
       Pennington-Benton.


   47. Mr Pennington-Benton's next point i.e.  that  there  is  a  risk  of
       additional costs and delay if an applicant seeks to lodge an  appeal
       with the First-tier Tribunal, is met squarely by Lord Justice Moore-
       Bick's reiteration in Willford that it is necessary to guard against
       granting judicial review in cases  where  there  is  an  alternative
       appeal regime,  merely  because  it  might  be  more  effective  and
       convenient to do so.


   48. In any event, I cannot readily understand why it  is  said  that  "a
       further layer of costs and delay" would be  added  by  an  applicant
       lodging an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal, rather than bringing
       judicial review proceedings in order to obtain a declaration to  the
       same effect.  If a person is entitled to appeal  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, and lodges a notice of appeal in this regard - as  opposed
       to bringing an application for judicial review - then not only  will
       that person have saved  the  costs  and  time  associated  with  the
       bringing of judicial review proceedings, but both the costs and time
       of the Secretary of State and the Upper Tribunal will also be saved.




   49. Neither do I accept that the Applicant gains any assistance from the
       fact that "in the past no issue has been taken by the Administrative
       Court  or  Upper  Tribunal,  by  either  the  SSHD  or  the   courts
       themselves, on this point."  -  by  which  Mr  Pennington-Benton  is
       referring to  applicants  in  a  similar  position  to  the  instant
       applicant but against whom an alternative remedy point was not taken
       in judicial review proceedings.


   50. This is a broad submission to make. In its  support  Mr  Pennington-
       Benton draws attention to a small number of  judgments  in  judicial
       review applications given after a substantive hearing in  which  the
       issue of whether a decision made by the Secretary of  State  amounts
       to an immigration decision was  determined  absent  the  alternative
       remedy point being taken against the particular applicant.


   51. In my view these decisions provide  no  assistance  to  the  instant
       applicant. First, there is no identification in any of the judgments
       that the alternative remedy issue was ventilated. Second, nothing in
       the judgments identifies why this was so. Third, it is not suggested
       that Mr Pennington-Benton  has  undertaken  a  search  of  the  many
       decisions on permission applications that both this Tribunal and the
       Administrative Court issue each year,  in  an  attempt  to  identify
       applicants that have been unsuccessful as a consequence of having an
       alternative remedy. This is  significant  because  the  most  likely
       stage of the proceedings that the alternative remedy point will bite
       against an applicant is the permission stage.


   52. Finally, turning to the sixth  of  the  points  relied  upon  by  Mr
       Pennington-Benton,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  fact   that   the
       alternative remedy point was not raised against the Applicant  until
       after permission to bring these proceedings was granted, should lead
       to a conclusion that it is now unfair to require  the  Applicant  to
       pursue the alternative remedy. Fairness dictates that the  Applicant
       be given a proper opportunity to deal with points taken against him.
       That opportunity was provided through the  mechanism  of  adjourning
       the hearing of 9 February 2015, and allowing the  Applicant  to  re-
       cast his case to deal with this issue  -  an  opportunity  which  he
       grasped. That is not to say that I have treated  the  stage  in  the
       proceedings at which such  point  was  taken  as  irrelevant  to  my
       consideration of how the Tribunal's discretion should be exercised -
       it is simply that I do not accept Mr Pennington-Benton's  submission
       that it is a factor that  points  determinatively  in  his  client's
       favour.


   53. Having considered all of the circumstances of this case in the round
       I am  satisfied  that  there  is  an  effective  alternative  remedy
       available to the Applicant such that, as an exercise of  discretion,
       this application should be refused.


   54. The Applicant can lodge  an  appeal  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       against the decision of the 24 May 2013 and I am satisfied that  the
       First-tier Tribunal has power to determine whether such decision  is
       an immigration decision carrying with it a right of appeal. In these
       circumstances I can see no useful  purpose  in  making  any  further
       comment in relation to this issue.


   55. Although each case must be determined on its  own  facts,  in  cases
       where a person seeks to dispute the Secretary of State's  assertions
       as to the availability of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  the
       appropriate course is for such person to lodge a  notice  of  appeal
       with the First-tier  Tribunal  requesting  that  it  determine  this
       issue. Given the existence of this suitable alternative  remedy,  it
       will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the  Upper  Tribunal
       will exercise its discretion and grant relief to a person who  seeks
       to raise this same issue before it in  judicial  review  proceedings
       brought against the Secretary of State.


Decision


    56. For the reasons given above,  the  Applicant's  claim  for  judicial
        review is dismissed.

-----------------------
[1] Paragraph 50 of the Applicant's consolidated skeleton argument.
[2]  See, however, section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014 with  transitional
provisions.

