
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


    Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2014                                 |                             |
|Delivered orally                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PHILLIPS
                                   Between

                                FURQAN AHMED
                                BACHAN SUBEDI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi, instructed by AMR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. Where a provision of  the  Rules  (such  as  that  in  para  245DD(k))
      provides that points will not be awarded if the decision-maker is  not
      satisfied as to another (non-points-scoring) aspect of the  Rule,  the
      non-points-scoring  aspect  and  the  requirement   for   points   are
      inextricably linked.
   2. As a result, the prohibition on  new  evidence  in  s  85A(4)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to the non-points-
      scoring aspect of the rule: the prohibition  is  in  relation  to  new
      evidence that goes to the scoring of points.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    Mr Ahmed is a national of Pakistan and Mr  Subedi  is  a  national  of
      Nepal.  They are both in this country having entered as  students  and
      both had leave as Post-Study Migrants.  They seek  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom in order  to  be  in  business  together  supplying  IT
      services to various other firms.  In order to do  that  they  made  an
      application to the Secretary of State for leave to remain  as  Tier  1
      Entrepreneur Migrants.  Their application was made originally  at  the
      very beginning of 2013.

2.    The Secretary of State interviewed the applicants and was prepared  to
      accept further documentation in  April  2013.   On  9  July  2013  the
      applications were refused for detailed reasons set out in  the  letter
      of refusal.  The form of the letter of refusal has been the subject of
      submissions by Mr Asme and we must therefore refer  to  them  briefly.
      The decision is stated at the beginning followed  by  the  immigration
      history and there  is  then  a  section  entitled  "Non-Point  Scoring
      Reasons for Refusal".  In that section of  the  letter  the  decision-
      maker looks at all the material available to her that  she  considered
      related to the genuineness and viability of the appellants' proposals.
       She took into account the documents provided and concluded  that  she
      was not satisfied that the applicants were genuine entrepreneurs.  The
      second part of the assessment is headed "Points Scoring".   No  points
      are awarded for Access to Funds, Funds  held  in  Regulated  Financial
      Institutions, and Funds Disposable in the United Kingdom; and in  each
      case the reason for the non-attribution of points is "for the  reasons
      stated earlier in this letter under the  heading  "Non-points  Scoring
      Reasons for Refusal".  Points were however added for English  language
      and maintenance as claimed.

3.    As we have said, the applications  were  refused  and  the  applicants
      then appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Their  appeal  came  before
      Judge Jessica Pacey on 9 January 2014.  Both appellants  appeared  and
      apparently gave evidence: and there were a number of  other  documents
      which enabled the Judge to take the view that the  business  proposals
      were indeed genuine and viable and she allowed the appeals.

4.    The Secretary of State applied for and obtained permission  to  appeal
      on the basis that the Judge had behaved in  a  way  that  was  not  by
      statute open to her.   The decision in the present case is of the sort
      specified in s 82(2)(d).  The relevant law is contained  in  s  85A(3)
      and (4), expressed as an exception to a general rule that all relevant
      evidence may be considered:

          "(3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -

               (a) the appeal is against an immigration decision of a  kind
                  specified in section   82(2)(a) or (d),

               (b) the immigration decision concerned an application  of  a
                  kind identified in immigration rules as requiring  to  be
                  considered under a 'Points Based System', and

               (c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds  specified
                  in section 84(1)(a), (e)  or (f).

          (4) Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
             adduced by the appellant only if it -

               (a)     was submitted in support of,  and  at  the  time  of
                  making, the  application  to      which  the  immigration
                  decision related,

               (b) relates to the appeal in so far as it relies on  grounds
                  other than those       specified in subsection (3)(c),

               (c)  is adduced to prove  that  a  document  is  genuine  or
               valid, or

               (d) is adduced in connection with the Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on a  discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement of  immigration  rules,  to
                  refuse an application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of 'points' under the 'Points Based System'."


   5. The purpose of that provision is quite clear.   It  is  that  where  a
      Points Based application is made and refused, the  assessment  by  the
      Judge is to be of the material  that  was  before  the  decision-maker
      rather than a new consideration of new material.  In other  words  the
      appeal if it is successful is on the  basis  that  the  decision-maker
      with the material before him should have made  a  different  decision,
      not on the basis that a different way of  presenting  the  application
      would have produced a different decision.

   6. As is apparent  from  her  judgement,  the  judge  took  into  account
      material other than that which was before the decision-maker.    In  a
      spirited defence of her procedure Mr Asme has submitted that  the  way
      in which the letter was divided into Non-Points Based and Points Based
      matters demonstrates that in assessing whether the business plans were
      genuine the decision-maker was refusing  the  application  on  grounds
      which were not related to the acquisition of points under  the  Points
      Based System.  If that is right, Mr Asme submits, then the  Judge  was
      at liberty to look at further evidence.  We are satisfied however that
      that is a submission which cannot succeed.  There  are  two  connected
      reasons for that.

   7. The first is that in paragraph 245DD(k) of the Statement of Changes in
      the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended) is the following:

           "If the Secretary of State is not satisfied with the genuineness
           of the application in relation to a points  scoring  requirement
           in Appendix A those points will not be awarded."

      That clearly links the assessment of the genuineness of the scheme  to
      the acquisition of  points  and  rules  out,  in  our  judgement,  the
      submission that the assessment of the genuineness of the scheme was  a
      ground not related to the acquisition of points under the Points Based
      System.  On the contrary, the  wording  of  the  Rule  links  the  two
      matters inextricably.

   8. Secondly, as  we  pointed  out  to  Mr  Asme  in  the  course  of  his
      submissions, if he were able to show that the Judge  was  entitled  to
      look at the genuineness of the scheme for the purposes of  the  appeal
      before her, she would nevertheless not be able  to  reach  a  decision
      that because of her view about the genuineness of the  scheme,  points
      should have been awarded.  That is because that would itself link  the
      genuineness of the scheme to the acquisition of  points,  and  she  is
      prohibited from hearing evidence which does go to the  acquisition  of
      points.

   9. For those reasons we are  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
      grounds of appeal are made out.  The Judge erred in  law  in  reaching
      her conclusion.  It is impossible to say  what  conclusion  she  would
      have reached if she had not taken into account the evidence which  she
      was not entitled to  hear.   We  set  aside  her  determination.   The
      position then is that we are required  to  substitute  a  decision  or
      remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision to  be  made.
      However, Mr Asme has told us after taking instructions  that  at  that
      point the appellants would wish to withdraw their appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision and make a new application supported  by
      the documents which are now available to them,  no  doubt  during  the
      course of the business which they have been seeking to run ever  since
      they set it up at the end of 2012.  We will  accept  that  withdrawal.
      The result is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  judgement  having
      been set aside,  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  now
      unchallenged and stands as a  refusal  of  the  applications  made  at
      beginning of 2013.











                                     Signed






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

  VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                                 Date:  3
                                                            July 2014




