
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MH (effect of certification under s.94(2)) Bangladesh [2013] UKUT 00379
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 April 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M H
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Simon instructed by Monk & Turner Solicitors
LLP



    A person may appeal whilst in the United Kingdom  where  an  asylum  or
    human rights  claim  has  been  made  but  not  where  there  has  been
    certification  of  that  claim  or   claims   as   clearly   unfounded.
    Certification under s.94 (2) operates even where a  claimant  seeks  to
    rely on grounds available to a party under s. 84 of the 2002  Act.   It
    is the claim (which may comprise asylum and human rights elements) that
    is certified, not the decision made on the  claim,  regardless  of  any
    grounds which might otherwise be raised against that decision.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blackford who allowed the  appeal
    by the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal (we shall refer to him
    as  the  claimant)  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  against  the
    decision of 3 October 2012 to give directions  for  his  removal.   The
    claimant is a national of Bangladesh where he was born on 20 May  1967.
    He had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003 and claimed asylum  on  21
    April 2012.  In a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 3 October  2012  the
    Secretary of State certified both the asylum and  human  rights  claims
    that  the  claimant  had  made  under  s.94(2)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis  that  they  were  clearly
    unfounded.  The claimant was informed as a consequence that he may  not
    appeal from in the United Kingdom.

 2. The judge heard  argument  from  Miss  Whittington  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Rana for  the  appellant.   Miss  Whittington
    argued that there was no right of  appeal  since  the  claim  had  been
    certified as unfounded.  She referred the judge to TM (s94 certificate:
    jurisdiction) Zimbabwe [2006] UKAIT 00005 although the  judge  observed
    this was not a case in which the validity of the certification  was  an
    issue.

 3. For the claimant, Mr Rana had accepted there was certification and that
    as a result there was no in-country right of appeal in respect  of  the
    asylum claim but nevertheless argued that the  appeal  was  within  the
    jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  because,  although  the  human
    rights claim had been certified, Article 8  had  to  be  considered  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules as well  as  in  accordance  with
    Article 8 in the way it would have been considered before 9  July  2012
    with reference to the decision in MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).

 4. It was also argued that only the asylum and  human  rights  claims  had
    been certified.  Paragraphs 27 to 29 of the refusal  letter  considered
    humanitarian protection and Mr Rana argued  that  in  respect  of  that
    ground, there was a right of appeal under s.82.   By  way  of  response
    Miss Whittington  had  argued  that  the  facts  behind  the  claim  to
    humanitarian protection were the same as the human rights points.

 5. The judge did not express  a  concluded  view  on  the  matter  of  his
    jurisdiction at the hearing but expressed the preliminary view that  he
    thought it likely the claimant had  a  remaining  right  of  appeal  in
    relation to humanitarian protection and proceeded to hear the appeal on
    that basis, preserving a ruling in relation to the preliminary issue as
    part of his determination.  He explains in that determination  that  he
    had come to the conclusion that his preliminary view was  correct;  the
    certificate did not apply to  humanitarian  protection.   He  concluded
    however that certification did apply to  the  Article  8  grounds.   He
    considered the Secretary of State was correct not  to  have  considered
    the new Rules in  relation  to  the  claimant's  claim.   Although  his
    reasoning for this conclusion is not entirely  clear,  it  was  not  an
    aspect pursued by the claimant subsequently.

 6. The application for permission to appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    argued that the judge had misdirected himself  in  law  in  failing  to
    distinguish between a ground of appeal under s.84 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the right of appeal  under  s.92(4)
    of the same Act.  The claimant was subject to a decision to remove him,
    being a decision under  s.82(2)(h)  as  an  illegal  entrant  which  is
    appealable by virtue of s.82(1).  Had the claimant's asylum  and  human
    rights claims not been certified as clearly  unfounded  he  would  have
    been entitled to exercise  an  in-  country  right  of  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal pursuant to s.92(4)(a).  This was  however  prevented  by  the
    operation of s.94(2).   The  grounds  refer  to  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal  in  SA  (in-country  appeal:  human  rights;  other  grounds)
    Bangladesh [2005] UKAIT 00178 distinguishing the right of  appeal  from
    the grounds on which an appeal can be brought.

 7. In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    explained that he was satisfied that although the application  was  out
    of time, four days were not excessive and that despite  no  explanation
    having been given for the delay he extended time as there  appeared  to
    be merits in the grounds.

 8. By way of a response pursuant to r.24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, the claimant gave reasons for opposing the appeal
    by the Secretary of State on the basis that:

    (i)  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  had  erred  in  law  and  acted
         unreasonably in extending time because the Secretary of  State  had
         given no reasons in the application.  It is  argued  that  in  such
         circumstances First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer should have  refused
         to admit the application; and

    (ii) the decision to extend  time  without  a  request  and  supporting
         evidence from the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the
         requirements of the Rules with reference to Samir  (FtT  permission
         to appeal: time) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 3 (IAC).

Is there a right of appeal against a decision extending time for  permission
to appeal and the grant of permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal?

 9. We gave Mr Simon our preliminary view that Samir did  not  support  the
    proposition argued in the rule 24 response.  In that case the  Tribunal
    was concerned with the situation where the  First-tier  Tribunal,  when
    considering an application for permission to appeal, failed  to  notice
    that the application was out of time and so made no decision on whether
    to extend time but nevertheless granted permission to appeal.

10. The guidance given by the Tribunal is in these terms:

         "In a case where, following Boktor and Wanis (late application  for
         permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC), a  grant  of  permission
         has to be regarded as conditional  upon  a  decision  whether  time
         should be extended, the latter decision is  part  of  the  original
         decision on the application.  If the application was to the  First-
         tier Tribunal, the decision as to time is  therefore  made  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal, and if the application is not  admitted  there
         is the possibility of renewal to the Upper Tribunal."

11. What had happened in Samir was that the Secretary of State applied  for
    permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  three
    days after the time provided for in the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules had expired.  A judge of the Upper  Tribunal  sitting
    as a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal
    without dealing with the lateness of the application.  The  appeal  was
    duly listed before a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal  who  concluded
    that time should not be extended.  He did not admit  the  Secretary  of
    State's  application  for  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal   and
    accordingly upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. As we observed to Mr Simon, the situation in the appeal  before  us  is
    quite different.  Although Judge Saffer indicated  no  explanation  had
    been given for the delay, the application does in fact acknowledge that
    it was late and that  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  there  were
    special circumstances in the case which would result in it being unjust
    if time were not extended.  This was because the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal raised an important point of law in respect of the  power
    to certify a claim under s.94 of the 2002 Act.

13. As observed by the Tribunal in Samir, s.11 of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement  Act  2007  provides  for  a  right  of   appeal   from   a
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    point of law.  The right may be exercised only with  permission,  which
    may be given by the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

14. Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act provides:

          1) For the purpose of subsection (2), the reference to a right of
             appeal is to a right of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  any
             point of law arising from a decision made  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal other than an excluded decision.

          2) Any party to  a  case  has  a  right  of  appeal,  subject  to
             subsection (8).

          3) That right may be  exercised  only  with  permission  (or,  in
             Northern Ireland, leave).

          4) Permission to appeal( or leave) may be given by -

             (a)  the First-tier Tribunal, or




             (b)  the Upper Tribunal, or on an application by the party.

         (5)  For the purposes of subsection (1), an "excluded decision"  is
         -

             ...

             (f)  any decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  of  a
                  description  specified  in  an  order  made  by  the  Lord
                  Chancellor."

17. Regulation 3  of  the  Appeals  (Excluded  Decisions)  Order  2009  (SI
    2009/275) (as amended) provides:

         "3.  For the purposes of Sections 11(1) and 13(1) of the Tribunals,
             Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the  following  decisions  of
             the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal  are  excluded
             decisions -

             ...

             (m)  any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in
                  relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A
                  of the British Nationality Act 1981, section 82, 83 or 83A
                  of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  or
                  regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
                  Regulations 2006."

18.   The  issue  is  therefore  whether  a  decision  to  extend  time  for
    permission  to  appeal  comes  within  the  category  of  the  excluded
    decisions.  Part 3 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 sets out the procedure for appealing  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It includes time limits by when such  applications
    must be received and it also provides power to the Tribunal  to  extend
    time (rule 24 (4)).  The only basis on which a party is able to  appeal
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is regulated by rule 21(2) of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which provides:

         "21(2)   A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission to
                appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  another
                Tribunal only if-

                (a)    they had made an application for permission to appeal
                    to the Tribunal which made the decision challenged; and

                (b)    that application has been refused  or  has  not  been
                    admitted.

         ....".

19.  Mr Simon acknowledged  the  absence  of  legislative  support  for  the
    position taken in the rule 24 response.  We did not hear full  argument
    on this aspect however and there may be an appropriate occasion  to  do
    so in another appeal. This appeal however turns on an issue relating to
    the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal to proceed as it  did.   In
    the light of our conclusion on this issue set out  below,  we  consider
    that an extension of time was correctly granted in order to  correct  a
    fundamental error by the First-tier Tribunal in determining the appeal.
     We now turn to whether Judge Blackford  erred  in  deciding  that  the
    claimant did have an in-country right of appeal on the basis  that  the
    humanitarian protection claim had not been certified.

The effect of certification of an  appeal  under  s.94(1),(2)and(3)  of  the
2002 Act -

20.  The relevant provisions of s.94 are in these terms:

         "94. Appeal from within United Kingdom: unfounded human  rights  or
             asylum claim
         E+W+S+N.I.
             (1)  This section applies to an  appeal  under  section  82(1)
                  where the appellant has made an asylum claim  or  a  human
                  rights claim (or both).

                   (1A)    A person may  not  bring  an  appeal  against  an
                  immigration  decision  of  a  kind  specified  in  section
                  82(2)(c), (d) or (e) in reliance on section 92(2)  if  the
                  Secretary of State certifies  that  the  claim  or  claims
                  mentioned in  subsection  (1)  above  is  or  are  clearly
                  unfounded.

              (2) A person may not bring an appeal to  which  this  section
                  applies in reliance on section 92(4)(a) if  the  Secretary
                  of State certifies that the claim or claims  mentioned  in
                  subsection (1) is or are clearly unfounded."

             ...".


21.  Mr Simon  accepted  that  s.94(2)  was  a  catchall  provision  and  so
    acknowledged his difficulties.

22. Mr Parkinson gave an undertaking that, having regard  to  the  mass  of
    evidence given before the First-tier Tribunal which went materially  to
    the  certification,  the  Secretary  of  State  would  reconsider   the
    certification issue and would not reject the claim as not being a fresh
    one.  If there was positive reconsideration, a new immigration decision
    would be made.  Time for submission of new  evidence  was  given  until
    close of business on 8 May.

23.  After  this  brief  discussion,  we  gave  our   decision   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
    law.  We set aside its decision and proceeded  to  re-make  it  on  the
    basis that there was no jurisdiction  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider an in-country appeal.

24. Before leaving this matter however we make these  observations  on  the
    impact of s.94(2)  where,  as  in  this  case,  there  was  a  separate
    consideration by the Secretary  of  State  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

25. It is not disputed that the claimant made a claim to asylum  asking  to
    be recognised as a refugee.   The  Secretary  of  State  noted  in  her
    refusal letter of 3 October 2012 that consideration had also been given
    whether  the  claimant  qualified  for   humanitarian   protection   in
    accordance with paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and went on  to
    quote  the  relevant  provisions  which  adopt   the   terms   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

26. It is undisputed that  the  claimant  had  made  an  asylum  claim,  so
    triggering s.94(1).  The decision made by the Secretary of State was  a
    decision to remove an illegal entrant or  other  immigration  offender,
    dated 23 May 2012 (although served later).  The decision makes it clear
    that although the claimant had a right of appeal he could not do so in-
    country because the certificate had been issued under s.94.

27. It is not clear  from  the  court  file  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted the notice of appeal whilst the claimant was in-country.  This
    may have been because of the distracting matter that, having  requested
    an oral hearing, the claimant was required to pay �140 for  his  appeal
    to proceed.  A case management review resulted in  standard  directions
    being issued by the First-tier Tribunal on 3 November  2012  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt who appears  not  to  have  taken
    into account an e-mail from the Secretary of State's Angel Square  Unit
    Co-ordinator, which addressed a number  of  pending  appeals  and  with
    specific reference to this appeal indicated:

         "Status of bundle: this decision  has  been  certified  as  clearly
         unfounded therefore the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear it."

28. It is clear from  Judge  Blackford's  record  of  proceedings  and  the
    determination  itself  that  the  Secretary  of  State  maintained  her
    position on jurisdiction at the hearing.  We accept that  the  position
    might have been different if the Secretary of State had not  taken  the
    jurisdiction point.  This was considered in Anwar v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 1275 [19]:

         "Was the AIT right in Miss Pengeyo's and Mr Anwar's cases  to  hold
         that  the  respective  immigration   judges   had   acted   without
         jurisdiction?  In my judgment they had jurisdiction  to  embark  on
         the hearing notwithstanding that neither  appellant  had  left  the
         United Kingdom but once the point was taken by the Home Office  (in
         assuming it to be factually correct  since  they  might  have  been
         absent from the hearing) it operated in  bar  of  the  proceedings.
         Had the point not been taken in either case, the immigration  judge
         would have been bound to proceed with the appeal." (Sedley LJ)

29. We note however in R (on the application of Nirula) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1436, Longmore LJ has clarified the position at [30] et seq:

         "30. Of course any decision of this court  is  only  authority  for
             what it decides and  for  any  reasoning  necessary  for  that
             decision.  One thing that is immediately clear from paragraphs
             19-23 of the Anwar decision is that nothing  is  said  on  the
             question whether the Tribunal is entitled to take a  point  on
             its own jurisdiction of its own motion.  That is a point which
             remains open for decision.  It is not a particularly difficult
             decision.  In my view any Tribunal  is  entitled  (and  indeed
             well advised) to air any doubts it has about its  jurisdiction
             and invite submissions on that question and  then  decide  it.
             Anwar does not question that proposition in any way."

         ...

         32.  Mr Ockelton also thought (para 47(c)) it wrong to say  that  a
             failure to consider the  issue  of  jurisdiction  can  give  a
             Tribunal a jurisdiction it would not  otherwise  have.   Anwar
             does not say so.  What it does say is that  the  Secretary  of
             State can choose not to take any jurisdictional  objection  if
             she wishes to take that course, just as a defendant can  waive
             his entitlement to plead limitation or,  more  likely,  choose
             not to plead a limitation defence.   If  a  Tribunal  gives  a
             decision  without  anybody  considering   the   jurisdictional
             position the decision may be precarious  but  as  Mr  Ockelton
             himself points out in para 53 the decision stands until it  is
             set aside.  It will become less precarious once the  time  for
             applying for permission to appeal has expired."

30. That is not however the point in the appeal before us.   The  Secretary
    of State maintained throughout that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    have jurisdiction.

31. The immigration decision  is  not  one  which  comes  within  s.94(1A).
    Instead it is one captured by the provisions in s.94(2), with reference
    to s.92(4)(a).  Section 92(1) provides:

         "(1) A person may not appeal under  s.82(1)  while  he  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind  to  which  this
             section applies."

32. Section 92(4) provides:

         "(4).     This  section  also  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an
             immigration decision if the appellant -

             (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim  while
                  in the United Kingdom, ...".

33.  A person may appeal whilst in the United Kingdom  where  an  asylum  or
    human rights  claim  has  been  made  but  not  where  there  has  been
    certification  of  that  claim  or   claims   as   clearly   unfounded.
    Certification under s.94 (2) operates even where a  claimant  seeks  to
    rely on grounds available to a party under s. 84 of the 2002  Act.   It
    is the claim (which may comprise asylum and human rights elements) that
    is certified, not the decision made on the  claim,  regardless  of  any
    grounds which might otherwise be raised against that decision.

34.  By  way  of  summary,  therefore,  we  are  satisfied  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blackford had no jurisdiction to determine the appeal on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  In doing so he made a material  error
    of law.  We set aside his decision and  substitute  our  decision  that
    there is no jurisdiction to hear the appeal by the claimant against the
    immigration decision whilst he is in this country.

35.  Accordingly the appeal by the Secretary of State in the Upper  Tribunal
    is allowed.  The Secretary of State is however bound by the undertaking
    given by Mr Parkinson as recorded above.

Signed

 Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson                                   Date 11  July
    2013.

