

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Yerokun (Refusal of claim; Mujahid) [2020] UKUT 00377 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by remote means          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 August 2020                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       SAMUEL OLUDARE OLUYEMI YEROKUN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Winter, instructed by Frew & Co Solicitors.


The reasons given by the President in R (Mujahid) v First-tier Tribunal and
SSHD [2020] UKUT 00085 (IAC) are reinforced by two further factors: (1)
Under s 104(4A) a human rights appeal is deemed to be abandoned if a period
of leave, however short, is granted after the appeal is brought.  It is
inconceivable that it was intended that a refusal of an application
accompanied by a grant of leave was intended to generate a right of appeal.
 (2) There is an inherent difference between an application and a claim and
the refusal of the one does not imply or entail the refusal of the other,
even where the application includes a claim.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The principal issue in this case is  whether  the  respondent,  whom  I
    shall call "the claimant" has a right  of  appeal.   If  he  does  not,
    neither this Tribunal nor the First-tier Tribunal has  jurisdiction  to
    deal with his challenge to the Secretary of State's decision.



THE FACTS AND THE PROCEEDINGS

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria.  He first  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in 2004.   He  has  had  a  number  of  subsequent
    periods of leave.  He has made a number of applications  for  leave  to
    remain on a variety of human rights grounds connected with his  family.
    His most recent application was in November 2017 and was an application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision is in the form of a notice  dated  27
    July 2018.  It states as follows:

         "You applied for leave to remain on the basis of  your  family  and
         private life but your  application  has  been  refused.   You  have
         however been granted 6 months leave outside the  immigration  rules
         on an exceptional basis pending the conclusion of court proceedings
         regarding access rights to your children."

 4. A letter of the same date gave the Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for
    both elements of that decision.  The notice indicated that there was no
    right of appeal against the decision.  The claimant nevertheless put in
    a notice of appeal.  In the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Buchanan decided
    at a hearing on 21 November 2018 that there  was  a  right  of  appeal.
    Following a further hearing on 24 April, he issued on 11  June  2019  a
    decision allowing the claimant's appeal "in  respect  of  the  decision
    made by the respondent".  The exact impact of Judge Buchanan's decision
    is  not  absolutely  clear,  but  it  does  appear,  particularly  from
    paragraphs  [66]-[67]   where   he   expresses   his   conclusions   on
    proportionality, that he considered he was dealing with  a  refusal  of
    leave to remain, amounting to a disproportionate interference with  the
    claimant's private life.

 5. The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to  this  Tribunal
    on a number of grounds including that relating to jurisdiction.

THE LAW

 6. The rights of appeal against an immigration decision are found in s  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):


         "(1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-
            (a) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse  a  protection
             claim made by P,
            (b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human rights
             claim made
                 by P, or
            (c) the Secretary of State has decided to revoke P's protection
             status."

 7. The other subsections are not material to this case.  By  s  84(2),  an
    appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim must be  brought  on
    the ground that the decision is unlawful under s 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act  1998.   Section  113(1)  defines,  for  the  purposes   of   these
    provisions, a "human rights claim".  That phrase:



         "(a) means a claim made by a person that  to  remove  him  from  or
         require him to leave the United Kingdom or to refuse him entry into
         the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not  to  act  contrary  to
         Convention) .... but
         (b) does not include a claim  which,  having  regard  to  a  former
         claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes  of  this  Part  in
         accordance with immigration rules,  'humanitarian  protection'  has
         the meaning given in section 82(2)"

 8. Paragraph (b) is not in issue here.  Nor is it in issue that by  making
    his application for leave to remain in the way  he  did,  the  claimant
    made a "human rights claim": so much is accepted by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 9. Clearly, in order to have a right of appeal under this head, the  human
    rights claim must have been the subject of a  decision  to  refuse  it.
    Precisely what that means has been the subject of a number of decisions
    of this Tribunal and of the Courts.  In putting the claimant's case  Mr
    Winter knew that he was in some difficulties given the decision  in  MY
    [2020] UKUT 00089 (IAC), a decision of  a  Presidential  panel,  and  R
    (Mujahid) v First-tier Tribunal and SSHD [2020]  UKUT  00085  (IAC),  a
    decision of the President.  The latter, decided on facts  very  similar
    to those in the present case, points clearly to a decision against  the
    existence of a right of appeal.  The headnote reads as follows:


         "(1) A person (C) in the United Kingdom who makes  a  human  rights
         claim is asserting that C (or someone connected with  C)  has,  for
         whatever reason, a right recognised by the ECHR, which is of such a
         kind that removing C from, or requiring  C  to  leave  [the  United
         Kingdom], would be a violation of that right.


         (2)  The refusal of a human rights claim under section 82(1)(b)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  involves  the
         Secretary of State taking the stance that she  is  not  obliged  by
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 to respond to the  claim  by
         granting C leave.


         (3) Accordingly, the Secretary of State does not decide to refuse a
         human rights claim when, in response to it, she  grants  C  limited
         leave by reference to C's family  life  with  a  particular  family
         member, even though C had sought indefinite leave by  reference  to
         long residence in the United Kingdom."



DISCUSSION

10. I see no good reason to depart from that decision.  Indeed,  there  are
    two points not mentioned there which to  my  mind  reinforce  it.   The
    first is the effect of s 104(4A):

         "An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the  appellant
         is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  (subject
         to subsection (4B))."

11. Subsection (4B) does not apply to appeals on human rights grounds.  The
    effect of this is that if a person's human rights claim is refused, and
    he appeals, the grant of a period of leave, however short,  brings  his
    appeal to an end.  It is inconceivable that there was intended to be  a
    right of appeal where the same grant was made before the  appeal  could
    be launched.  The reason why the grant of leave causes the appeal to be
    abandoned is that the grant removes for the moment  the  argument  that
    the Secretary of State proposes to interfere with the claimant's rights
    by removing him, which is the sole basis upon which  the  appeal  could
    have been pursued, given the words of s 113 and s 84.

12. The second point is a little more tentative, but none the  less  in  my
    judgment real.  It seems to me that there  is  an  inherent  difference
    between an application and a  claim.   A  claim's  success  depends  on
    circumstances and their assessment; an application's success depends on
    the exercise of some executive power.  Some  applications  may  include
    claims, and the converse may also be true, but it does not follow  even
    in such cases that the refusal of one implies or entails the refusal of
    the other.  A person who makes an application by reference to  a  claim
    seeks some particular benefit arising from  the  circumstances  of  his
    case.  The  decision-maker  may  recognise  the  circumstances  but  be
    disinclined to grant the particular benefit sought.  There  is  nothing
    contradictory, therefore, in refusing the application while recognising
    (and so not refusing) the claim.   The  statute  provides  a  right  of
    appeal against refusals of claims - as it happens, claims based on  the
    United Kingdom's international obligations - but it says nothing  about
    a right of appeal against the refusal of an application  which  by  the
    nature of this area of law, is likely to be a matter  governed  by  the
    Immigration Rules and other domestic law.

13. It may have been the failure to recognise  the  distinction  between  a
    claim and an application that led Judge Buchanan into  error.   In  his
    first decision, at [13], he wrote as follows:

         "In my judgment, standing that the  appellant  was  notified  of  a
         Decision made by the Secretary of State which states in terms  "You
         have applied for leave to remain on the basis of  your  family  and
         private life but your application has been refused": he is  plainly
         a person whose claim has been refused."

14. The  judge  gives  no  reason  for  his  elision  of  the  concepts  of
    application and claim in this way.  His bold statement at  the  end  of
    that paragraph led him directly to the  conclusion  that  the  claimant
    who, as a result of his dealings with the Secretary of State,  had  had
    the threat of removal from the United Kingdom  lifted  by  a  grant  of
    leave, was a person whose claim that to remove him  would  be  unlawful
    under s 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 had been refused.   That  in  my
    judgment cannot be right.

DECISION

15. For the reasons given above, the decision against  which  the  claimant
    sought to appeal was not a decision within s 82(1) of the 2002 Act  and
    carried  no  right  of  appeal.   The  First-tier   Tribunal   had   no
    jurisdiction.  For the avoidance of doubt, that also means that all the
    views, assessments and judgments expressed by Judge Buchanan about  the
    evidence before him are of no effect and should not be the  subject  of
    any reference hereafter.  So far as these proceedings are concerned,  I
    find that Judge Buchanan erred  in  law  in  considering  that  he  had
    jurisdiction.  I set aside  his  decision.   I  substitute  a  decision
    dismissing the purported appeal for want of jurisdiction.






                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 2 December 2020

