

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by
Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  15 July 2010                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARD


                                   Between

                                      HK
                                     NS
                                     MM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford of Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Gulvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer








    1.      Children are not disproportionately affected  by  the  problems
       and conflict currently being experienced  in  Afghanistan.  Roadside
       blasts, air-strikes,  crossfire,  suicide  attacks  and  other war-
       related incidents do not impact more upon children that upon  adult
       civilians.


    2.      While forcible recruitment by the Taliban cannot be  discounted
       as a risk, particularly  in  areas  of  high  militant  activity  or
       militant control, evidence is required to show that  it  is  a  real
       risk for the particular child concerned and not a mere possibility.


    3.      Where a child has close  relatives  in  Afghanistan  who  have
       assisted him in leaving the country, any assertion that such  family
       members are uncontactable or are unable to meet the child  in  Kabul
       and care for him on return, should be supported by credible evidence
       of efforts to contact those family members and  their  inability  to
       meet and care for the child in the event of return.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   History of the appeals

   1. The appellants are three  Afghan  children.   Each  has  discretionary
      leave to remain granted in accordance with the Respondent's policy  on
      unaccompanied child asylum seekers for another  two  years  at  least.
      They were refused asylum and humanitarian protection on 6 May 2009,  8
      May 2009 and 21 August 2009 respectively. Each appealed to the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal ("AIT") and each had his appeal dismissed.

   2. The first appellant's appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Obhi on  3
      July 2009. The Immigration Judge found that that appellant was not  at
      risk of being taken by the Taliban and further found  that  he  had  a
      surrogate family in the form of  his  uncle  and  aunt,  and  that  if
      returned to Afghanistan it was unlikely that his uncle would refuse to
      care for him. The Immigration Judge also looked at the situation  with
      regard to humanitarian protection but found that there was no evidence
      of any individual threat to this appellant which was any greater  than
      that which the vast majority of citizens in Afghanistan faced.

   3. With  regard  to  the  second  appellant,  his  appeal  was  heard  by
      Immigration Judge Buchanan on 12 October 2009.  The immigration  judge
      found that the appellant was not at specific risk of being abducted or
      exploited by the Taliban and found that there was  no  reason  why  he
      could not continue to live with his mother and paternal  uncle  if  he
      were to be returned.  The  Immigration  Judge  also  found  that  this
      appellant had not demonstrated any specific individual threat  to  him
      that would not be encountered by other young Afghans of his age.

   4. The appeal of the third  appellant  was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge
      Deavin on 14 July 2009. In a very brief determination the judge  found
      that the appellant lived in a village in  north-east  Afghanistan  and
      that there was no sound evidence of any problems encountered with  the
      Taliban or of any forced conscription. The Immigration Judge  did  not
      consider the question of humanitarian protection.

   5. Each appellant sought a reconsideration order which was granted  by  a
      senior immigration  judge.  Following  the  demise  of  the  AIT,  and
      pursuant to the provisions of the Transfer of Functions of the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal Order 2010,  these  three  appeals  have  now
      become appeals to the Upper Tribunal.


   The issues


   6. At the beginning of the hearing  we  invited  the  representatives  to
      clarify what they saw as the principal issues in these three  appeals.
      Mr Bedford defined them as follows - i) whether they were entitled  to
      humanitarian protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive; ii) whether  the boys were at risk of forced recruitment by
      the Taliban and iii) whether they  would  face  a  real  risk  of  ill
      treatment as unaccompanied children if returned to Kabul.

   Submissions

   7. Each of the representatives made submissions which we do  not  propose
      to set out in full here but rather we provide a  summary.  Mr  Bedford
      dealt firstly with Article 15(c).  He  referred  to  the  case  of  GS
      (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan CG  [2009]  UKAIT
      00044 ("GS") and submitted that matters had moved on since  that  case
      and that the situation was worse. He submitted that  some  people,  on
      account of their vulnerability, needed only to show a lower  level  of
      indiscriminate violence in order to bring them within  the  provisions
      of Article 15(c).  He submitted that unaccompanied children were  more
      vulnerable to forced  labour  or  sexual  exploitation  in  Kabul  and
      therefore would be within the parameters of  Article  15(c).  He  made
      reference to the expert report of Dr Giustozzi which had been produced
      in evidence for the Tribunal and also to the UNAMA Report  of  January
      2010 which showed  that  at  least  5978  civilians  were  killed  and
      injured in 2009, the highest number of  civilian  casualties  recorded
      since the fall of the  Taliban   regime  in  2001.  A  total  of  2412
      civilian deaths were recorded between 1 January and 31 December  2009,
      and this figure represented an increase of 14% on the civilian  deaths
      recorded in 2008. He further submitted that there was likely to be  an
      under-reporting of these figures and he referred to various pieces  of
      the country specific evidence in support of this submission. He  cited
      parts of that report to show that women and children,  and  those  who
      were vulnerable, face  particular  disadvantages  in  the  context  of
      problems associated with armed conflict. Children had been affected as
      a result of attacks including air strikes, rocket  attacks,  IEDs  and
      suicide attacks. There were  several  cases  throughout  the  year  of
      children being used to carry out suicide attacks or plant  explosives.
      He also referred to figures cited in the April 2010 Country of  Origin
      Report showing that about  1050  children  died  in  suicide  attacks,
      roadside blasts, air strikes and  in  the  crossfire  between  Taliban
      insurgents and pro-government Afghan and foreign forces in the  period
      between January and December  2009.  Mr  Bedford  made  various  other
      references to the background evidence which we will  not  set  out  in
      full here but which are  fully  recorded  in  his  detailed  and  very
      helpful skeleton argument.

   8. As regards the risk of recruitment by  the  Taliban,  he  referred  to
      various extracts from the Country of Origin Report  of  February  2009
      and a more recent one of April 2010. The Child Soldiers Global  Report
      2008, referred to in that report, stated  that  there  were  anecdotal
      reports of under 18s serving in the armed forces.  The  children  were
      used as suicide bombers by  anti-government  elements  and  there  was
      forcible and voluntary recruitment  by  the  Taliban  of  children  in
      southern provinces and in parts of Pakistan. The Child Soldiers Report
      of 2004 noted UNICEF reports in mid-2003 that boys aged between 14 and
      18 continue to be involved. Some joined voluntarily  but  others  were
      coerced under threat of death or injury.

   9. Turning lastly to the matter of the risk for unaccompanied children in
      Kabul,  he  noted  that  the  AIT  had  held  in  LQ  (age:  immutable
      characteristic) Afghanistan [2008]  UKAIT  00005  ("LQ")  that  Afghan
      children are a particular social group for the purposes of the  Geneva
      Convention. He referred to the words of Jackson LJ in ZK (Afghanistan)
      v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 749 at paragraph 25 and 26, with whom the other
      two members of the Court agreed. It was held that paragraph  24.40  of
      the 2008 Country of Origin Report citing a UNHCR paper of May 2006 was
      a sufficient basis of finding that a child  without  family  in  Kabul
      would be  exposed  to  a  risk  of  severe  harm.  He  submitted  that
      unaccompanied and separated  children  represented  one  of  the  most
      vulnerable groups in Afghanistan  in  terms  of  potential  risks  and
      weakness of social and legal protection. In his skeleton  argument  he
      also cited various extracts from the background material which  we  do
      not set out here but which we have noted and taken into consideration.
      In answer to a question  from  the  Tribunal  he  submitted  that  the
      question for the Tribunal to ask itself was whether there was  a  real
      risk that each of these children would not have protection upon return
      to Afghanistan.

  10. At the beginning of his submissions,  the  Tribunal  indicated  to  Mr
      Gulvin that they did not need to hear him on the  subject  of  Article
      15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.   He  therefore  commenced  his
      submissions by noting that in all three cases the refusal letters  had
      given details of how the appellants might be  able  to  contact  their
      relatives in Afghanistan. The  appellants  had  all  been  represented
      throughout the proceedings and contact with their relatives back  home
      had been an issue from the beginning. Each of the appellants had  been
      provided with information to enable them to make  contact  with  their
      families but there was no evidence that any had done so.  It  was  his
      submission  that  none  of  these  children  could  be   regarded   as
      unaccompanied children on return to Kabul as they each  had  relatives
      and they had not shown that those relatives would not be able to  come
      to meet them and accompany them.  There was  therefore  no  reason  to
      believe that those relatives would not be willing to assist them.

  11. Turning to the question of  recruitment  by  the  Taliban,  Mr  Gulvin
      acknowledged that there was some anecdotal evidence in the  background
      material  but  at  best  it  raised  only  a  possibility  of   forced
      recruitment. There was no sufficient evidence to  show  that  boys  of
      this age were exposed  to  any  more  than  a  mere  possibility,  and
      certainly that these three boys did not  face  a  real  risk  of  such
      recruitment. There simply was not the  evidence  to  support  such  an
      assertion.

  12. At the end of submissions the Tribunal reserved  its  decision,  which
      decision we now give together with our reasons.

   Material error of law

  13. We are satisfied that a material error of law has been demonstrated in
      each of these determinations. In the  case  of  the  first  appellant,
      Master  HK,  we  are  satisfied  that  in  the  light  of   subsequent
      jurisprudence, and through no fault of his own, the Immigration  Judge
      failed properly to consider the issue of  humanitarian  protection  in
      line with appropriate country guidance as provided in GS, and  in  the
      European Court of Justice case of Elgafaji (Case  C-465/07)  [2009]  1
      WLR 2100, 17 February 2009 ("Elgafaji"). In  the  case  of  the  other
      appellants  the  respective  judges  failed  to  address  humanitarian
      protection at all.

  14. We note the following extract from the judgment of the European  Court
      in Elgafaji:

        "31. ...it is appropriate to compare the three  types  of  'serious
        harm' defined in Article 15 of the Directive, which constitute  the
        qualification for subsidiary protection, where, in accordance  with
        Article 2(e) of the Directive, substantial grounds have been  shown
        for believing that the applicant faces 'a real risk of [such] harm'
        if returned to the relevant country.

        32. In that  regard,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  terms  'death
        penalty',  'execution'  and  'torture  or  inhuman   or   degrading
        treatment or punishment of an applicant in the country of  origin',
        used in Article 15(a) and (b) of the Directive, cover situations in
        which the  applicant  for  subsidiary  protection  is  specifically
        exposed to the risk of a particular type of harm.

        33. By contrast, the harm defined in Article 15(c) of the Directive
        as  consisting  of  a  'serious  and  individual  threat  to   [the
        applicant's] life or person' covers a more general risk of harm.

        34. Reference is made, more  generally,  to  a  'threat  ...  to  a
        civilian's  life  or  person'  rather  than  to  specific  acts  of
        violence.  Furthermore,  that  threat  is  inherent  in  a  general
        situation of 'international or internal  armed  conflict'.  Lastly,
        the violence in  question  which  gives  rise  to  that  threat  is
        described as 'indiscriminate', a term which  implies  that  it  may
        extend to people irrespective of their personal circumstances.

        35. In that context, the word 'individual' must  be  understood  as
        covering harm to civilians irrespective of  their  identity,  where
        the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
        conflict  taking  place  assessed   by   the   competent   national
        authorities before which an application for  subsidiary  protection
        is made, or by the courts of a Member State  to  which  a  decision
        refusing such an application is referred, reaches such a high level
        that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a  civilian,
        returned to the relevant country or, as the case  may  be,  to  the
        relevant region, would, solely on account of his  presence  on  the
        territory of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being
        subject to the serious threat referred  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
        Directive.

        36. That interpretation, which is likely  to  ensure  that  Article
        15(c) of the Directive has its own field  of  application,  is  not
        invalidated by the wording of recital 26 in  the  preamble  to  the
        Directive, according to which '[r]isks to which a population  of  a
        country or a section of the  population  is  generally  exposed  do
        normally not create in themselves an individual threat which  would
        qualify as serious harm'.

        37. While that recital implies that the objective finding alone  of
        a risk linked to the general situation in a country is  not,  as  a
        rule, sufficient to  establish  that  the  conditions  set  out  in
        Article 15(c) of the Directive  have  been  met  in  respect  of  a
        specific person, its wording nevertheless allows by the use of  the
        word 'normally' for the possibility  of  an  exceptional  situation
        which would be characterised by such a high  degree  of  risk  that
        substantial grounds would be shown for believing that  that  person
        would be subject individually to the risk in question.

        38. The exceptional nature of that situation is also  confirmed  by
        the fact that the relevant protection is  subsidiary,  and  by  the
        broad logic of Article 15 of the Directive, as the harm defined  in
        paragraphs (a) and (b) of that article requires a clear  degree  of
        individualisation. While it  is  admittedly  true  that  collective
        factors play a significant role in the application of Article 15(c)
        of the Directive, in that the person concerned belongs, like  other
        people, to a circle of potential victims of indiscriminate violence
        in situations of international or internal armed  conflict,  it  is
        nevertheless the case that that provision  must  be  subject  to  a
        coherent interpretation in relation to  the  other  two  situations
        referred to in Article 15 of the Directive and must, therefore,  be
        interpreted by close reference to that individualisation.

        39. In that regard, the more the applicant is able to show that  he
        is specifically affected by reason of  factors  particular  to  his
        personal circumstances,  the  lower  the  level  of  indiscriminate
        violence required for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection.

        40. Moreover, it should be added that, in the individual assessment
        of an application for subsidiary protection, under Article 4(3)  of
        the Directive, the following may be taken into account:

           the  geographical  scope  of  the  situation  of  indiscriminate
           violence and the actual destination  of  the  applicant  in  the
           event that he is returned to the relevant country, as  is  clear
           from Article 8(1) of the Directive, and
           the existence, if any, of a serious  indication  of  real  risk,
           such as that referred to in Article 4(4) of  the  Directive,  an
           indication in the light of which  the  level  of  indiscriminate
           violence required for eligibility for subsidiary protection  may
           be lower.
           ...........................................
        43. Having regard to  all  of  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
        answer to the questions referred  is  that  Article  15(c)  of  the
        Directive, in conjunction with Article 2(e) of the Directive,  must
        be interpreted as meaning that:
           the existence of a serious and individual threat to the life  or
           person of an applicant for subsidiary protection is not  subject
           to the condition that that applicant adduce evidence that he  is
           specifically targeted by reason of  factors  particular  to  his
           personal circumstances;
           the existence of such a threat can exceptionally  be  considered
           to be established where the degree  of  indiscriminate  violence
           characterising the armed conflict taking place assessed  by  the
           competent national authorities before which an  application  for
           subsidiary protection is made, or by  the  courts  of  a  Member
           State to which  a  decision  refusing  such  an  application  is
           referred reaches such a high level that substantial grounds  are
           shown for believing that a civilian, returned  to  the  relevant
           country or, as the case may be, to the relevant  region,  would,
           solely on account of his  presence  on  the  territory  of  that
           country or region, face a real risk of  being  subject  to  that
           threat."

  15. The immigration judge in Master HK's appeal directed himself according
      to the  2009  case  of  GS  (existence  of  internal  armed  conflict)
      Afghanistan CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00010  which  was  appropriate  country
      guidance at the time. However after the decision of  the  Tribunal  in
      the case of GS (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan CG
      [2009] UKAIT 00044, the earlier case was found to be no longer  extant
      country guidance. The question to be asked, as formulated in the Court
      of Appeal case of QD and AH [2009] EWCA Civ 620, is  as  follows:  "is
      there in Afghanistan, or a material part of it, such a high  level  of
      indiscriminate violence that substantial grounds exist  for  believing
      that an applicant such as the appellant would, solely by being present
      there face a real risk that threatens his life or person?"





  16.  We therefore set aside the three decisions of the immigration  judges
      and we now proceed to remake them.

   Article 15(c)


  17. We turn firstly to the matter of Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive. Mr Bedford drew our attention to paragraphs 39  and  43  of
      the European Court's determination in Elgafaji and  we  bear  in  mind
      their guidance that the more an applicant is able to show that  he  is
      specifically affected by reason  of  factors  particular  to  his  own
      circumstances the lower the level of  indiscriminate  violence  needed
      for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection.  We also  note  that
      the AIT  considered the situation in Afghanistan in the case of GS  on
      the basis of background and expert materials for  the  period  to  May
      2009 (at the latest) and found that the violence  in  Afghanistan  had
      not then reached such a high level that the adult civilian  population
      generally were at risk.


  18. We further take into consideration that,  at  paragraph  134  of  that
      case, the AIT expressly left open the possibility that  there  may  be
      categories of individuals for whom there is an enhanced risk where the
      degree of indiscriminate violence would not need to be as high  as  it
      would otherwise need to be for subsidiary protection to be granted. We
      have  carefully  considered  the  UNAMA  Report  Jan  2010   and,   in
      particular, the increase in the number of civilians  killed  in  2009.
      Mr Bedford also  pointed  out  to  us  that  UNAMA  reported  that  UN
      preliminary figures show that there is a 29.6% year on  year  increase
      in security related incidents, with an average of 960.3 incidents  per
      month compared to 741.1 incidents per month for 2008. However  we  are
      mindful that no definition of "security related incident" is  provided
      in the report and Mr Bedford was not able to assist us in this regard.
      We therefore consider that "security related incident" may well  be  a
      term which includes military encounters and other  encounters  of  the
      security forces with dissident groups, and therefore we are unable  to
      gain any assistance from this figure insofar as it may  assist  us  in
      looking at the risks for the civilians, and the extent to which  there
      has been any  increase  in  those  risks.  We  have  also  taken  into
      consideration that the methodology used by  UNAMA  may  result  in  an
      underreporting, although it is difficult to know to  what  extent  the
      figures may have been under-reported.

  19.  Mr Bedford sought to  persuade  us  that  children  are  particularly
      vulnerable and face particular disadvantages in  the  context  of  the
      problems associated with armed conflict. We have had particular regard
      to the evidence he has produced which shows that  women  and  children
      are victims of air strikes, house raids, suicide and IED  attacks  and
      that these attacks often lead to deep psychological scars and  trauma.
      We note that there are reports of children being  used  to  carry  out
      suicide attacks or to plant explosives.

  20.  The April 2010 COIR states at paragraph 26.04 that:

       "On 6 January 2010 Integrated  Regional  Information  Networks  News
       stated that:

       "'Armed conflict killed hundreds of children and adversely  affected
       many others in 2009 the deadliest year  for  Afghan  children  since
       2001- an Afghan Human Rights group has said:

       "About 1,050 children died in suicide attacks roadside  blasts,  air
       strikes and in the cross fire between Taliban  insurgents  and  pro-
       government Afghan and foreign forces from January to  December  2009
       the Afghan Rights Monitor, a Kabul based  rights  group  said  in  a
       statement on 6 January:

       "'At least three children were killed in war related incidents every
       day in 2009 and many others suffered in  diverse  mostly  unreported
       ways Almai Smadi, ARM's director was  quoted  in  the  statement  as
       saying.' "


  21. We have considered the evidence in considerable detail but we are  not
      satisfied that it shows that children are disproportionately  affected
      by the problems  and  the  conflict  currently  being  experienced  in
      Afghanistan. The roadside blasts, air strikes and crossfire,  together
      with suicide attacks when they occur, do  not  impact  any  more  upon
      children than they do upon adult civilians. Furthermore,  even  though
      there is shown to be an increase in the number of civilian casualties,
      we are not satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to show that  the
      guidance given by the AIT in GS is no  longer  to  be  regarded  as  a
      valid.


  22.  The UNAMA Report of 2009 shows that suicide and  IED  attacks  caused
      more civilian casualties than any other tactic, but  notes  that  such
      attacks have primarily targeted government or  international  military
      forces. These attacks are carried out in areas frequented by civilians
      and therefore, as a result, civilians are casualties  too.  We  accept
      that  civilians  are  deliberately   targeted   with   assassinations,
      abductions and executions if they are perceived to be supportive of or
      associated with the government or  the  international  community.  The
      report notes that a  broad  range  of  civilians  including  community
      elders, former military personnel, doctors, teachers and  construction
      workers have been targeted. Other personnel, such  as  United  Nations
      non-governmental organisations, have also been targeted for  receiving
      threats, and, in some cases, becoming victims of violence. However  we
      find that none of these three appellants has been associated with  any
      of what we might call these "at risk" groups, and there is  no  reason
      to believe that they would be upon return to Afghanistan.

  23.  The report also shows that there are risks concerned with living near
      areas of fighting, and where there are search and seizure  operations,
      and being located near to military bases. The civilians located  close
      to these areas can run an increased risk of  danger  and  particularly
      those  living  near  military  installations  which  have  often  been
      targeted by the armed opposition.   Civilians  have  been  killed  and
      injured as a result  of  their  proximity  to  military  bases.  Again
      however, there is nothing in the evidence to  show  that  these  three
      appellants would be living in proximity to military bases or to  areas
      where there are military operations, search and seizure operations  in
      particular. Looking at the figures contained in the  report  regarding
      the casualties from anti-government elements, we see that IED  devices
      claimed  773  casualties,  suicide   attacks   281,   executions   and
      assassinations 225 and other tactics 351. This latter  group  resulted
      primarily from rocket attacks or ground engagements in which  civilian
      bystanders were directly  affected.  Looking  at  the  detail  of  the
      reports concerning suicide and IED attacks, while we note  that  these
      attacks have been carried out in a manner which fails to  discriminate
      between civilian and military targets or take adequate precautions  to
      prevent civilian casualties, the information provided  in  the  report
      shows that the attacks have largely  been  centred  on  the  types  of
      targets which we have described above. With regards to assassinations,
      the persons most  often  assassinated  or  executed  have  been  those
      individuals who have acted as  informants  or  spies  for  the  Afghan
      government or international forces,  those  working  as  interpreters,
      truck drivers and security guards at military bases and those actively
      supporting the government or belonging to ANSF. It would seem that the
      majority of assassinations covered in the report  took  place  in  the
      South, South East and Central regions of Afghanistan.

  24.  Appalling though these atrocities may be we have no reason to believe
      that these young individuals would be at real risk of such treatment.

  25.  With regard to aerial attacks, the information shows that strikes and
      close air support accounted for a large percentage of civilian deaths,
      with 65 incidents recorded in which air strikes resulted in the deaths
      of civilians in 2009. In all, this resulted in 359 civilian deaths  in
      2009 and 15% of those killed overall. There is no evidence  before  us
      to show that the particular areas in which these three young men  were
      living, or are likely to return to, are the areas in which there is  a
      significant risk of death or injury through such operations.

  26.  Finally,  with regard to search and seizure operations,  although the
      report recorded 98 civilian deaths as a result of these operations  in
      2009,  again that there is no evidence to show that these young people
      are likely to be living in areas where such operations  might  pose  a
      significant or real risk for them.

  27.  We also note the comments made by the appellant's expert Dr Giustozzi
      at paragraph 5 of his report, where he states as follows:

        "Like in Iraq, the risk to  civilians  is  not  evenly  distributed
        around the territory of the country. It is highest in the  southern
        provinces and along the highways going from Kabul to the  provinces
        of the South and South East. Significant levels of risk then  exist
        in the south-east and in the east. The risk is lower in the  North,
        North East and in the central highlands. In Kabul city the risk  is
        modest: there have been bloody attacks but the casualty rate  among
        the city's 5 million inhabitants is rather low. The BBC produced  a
        security map of Afghanistan  in  the  summer  of  2009,  reproduced
        below. In this map it is shown that the worst areas, red  and  pink
        are concentrated in the South and East whereas the yellow areas the
        next degree of danger, are widespread. White areas  are  considered
        to be low risk, even if the Ministry of Interior, on whose data the
        map is  based,  tends  to  underestimate  the  risk  for  political
        reasons. Since the  publication  of  the  map,  the  situation  has
        worsened in some parts of the North in particular such as Kunduz".

  28.  Mr Bedford also sought  to  argue  that  a  "risk  of  a  threat"  is
      something less than  a  real  threat.  However,  this  submission  was
      misconceived. The point has already  been  decided  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620 as follows:

             "27.  The  ECJ's  judgment,  however,  does  not  resolve   the
        multiplication of contingencies by articles 2(e) and 15(c). In fact
        the final words of its answer to  the  second  question  appear  to
        adopt it: "a real risk of being subject  to  that  threat".  It  is
        possible to devise a theoretical situation in which people  can  be
        said to face a risk of a threat (the possibility that  a  quiescent
        militia will re-emerge; a rumour that the  local  wells  have  been
        poisoned) but it is not thinkable that the Directive seeks to cover
        such remote and not truly dangerous situations rather than the real
        risks and real threats presented by the kinds  of  endemic  act  of
        indiscriminate violence -  the  placing  of  car  bombs  in  market
        places; snipers firing methodically at  people  in  the  streets  -
        which have come to disfigure the modern world.

            28. In this regard it is possible that  the  Directive  is  less
        strong than IHL, which - as the AIT point  out  in  �126  of  KH  -
        prohibits "threats of violence the primary purpose of which  is  to
        spread terror among the civilian population". It seems to us clear,
        nevertheless, that when article 15(c)  speaks  of  a  threat  to  a
        civilian's life or person it is concerned not with fear  alone  but
        with a possibility that may become a reality.

            29. In  our  judgment  "risk"  in  article  2(e)  overlaps  with
        "threat" in article 15(c), so that the latter reiterates  but  does
        not qualify or dilute the former. As a matter  of  syntax  this  no
        doubt has its problems, but as a matter of law and common sense  it
        does not. Tribunals will of course need  to  address  them  in  the
        light of the ECJ's ruling, but  as  a  single,  not  a  cumulative,
        contingency."



   Forced recruitment of children

  29. We now consider the question of the forced recruitment of children  in
      Afghanistan. We have carefully considered the  evidence  to  which  Mr
      Bedford has referred us.  We note the reference in the refusal  letter
      to The Child Soldiers Report 2004 which noted:

        "Although accurate documentation on the number  of  child  soldiers
        actively associated with armed  groups  was  not  available  Unicef
        reported in mid-2003 that boys aged between 14 and 18 continued  to
        be involved in such groups. They  were  attracted  by  promises  of
        payment or education, by a desire to protect their own  communities
        or by the status  and  power  of  carrying  weapons.   Some  joined
        voluntarily, but others were  coerced  under  threat  of  death  or
        injury.  In some cases  local  commanders  demanded  that  families
        provide a son  to  fill  quotas  imposed  by  regional  commanders.
        Parents  also  sent  their  children  to  join  armed  groups   for
        ideological  reasons  and  under  18s  joined  up  alongside  their
        brothers or other family members."

  30. This information is unfortunately now some  six  years  old.  It  does
      however show the age group of the boys who may be targeted in this way
      but it also points out that not  all  children  are  coerced  and  age
      location and family patterns are all factors to be considered.

  31. The COIR February 2009 quotes the Child Soldiers Global Report of 2008
      which refers to anecdotal reports of under 18s serving  in  the  armed
      forces and reported use  of  children  as  suicide  bombers  by  anti-
      government elements including the Taliban, and forcible recruitment of
      children in the southern provinces and  parts  of  Pakistan.  In  this
      regard we note that none of  these  three  children  come  from  those
      southern provinces.

  32.  Mr Bedford has also referred us to  the  COIR  April  2010  paragraph
      26.07 which states as follows:

        "...the UNICEF Humanitarian  Action  Report  2010  published  on  4
        February 2010 referring to Afghanistan stated that:

        "Children continue to face multiple risks to their personal  safety
        especially as community support mechanisms remain  weak  and  there
        are few government services to protect them and their families from
        gender based violence and domestic abuse and  exploitation.   Armed
        groups continue to  recruit  children  to  be  used  as  spies  and
        informants or transport explosives  and  conduct  suicide  attacks.
        These children are subject to arrest capture and detention  without
        due process by Afghan and international military forces for alleged
        association with armed groups."


  33. The COIR April 2010 paragraph 26.40 also refers  to  the  USSD  Report
      2009 which noted that:


        ..."Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  insurgent  recruitment  of
        underage soldiers was on the rise.  There  were  numerous  credible
        reports that the  Taliban  and  other  insurgent  forces  recruited
        children younger than 18, in some cases as suicide bombers  and  in
        other cases to assist with their work.  For example in Uzurgan  the
        Taliban reportedly used children to dig  hiding  places  for  IEDs.
        There were many reports of insurgents using minor teenage  boys  as
        combatants  in  Paktya  province.   In  July  in  Helmand  province
        authorities apprehended a child before he allegedly would have been
        equipped to become a suicide bomber.  NDS  officials  held  several
        children  in  the  juvenile  detention  facility  in   Helmand   on
        insurgency related charges.  Although most children were 15  or  16
        years old, reports from Ghazni province indicated  that  insurgents
        recruited children as young as  12  particularly  if  they  already
        owned motorbikes and weapons.  NGOs and UN agencies  reported  that
        the Taliban tricked, promised money to children, or forced them  to
        become suicide bombers."


  34. We have taken all such reports into consideration.  Whilst  we  cannot
      discount  the  forcible  recruitment  by  the  Taliban  as   a   risk,
      particularly in areas of high militant activity or  militant  control,
      we conclude that the evidence does not point to this  being  any  more
      than a mere possibility and not a real risk for these three boys.


  35. We find that there is no particular evidence that the  recruitment  of
      child soldiers  by  the  Taliban  is  a  significant  problem  in  the
      provinces from which these three appellants come:  Kunduz,  Kunar  and
      Logar provinces.

  36. The first appellant comes from Khanabad in Kunduz province. This is  a
      province in the north of Afghanistan. It is shown to be one of  medium
      risk in Dr Giustozzi's map.  The evidence accepted by the AIT was that
      this boy's parents were killed  in  an  earthquake  about  five  years
      before he came to the United Kingdom, and he was looked after  by  his
      maternal uncle who did not have any children of his  own.  His  father
      had been forced to work for the Taliban, sewing clothes for them,  and
      there was evidence from the appellant that his uncle had seen forcible
      recruitment in his area. This appellant had an older brother  who  was
      not, according to his evidence, taken by the Taliban but who died  due
      to injuries received in the earthquake. We  note  that  the  SEF  form
      records the elder brother of having been aged 22.  Therefore,  it  was
      legitimate to observe that the Taliban had not shown any  interest  in
      recruiting this appellant's elder brother. We are not satisfied  that,
      given the anecdotal nature of the evidence of recruitment of children,
      the lack of any evidence to show  significant  recruitment  in  Kunduz
      province,  and the fact that child recruitment had not been visited on
      this family in this area in the past, this is a  real  risk  for  this
      appellant.


  37. With regard to the second appellant, this young man comes from Nowabad
      village in Logar province. It would seem  from  the  risk  map  of  Dr
      Giustozzi  that  this  area  is  probably  a  medium  risk  area.  The
      immigration judge found that the appellant's father had been taken  by
      the Taliban. The appellant himself  gave  evidence  of  local  Taliban
      activity. There is no evidence,  however,  that  the  youngsters  were
      taken; again this is not an area where we see any significant evidence
      of child recruitment by the Taliban. Furthermore, the  appellant  went
      to live with his uncle in Heraz for five months, and the appellant was
      pleased to be living there as there was no fighting going on. This  is
      a province in the extreme west of the country and  is  categorised  as
      low to medium risk, low risk in the northern part of the province with
      an increased medium risk in the southern parts. In any event,  we  are
      not satisfied that if he returned to live with his uncle in that  area
      he would be at real risk of being recruited.

  38. Finally, with regard to the third appellant, this young man came  from
      Kunar province  in  the  north-eastern  part  of  Afghanistan,   which
      appears to be medium or high risk on the map of danger and security  (
      although it is difficult to tell - without having  a  coloured  map  -
      which it is). He lived with his parents and his younger brother  until
      his father disappeared. His father had been missing  for  five  years,
      said to be taken by the Taliban. He  had  been  in  the  care  of  his
      maternal uncle and mother.  The appellant understood that the  Taliban
      took people from the village and took boys when  they  were  about  10
      years old. He had been told this by  his  family.  The  appellant  had
      lived in the village all his life and yet there is  no  evidence  from
      him of him  having  known  of  any  youngsters  actually  having  been
      recruited; he relies on what he says he was  told  by  his  uncle  and
      mother.  We  consider  that  if  indeed  there  was   active   Taliban
      recruitment of children in his village the appellant would  be  likely
      to have been able to give some evidence of having seen or heard of  it
      himself.  He was aged 13 when he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      therefore it seems to us he was of an age when he might have been able
      to recall abductions of young boys.

  39.  Although there does appear in this case too to have been evidence  of
      family talk of the taking of young boys by the Taliban,  as  with  the
      other two young men, there  is no material evidence of children  being
      taken in this way,  and, at best, there is   only  anecdotal  evidence
      that this does occur in parts of the country .  The  country  specific
      evidence is not such as to persuade us that  there  is  a  significant
      problem of child recruitment by the Taliban in the area in which  this
      appellant lived.



   Risk of homelessness, forced labour and sexual exploitation

  40. Mr Bedford argued that in ZK (Afghanistan) at paragraphs  25  and  26,
      Jackson LJ, with whom the Chancellor and Thomas LJ agreed,  held  that
      paragraphs 24.40 of the 2008 COIR Report, citing a UNHCR  paper  dated
      May 2006, was a sufficient basis for a finding that  a  child  without
      family in Kabul would be exposed to a risk of severe  harm.   He  also
      argued that in the case of LQ,  the  AIT  accepted  that  children  in
      Afghanistan could be regarded as a "particular social group"  for  the
      purposes of the Refugee Convention.


  41. First, we do not accept that conclusion assists these  appellants.  In
      LQ the Tribunal found that age was an immutable characteristic for the
      purpose of considering whether a particular social group is shown when
      considering the Refugee Convention.   In  the  circumstances  of  that
      particular case, the tribunal found as follows:

        "In the light of the expert evidence, we conclude that the risk  of
        severe harm to the appellant, as found by the Adjudicator, would be
        as a result of his membership  of  a  group  sharing  an  immutable
        characteristic and constituting, for the purposes  of  the  Refugee
        Convention, a particular social group."

  42. However, this is not to be regarded as any form  of  country  guidance
      nor precedent  for  any  general  proposition  that  all  children  in
      Afghanistan form a  particular  social  group  irrespective  of  their
      particular family circumstances.

  43. Mr Bedford referred us to the 2009 UNHCR Guidelines which  states:

        "Unaccompanied and separated children represent  one  of  the  most
        vulnerable groups in Afghanistan, in terms of the  potential  risks
        and   the    weakness    of    social    and    legal    protection
        networks...Vulnerable children, include, but are  not  limited  to,
        those at risk of  forced  recruitment  (including  use  as  suicide
        bombers), sexual violence, child labour in exploitative  conditions
        and trafficking. Such children are at  risk  of  persecution  as  a
        particular social group."

   44.  He also referred us to P.61 of those Guidelines which states:

        "The traditional family and  community  structures  of  the  Afghan
        social and tribal system constitute the main protection and  coping
        mechanism for returning Afghan refugees.  The support  provided  by
        families, extended families and tribes is limited  to  areas  where
        family or community links exist, in particular,  in  the  place  of
        origin or habitual  residence.    Those  who  may  face  particular
        difficulties upon return  include,  but  are  not  limited  to  ...
        unaccompanied children ... Return to places other  than  places  of
        origin or  previous  residence  may  therefore  expose  Afghans  to
        insurmountable  difficulties  not  only  in  sustaining   and   re-
        establishing livelihoods but  also  to  security  risks.   Security
        risks may include,  inter  alia,  arbitrary  detention  and  arrest
        targeted killings  based  on  ethnic  rivalries  and  family  based
        conflicts, besides the increasing risks being posed by the  ongoing
        armed conflict, as detailed above ... In  this  regard,  given  the
        differences particular  to  the  situation  in  Afghanistan,  UNHCR
        advises against the return of persons to  areas  other  than  their
        places of origin or previous areas of residence where they  do  not
        have effective family or tribal links  and  support,  unless  these
        returns are voluntary in nature."

   45. We also note that the COI Report of April 2010  refers  to  the  fact
      that police regularly beat and incarcerated children they took off the
      streets, and quotes the USSD Report of 2009  which  noted  that  child
      abuse  was  endemic  throughout  the  country,  ranging  from  general
      neglect, physical abuse, abandonment, and confinement  to  working  to
      pay off family debts.  We have also had our  attention  drawn  to  the
      Human Rights Watch World report 2009, Afghanistan published in January
      2009, which provides information in the  practice of bacha  bazi  (boy
      play or  the keeping of boys as sex  slaves  by  wealthy  or  powerful
      patrons) The USSD Report 2009 noted that numerous reports alleged that
      harems of young boys were cloistered for bacha  bazi  for  sexual  and
      social entertainment, although credible statistics were  difficult  to
      acquire as the subject was a source of shame, and 'dancing boys' was a
      widespread culturally sanctioned form of male  rape.  We  accept  that
      sexual abuse of children remains pervasive in  Afghanistan,  and  that
      cases of child slavery and debt  bondage  practices  have  also  risen
      there, particularly in poor rural communities, and are often disguised
      as marriage.  Child labour is also  a  factor.   According  to  UNICEF
      estimates at least 30 percent of primary school-age children undertook
      some work and there were more than one million child labourers younger
      than 14.  There is also evidence to show that:

        "Afghan boys and  girls  are  trafficked  within  the  country  for
        commercial sexual exploitation, forced marriage to settle debts  or
        disputes, forced begging, as well as forced labor or  debt  bondage
        in brisk  kilns  carpet  making  factories  and  domestic  service.
        Afghan children are also trafficked to Iran and Pakistan for forced
        labor  particularly  in  Pakistan's  carpet  factories  and  forced
        marriage.  Boys  are  promised  enrolment  in  Islamic  schools  in
        Pakistan but instead  are  trafficked  to  camps  for  paramilitary
        training by extremist groups..."

   46. The USSD Report 2009 stated that:

        "NGOs estimated there were 60,000 street children in  urban  areas.
        Street children had little or no  access  to  government  services,
        although several NGOs provide access to basic needs such as shelter
        and food...During the year drought and food shortages  forced  many
        families to send their children onto the streets to  beg  for  food
        and money."

   47. We have also had regard to   paragraphs  14  -16  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
      report dated 7 July 2010 where the doctor noted  that there  are  many
      children working the streets of  the  capital  with  their  number  is
      increasing. He also noted that there  are  few  orphanages  in  Kabul,
      mostly run by the government and the Afghan Red Crescent  Society  but
      they do not accept children above 16. He further noted that, in  order
      to survive the winter  with  the  low  temperatures  in  Kabul,  young
      returnees would most likely have to accept the  protection  of  racket
      organisations which, in exchange for the shelter,  force  children  to
      work for them, for example, begging on the streets. He also reports on
      the sexual exploitation of children.

   48. We have taken this evidence into consideration, and we agree that  it
      presents a bleak picture for children who are returned to  Afghanistan
      and who do not have a family that will care for them. We note that  in
      the case of the first appellant, the finding of the Tribunal was  that
      this young man from Kundoz province had no parents,  although  he  was
      looked after by a maternal uncle following the death of his family  in
      the earthquake. His maternal uncle and wife did not have  children  of
      their own and clearly became de facto parents of the  young  man.  The
      immigration judge found that he had a surrogate family in  Afghanistan
      and, if he were to be returned, it was unlikely that his  uncle  would
      refuse to care for him. Indeed, Mr Bedford did not  dispute  that  the
      relatives of all three appellants would be willing to care  for  their
      respective appellant.  With regard to the  second  appellant,  he  was
      looked after by an  uncle  when  his  father  disappeared.  The  third
      appellant, together with his mother was simply taken  to  live  at  an
      uncle's home after the disappearance of his father.

   49. None of these boys is  an  orphan  and  none  is  without  family  in
      Afghanistan. It was pointed out on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
      that in each of these cases the appellant was advised  that  he  could
      seek to make contact with his relatives through the  auspices  of  the
      Red Cross organisation. Information was provided that  the  Red  Cross
      International tracing service is a way  for  families  who  have  been
      separated to try to restore contact. It was noted that it  is  a  free
      service and that in the United Kingdom contact should be made with the
      local Red Cross Branch; if the organisation feels that it is  able  to
      help the inquirer will be asked to fill in a relevant form which  will
      be sent to the headquarters in London, from whence it is forwarded  to
      the appropriate Red Cross or Red Crescent Society in  the  appropriate
      country or to the International Committee of the Red Cross.  They  can
      offer assistance in putting the parties in contact through  letter  or
      phone.

   50. In each case this information was provided in the refusal  letter  to
      the appellant, but there was no evidence before the Tribunal in any of
      the cases that any efforts had  been  made  to  contact  relatives  in
      Afghanistan. None of these  respective  families  lived  in  areas  of
      Afghanistan where it might  be  thought  that  they  could  have  been
      displaced by the conflict. None of the families lived in the provinces
      which are under the control of the Taliban or where there  is  regular
      ongoing fighting which the generally displaces local people from their
      areas. There is no reason to believe that the relatives of these three
      young men  are  living  anywhere  else  other  than  where  they  were
      previously living when each the appellants had contact with them.

   51. There is no evidence of any endeavour being made on behalf of the any
      of the appellants to make contact with their relatives still living in
      Afghanistan. As Mr Bedford accepted, it was not in  dispute  that  the
      respective families would be willing to collect and take care of these
      young men upon their return.

   52. The Court of Appeal in the case of HH  (Somalia)  and  others  [2010]
      EWCA Civ 426 accepted that the route of return for an appellant should
      be looked at. It was said that it  is  impossible  to  decide  whether
      return home is feasible or relocation is  reasonable  without  knowing
      how the individual is going to get there. They considered that in  any
      case in which it can be shown, either directly or by implication,  the
      route or method of return is envisaged, the Tribunal  is  required  by
      law to consider and determine any challenge to the safety of the route
      or method. In that case it was considered that the tribunal had  erred
      in refusing to determine that appeal on the basis of  what  was  known
      about the route of return. It  was  known  that  return  would  be  to
      Mogadishu airport, and it was implicit that the journey  onward  would
      be by road. The Court found that the method of return was a  necessary
      ingredient in any  appraisal  of  risk.  Even  if  they  had  no  real
      information about this, they were still obliged to do as best as  they
      could to deal with the issue.

   53. The Tribunal finds itself with a similar dearth of evidence in  these
      cases. However, it is known that the appellants would be  returned  to
      Kabul. The respondent  pointed  out  the  availability  of  assistance
      through the Red Cross, to which we have referred above. The respondent
      also made reference to the International  Organisation  for  Migration
      which  assists  Afghan  nationals  through   voluntary   returns   and
      reintegration into society. It  was  pointed  out  in  the  respective
      refusal letters that once an application  for  return  assistance  has
      been approved, the IOM sending mission makes travel  arrangements  and
      IOM Afghanistan provides reception assistance through the coordination
      cell at Kabul airport. Their  personnel  guide  beneficiaries  through
      immigration and customs processes. Temporary accommodation is provided
      upon request and  returnees  are  offered  onward  transportation  and
      assistance to their final destination. It is therefore our  conclusion
      that assistance would  be  available  to  these  appellants,  both  in
      seeking out their relatives in Afghanistan, and in facilitating  their
      reunion and the reception of the appellants upon return to  Kabul.  As
      noted above, we have no reason to  believe  that  contact  with  their
      families would be impeded by the situation in Afghanistan, and we have
      no reason to believe that the families have moved from where they were
      previously living.

   54. The families were all able to  make  arrangements  for  the  boys  to
      travel out of Afghanistan and to the west.  They  travelled  with  the
      assistance of agents and each of the  families  was  clearly  able  to
      provide the finance for such journeys,  which is no  small  amount  of
      money. We have no reason to believe  that  their  families  could  not
      travel to Kabul to meet them on their return. Therefore, while we take
      into consideration the evidence which has been produced regarding  the
      dangers for children in Afghanistan, particularly those  who  have  no
      family to turn to, we do not believe that these appellants would  face
      a real risk of such eventualities. There is no  real  risk  that  they
      would be homeless as they have families to whom they could return, and
      they have uncles who would be able to protect them from any  abuse  or
      violence on the journey home. There is no reason to believe that  they
      would have to stay in Kabul other than while in transit,  and  it  has
      not been shown that the level of violence in Afghanistan is such  that
      they could not travel safely from Kabul to their home areas.

   Decision

  55. It is our conclusion that the evidence does  not  show  that  any  of
      these three young men faces a real risk on return to Afghanistan.

       These appeals are therefore dismissed.







                               Signed



                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)





             APPENDIX: SCHEDULE OF DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL



|             |                       |                                  |
|Date         |Source                 |Description                       |
|2007         |                       |                                  |
|December     |UN High Commissioner   |UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines for|
|             |for Refugees (UNHCR)   |Assessing the International       |
|             |                       |Protection Needs of Afghan Asylum |
|             |                       |Seekers                           |
|2008         |                       |                                  |
|3 January    |UN High Commissioner   |UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines for|
|             |for Refugees (UNHCR)   |Assessing the International       |
|             |                       |Protection Needs of Afghan Asylum |
|             |                       |Seekers                           |
|25 February  |US State Department    |Human Rights Report 2007:         |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|28 May       |Amnesty International  |Amnesty International Report 2008:|
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|10 November  |United Nations         |Report of the Secretary-General on|
|             |                       |children and armed conflict in    |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|1 December   |International Council  |Struggle for Kabul:  The Taliban  |
|             |on Security and        |Advance                           |
|             |Development            |                                  |
|15 December  |UNICEF Press Conference|Children in Armed Conflict in     |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|             |                       |Speakers:  Mr Bo Asplund, Deputy  |
|             |                       |Special Representative Of The     |
|             |                       |Secretary-General For Afghanistan |
|             |                       |(DSRSG);Ms Catherine Mbengue,     |
|             |                       |UNICEF Country Representative for |
|             |                       |Afghanistan; Dr Nilab Mobarez,    |
|             |                       |UNAMA Spokesperson's Office       |
|23 December  |Afghanistan Independent|Insurgent abuses against Afghan   |
|             |Human Rights Commission|civilians                         |
|2009         |                       |                                  |
|14 January   |Human Rights Watch     |World Report 2009:  Afghanistan   |
|17 February  |UN Assistance Mission  |Annual Report on Protection of    |
|             |to Afghanistan (UNAMA) |Civilians in Armed Conflict, 2008 |
|18 February  |United Kingdom Home    |Afghanistan Country of Origin     |
|             |Office Country of      |Report, February 2009             |
|             |Origin Information     |                                  |
|             |Service                |                                  |
|25 February  |US Department of State |2008 Human Rights Report:         |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|26 February  |Amnesty International  |Getting away with murder?  The    |
|             |                       |impunity of international forces  |
|             |                       |in Afghanistan.                   |
|26 March     |United Nations         |Report of the Secretary-General on|
|             |                       |children and armed conflict:      |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|3 April      |Oxfam International    |Caught in the conflict: Civilians |
|             |                       |and the international security    |
|             |                       |strategy in Afghanistan           |
|8 April      |United Kingdom Home    |Operational Guidance Note:        |
|             |Office Border Agency   |Afghanistan                       |
|22 June      |US Center of Excellence|Dozens killed in security         |
|             |in Disaster Management |incidents across Afghanistan      |
|             |and Humanitarian       |                                  |
|             |Assistance (COEDMHA)   |                                  |
|July         |UN High Commissioner   |UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines for|
|             |for Refugees (UNHCR)   |Assessing the International       |
|             |                       |Protection Needs of Afghan Asylum |
|             |                       |Seekers                           |
|9 July       |Voice of America News  |Bomb Kills 25 in Afghanistan      |
|9 July       |Institute for War and  |Insurgency Gaining Ground in      |
|             |Peace Reporting (UK)   |Afghan North                      |
|15 July      |Voice of America News  |Top US General 'Worried' by Rise  |
|             |                       |in Afghan Violence                |
|16 July      |Freedom House          |Freedom in the World 2009:        |
|             |                       |Afghanistan:                      |
|31 July      |Voice of America News  |UN: Civilian Death Toll Rises in  |
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |
|31 July      |Office of the United   |Afghanistan:  civilian casualties |
|             |Nations High           |keep on rising                    |
|             |Commissioner for Human |                                  |
|             |Rights (OHCHR)         |                                  |
|2010         |                       |                                  |
|January      |UN Assistance Mission  |Annual Report on Protection of    |
|             |to Afghanistan (UNAMA) |Civilians in Armed Conflict, 2009 |
|8 April      |United Kingdom Home    |Afghanistan Country of Origin     |
|             |Office Country of      |Report, February 2010             |
|             |Origin Information     |                                  |
|             |Service                |                                  |
|7 July       |Dr Antonio Giustozzi   |Country expert report: Violence in|
|             |                       |Afghanistan                       |



