
[pic]
IAC-FH-KH-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Pun and others (Gurkhas - policy - article 8) Nepal [2011] UKUT 00377 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2011 & 1 July 2011                |On 8 September 2011          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE JARVIS
                     DESIGNATED IMMIGRATION JUDGE DIGNEY


                                   Between

                  (1)   entry clearance officer - katHmandu
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DIK PRASAD PUN
                               TEJ KUMARI PUN
                                                                 Respondents



                               HEM RAJ GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  (2)   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KATHMANDU
                                                                  Respondent




                  (3)   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              KUL PRASAD GURUNG
                                NABIN GARANG
                                                                 Respondents



                  (4)   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JANAKI RANA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Eadie, QC (on 13 April 2011) and Mr  M  Blundell
                    instructed by the Treasury Solicitor (first,  third  and
                    fourth appeal)
      Ms R Stickler instructed by N C Brothers & Co. (second appeal)

For the Respondent:    Ms R Stickler instructed by N C Brothers & Co  (first
appeal)
      Mr C Jacobs instructed by Howe & Co (third and fourth appeals)
      Mr J Eadie, QC (on 13 April 2011) and Mr M Blundell instructed by  the
                    Treasury Solicitor (second appeal)




    (i)     The policy in Chapter 29(4) of the DSP  (subsequently  replaced
        by  the  provisions  of  SET  12)  relating  to  applications   for
        settlement by adult dependants of former members of HM Forces  sets
        out a true discretion to be exercised  outside  the  Rules  by  the
        respondent and cannot reasonably be interpreted as  setting  out  a
        number of different requirements where the  fulfilment  of  one  or
        more leads to an entitlement to a grant of entry clearance.


    (ii)    The policy creates a broad discretion to be  exercised  by  the
        decision  taker  in  the  light  of  the   individual   facts   and
        circumstances of each case taking into account but not  limited  to
        the identified bullet points.  These serve to identify some factors
        which may be relevant whilst not excluding other factors which  may
        depending on the facts of the case be equally relevant.


    (iii)   As a matter of principle an appellant is entitled to a decision
        on any appeal before the Tribunal and an article  8  appeal  should
        not be adjourned or sent back to be re-made by the respondent where
        this course  is  resisted  by  the  appellant  unless  there  is  a
        compelling reason for doing so.  Where as in the  present  cases  a
        human rights appeal is set in the context of the amendments to  the
        Rules to deal with a particular historical issue and with  specific
        published policies dealing with the approach to  be  taken  in  the
        case of adult dependants not falling within the Rules,  a  decision
        under article 8 will inevitably be informed by  the  provisions  of
        the Rules and the policy.


    (iv)    If the Tribunal does determine  an  article  8  appeal  when  a
        decision under the policy is or would otherwise be sent back to the
        respondent, that appeal cannot be treated as a way for the Tribunal
        to exercise a discretion which under the policy is a matter for the
        respondent but must be determined in accordance with the guidelines
        set out by the House of Lords and the Supreme Court.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    These appeals all concern applications for  entry  clearance  made  by
    adult dependent relatives of former members of the British  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas who have taken up their rights to settle in the  UK.   In  this
    determination we will refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  the  applicants  as  the  appellants  and  Entry
    Clearance Officers as the respondents.


2.    These appeals have been heard together as they raise common issues  on
    the interpretation of the policy set out in Chapter 29(4)  of  the  DSP
    referred to below subsequently replaced by the provisions  of  SET  12.
    On 13 April 2011 the Tribunal heard submissions  on  these  issues  and
    with the agreement of the  parties  we  decided  that  the  appropriate
    course would be to deal with those matters as a preliminary issue, send
    out our decision and then hear further submissions  on  the  individual
    appeals.

The Preliminary Issue

3.    Our decision on the preliminary issue was issued on 22 June  2011  and
    is as follows:

    "1.     These appeals raise issues on the meaning and interpretation of
         the respondent's policy set out firstly in  chapter  29.14  of  the
         Diplomatic Service Procedures  (DSP):  Entry  Clearance,  Volume  1
         General Instructions and the identically worded provisions  of  SET
         12: Settlement Entry for Former Members  of  HM  Forces  and  Their
         Dependants (SET 12).  In this decision we will refer to the parties
         as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicants as  the
         appellants and the entry  clearance  officers  as  the  respondent.




    2.      The background to these policies lies in  the  changes  to  the
        Immigration Rules introduced in  October  2004  providing  for  the
        grant of settlement to Gurkha soldiers with four years' service who
        retired from the British Army on or after 1 July 1997.  DSP chapter
        29 was issued at the same time to provide operational  instructions
        to Entry Clearance Officers  and  to  set  out  the  policy  to  be
        followed in relation to dependants over the age of 18.  Chapter  29
        ceased to have effect in around February 2009 but a further  policy
        (SET 12) was published in the same terms


    3.      The core legal issue which arises in  the  present  appeals  is
        whether in circumstances where an  Immigration  Judge  has  made  a
        finding that the respondent's decision under the policy was not  in
        accordance with the law,  he  should  direct  the  grant  of  entry
        clearance or remit the application to the respondent for a  further
        decision.  The  issue  put  at  its  simplest  is  whether  as  the
        respondent argues para 29.14 creates a broad discretion  which,  as
        it is a discretion exercised outside the Immigration Rules, is  one
        which must be exercised by the respondent and accordingly, when  it
        is found that the decision is not in accordance with the  law,  the
        application must  be  remitted  to  the  respondent  for  a  lawful
        decision to be made or whether, as argued by  the  appellants,  the
        terms of the policy create a presumption that leave will be granted
        if one or more of the bullet points set out in para 29.14  is  met,
        when, if so, and if there is nothing to displace  that  presumption
        and nothing further to be considered, the appeal should be  allowed
        in accordance with AG and others (Policies; executive  discretions;
        Tribunal's powers) (Kosovo) [2007] UKAIT 82.


    4.      Para 29.14 provides as follows:


             "It is not the intention to split a family unit solely because
             the dependant is 18 years of age or  over.   Applications  for
             settlement from dependants who are 18 years  of  age  or  over
             will be considered and discretion to grant settlement  outside
             the rules may be exercised  in  individual  cases.  Dependants
             over  the  age  of  18  need  to  make   separate   individual
             applications  and  pay  the  appropriate  fee.   In  assessing
             whether the settlement in the UK is appropriate the ECO should
             consider the following factors:


                . one parent or a relative of the applicant is  present  and
                  settled,  or  being  admitted  for,  or   being   granted,
                  settlement in the UK under the HM Forces Rule;


                . the applicant has previously been granted limited leave as
                  a dependant of a member of HM Forces;


                . the applicant has been, and wishes to continue, pursuing a
                  full-time course of studies in the UK;


                . refusal of the application would mean that  the  applicant
                  would be living alone outside the UK  and  is  financially
                  dependent on the parent or relative present  and  settled,
                  or being granted settlement in the UK under the HM  Forces
                  Rule;


                . the applicant would find it  very  difficult  to  function
                  because of illness or  disability  without  the  help  and
                  support of their parent or close relative in the UK.


             If one or more of the factors listed above  are  present,  the
             ECO may exercise  discretion  to  grant  entry  clearance  for
             settlement in the UK."


    Summary of Mr Eadie's Submission


    5.      Mr Eadie submitted that  para  29.14  is  plainly  intended  to
        create a broad discretion to be exercised by  the  respondent.   It
        sets out a policy operating outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
        correct approach to ascertaining its effect was, he submitted,  set
        out by the Tribunal in UR & Others (Policy;  executive  discretion;
        remittal) Nepal [2010] UKUT 480 (IAC).  The  core  purpose  of  the
        policy was considered and the Tribunal held that it did not  create
        a presumption of the kind that would make  it  appropriate  for  an
        immigration judge to allow the appeal outright and that the  proper
        course was to remit for a fresh decision  to  be  taken.   He  also
        referred to  and  relied  on  the  Tribunal  determinations  in  CT
        (Gurkhas: policy) Nepal [2011] UKUT 53  (IAC)  and  KG  (Gurkhas  -
        overage dependants - policy) Nepal [2011] UKUT 00117 (IAC).   These
        authorities supported  the  proposition  that  no  presumption  was
        created simply by the fact that one or more of  the  bullet  points
        was fulfilled.  The fact  that  there  remained  a  discretion  was
        indicated by the wording of the policy itself i.e. the use of "may"
        in the  paragraph  before  the  bullet  points  and  in  the  final
        sentence.


    6.      He argued that the content  of  the  bullet  points  themselves
        indicated that there could be  no  such  presumption.   Each  point
        covered a variety of possible factual scenarios. The  first  bullet
        point would include every single relative  of  persons  present  or
        settled or being granted or being admitted to settlement under  the
        HM Forces Rule.  It could not have been intended  that  the  policy
        was to create a presumption on  crossing  this  threshold.   Bullet
        points 2 to 5 simply identified matters properly to be  taken  into
        account and the respondent could lawfully  and  rationally  make  a
        decision to refuse an application even if  one  or  more  of  these
        conditions were met.   If an ability to meet one  or  more  of  the
        bullet points led to the presumption of grant within  AG  (Kosovo),
        there would be no scope for the respondent to take into account the
        kind of matters set  out  in  Part  9  of  the  Rules  such  as  an
        individual's dishonesty and criminal record.


    7.      He submitted that as with any policy a balance had to be struck
        between flexibility and the need to identify matters properly to be
        taken into account.  This allowed the decision-maker to respond  to
        the individual circumstances of each application.  This flexibility
        did not make the policy unlawful:  it was sufficiently prescriptive
        and set out an adequate framework  in  which  rational  and  lawful
        decisions could properly be made.  The purpose of  the  policy  had
        been fairly set out in UR and the policy was  consistent  with  and
        put  into  effect  the  ministerial  statements  set  out  in   the
        Parliamentary materials relied on by the appellants.  The  Military
        Covenant was being adhered to as the policy  set  out  the  special
        treatment to be given to adult dependants of members of  the  armed
        forces.


    8.      He submitted that it was not open to the appellants to rely  on
        the record of Mr  Kovats' submissions in R (on the  application  of
        Limbu) [2008] EWHC 2261 (Admin) recorded  in  para  58(iv)  of  the
        judgment  where  the  issues  being  addressed  were  fundamentally
        different, whether discretion should be exercised under para  29.4.
        The submission had been  addressed  to  a  different  point.   When
        giving judgment, Blake J  had  not  ruled  on  the  correctness  or
        otherwise of the issue of whether a presumption arose  but  in  any
        event he had been dealing with a different policy  and  there  were
        marked  differences  between  para  29.4  and   29.14.    In   such
        circumstances no weight should be attached to the submissions  made
        by Mr Kovats in Limbu.


    9.      In summary, he submitted that the policy  was  designed  to  be
        applied  flexibly,  applying  relatively  but  necessarily  broadly
        defined sets of factors to a potentially wide  range  of  different
        factual  scenarios  presented  in  individual   cases.    Excessive
        rigidity or circumscription would be  a  vice  not  a  virtue.   He
        argued that the policy expressed in para 29.14 struck a lawful  and
        rational balance between  rigidity  and  flexibility  and  did  not
        prescribe how the discretion was to be exercised in all situations.




    Summary of Ms Stickler's Submissions


    10.      Ms  Stickler's  submission  was  that  para  29.14  created  a
        presumption that entry clearance would  be  granted  to  dependants
        over the age of 18 if they satisfied one or more of the five bullet
        points listed and where so, entry clearance must be  granted.   She
        argued that this interpretation was supported  by  considering  the
        content and purpose of the policy, its language  and  construction,
        the  concession  made  by  counsel  in  Limbu  and  the  need   for
        transparency and the avoidance of inconsistency.  She  argued  that
        there were Parliamentary statements which assisted the Tribunal  in
        determining the meaning and purpose of policy and in particular the
        statements by Mr Des Brown of  14  September  2004  and  the  press
        release issued by the Home Office in 2004, referred to in paras  11
        and 12 of the judgment of Blake J in  Limbu.   The  government  had
        made it clear that it wished to acknowledge the role played by  the
        Gurkhas in the history of the UK and had expressed the intention of
        putting together the best possible  package  to  enable  discharged
        Gurkhas to apply for settlement and citizenship.  These  statements
        were made with the Military Covenant in mind  and  the  policy  was
        designed to ensure that ex-Gurkha soldiers would be able  to  enjoy
        their right to remain in the UK with their family members including
        dependants over the age of 18.


    11.     She submitted that the first sentence of para  29.14  supported
        her argument by confirming that family unity was  the  respondent's
        objective in formulating the policy. The intention was clearly  set
        out: not to split a family unit solely because a dependant  was  18
        years of age or over.  The use of the words "may" and  "discretion"
        within the paragraph did not preclude the policy  from  creating  a
        presumption in favour of entry clearance.  She  submitted  that  in
        the context of this policy "may" did not indicate that there was  a
        discretion to be exercised but set out a power to grant leave.  She
        argued that if one of the bullet points was  fulfilled  the  policy
        authorised the  exercise  by  the  respondent  of  a  power  not  a
        discretion.   She accepted that "may" needed to be read  as  "must"
        but this was the only way to achieve the  purpose  of  the  policy.
        [At the resumed hearing on 1 July 2011 Ms Stickler asked us to note
        she had not sought to argue simply that "may"  should  be  read  as
        "must" save in the context of her argument  that  "may"  authorised
        the  exercise  of  a  power  and   we   accordingly   record   that
        clarification of her argument].


    12.     She relied on the concession made on behalf of  the  respondent
        through her counsel, Mr Kovats, in the case of Limbu.  Although the
        concession was made in the context of para  29.4,  it  was  equally
        applicable, so she argued,  to  para  29.14.   The  respondent  had
        confirmed that para 29.4 provided a discretion to  Entry  Clearance
        Officers in the absence of the specified factors but that when  one
        or more of the identified factors existed entry clearance should be
        granted.  The policy in para 29.14 was framed in exactly  the  same
        way as  para  29.4:  both  used  the  phrase  "discretion   may  be
        exercised", confirmed that the respondent should consider a list of
        factors, provided that list and then stated that if one or more  of
        the factors were present the respondent may exercise discretion and
        grant entry clearance.  She argued that it would be irrational  and
        arbitrary to use exactly the same structure  and  wording  and  yet
        apply different interpretations. There was no need for Blake  J  to
        consider the correctness of the submission as it was  a  concession
        and so there was nothing left to consider.


    13.     She submitted that if the  policy  was  to  be  interpreted  as
        genuinely discretionary, this would lead to inconsistent  decision-
        making as one ECO might consider that the presence  of  one  factor
        triggered entry clearance whereas  another  could  decide  that  it
        should be refused despite that factor being present.  Those seeking
        settlement with  family  members  in  the  UK  needed  consistency,
        clarity, and fairness in their treatment.  She submitted  that  the
        determination in CT was  properly  distinguishable  as  the  policy
        wording being considered there  was  substantially  different,  the
        Tribunal focusing on the need for exceptional  circumstances.   She
        submitted that in UR the Tribunal had been wrong to rely simply  on
        the argument that the aim  behind  the  policy  was  to  avoid  the
        phenomenon of the "stranded  sibling"  whose  parents  and  younger
        siblings had all gone to the UK  leaving  him  alone  in  his  home
        country.   That  interpretation  was  not   consistent   with   the
        Parliamentary debates and press statements surrounding the  policy.
        The fact that there may be two siblings in Nepal did not change the
        fact that both of them would be separated from their family members
        in the UK: they would remain  stranded  dependants  as  much  as  a
        single stranded dependant. She argued that the comment in  UR  that
        the first bullet point was a condition precedent was  incorrect  as
        it was clear that a list of factors had  been  introduced  with  no
        intention of regarding the first factor as such a  condition.   She
        submitted that KG was wrongly decided and that the decisions of  IJ
        Connor  in  Gurung  (OA/08774/2007)   of   IJ   Craig   in   Gurung
        (OA/50741/2008) should be preferred.  In these cases decisions were
        substituted allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  policy
        created a presumption.


    The Submissions of Mr Jacobs


    14.     Mr Jacobs submitted that there was nothing in the policy in SET
         12 to prevent a  judge  from  directing  that  entry  clearance  is
         granted when the findings left open no other  outcome.   He  argued
         that  if  two  of  the  criteria  identified  in  the  policy  were
         established, the appellant was entitled to succeed.  The respondent
         could not reasonably submit that it was her intention to  split  up
         families of Gurkha servicemen in the light of the very  wording  of
         the policy. In light of the Military Covenant it was in the  public
         interest that members of the Gurkhas  and  their  dependent  family
         members should be treated properly.  He relied  on  the  concession
         made in Limbu that where one or more factors set out in  para  29.4
         were met; discretion should be exercised in the applicant's favour.
          That concession must rationally extend to the  identically  worded
         provisions of para 29.14.  The underlying rationale of  the  policy
         was predicated on a declaration of intent not  to  split  a  family
         unit solely because the dependant was 18 years or over.


    15.     He submitted that the judge was entitled to  allow  the  appeal
         where at least two of the bullet points were met and there were  no
         countervailing factors. If remitting the application  for  a  fresh
         decision would inevitably lead to the same  result,  there  was  no
         reason why the Tribunal should not allow the appeal.   He  referred
         to the comments of Beatson J in R (on the application of K) v  SSHD
         [2010] EWHC 3102 (Admin) that a policy  should  be  interpreted  in
         terms of what a reasonable and literate man would understand it  to
         mean.  The policy told Entry Clearance Officers  what  they  should
         consider and where there were no countervailing factors there could
         only be one answer, the appeal should be allowed.


    Parliamentary Statements


    16.     As we are dealing with  a  statement  of  executive  policy  we
         accept that the relevant ministerial and  Parliamentary  statements
         should  properly  be  taken  into  account  when  interpreting  its
         meaning: NF (Ghana) [2008] EWCA Civ 906.  On 14 September  2004  in
         response to a question from Ann Widdicombe, Mr Des Brown,  Minister
         of State (Citizenship, Immigration and Counter-Terrorism) said:


             "I am well aware of the high regard in which the  Gurkhas  are
             held in this country, and of the valued contribution that they
             make during their service with the British Armed Forces ...  I
             am sure that the legend of honour of the Gurkhas could  occupy
             the House for some time if we were to debate their heroism and
             service to British society and its armed forces.


             The government recognise the enormous  contribution  that  the
             Gurkhas have made, serving across  the  world  with  the  UK's
             armed forces.   I want to  take  this  opportunity  simply  to
             thank them for their bravery and their loyalty. Ministers  are
             sympathetic to concerns about their current situation,  which,
             as the Right Hon. Lady reminded us, has applied for  the  past
             50 years ...


             It is not by any stretch  of  the  imagination  as  simple  as
             identifying an apparent injustice and seeking to  resolve  it.
             As one would have expected, the review has identified  complex
             legal issues, on which complex legal advice is  being  sought.
             We need to be sure that we understand what impact  change  may
             have in relation, for example, to  ensuring  that  any  future
             policy is not discriminatory, and that the Gurkhas obtain  the
             best advantage from it.


             I see that I am running out of time.  Let me finally  reassure
             the House that the current review is being  conducted  in  the
             best interests of the Gurkhas.  ..."


    17.     We were also referred to the press release issued by  the  Home
         Office in 2004 cited by Blake J in Limbu explaining the reasons for
         the change in policy:


             "The Ghurkhas have  served  this  country  with  great  skill,
             courage and dignity during some of the most testing  times  in
             our history.  They have made an enormous contribution not just
             to our armed forces but to the life of this country, and it is
             important that their commitment and sacrifice is recognised."


         Blake J also referred to what the  Home  Secretary  David  Blunkett
         said:


             "Throughout their history, the men of the Gurkha Brigade  have
             shown unquestioning loyalty to the Queen and the people of the
             United Kingdom.  In battle they have distinguished  themselves
             as brave and  skilful  soldiers  in  all  conditions  and  all
             terrains.  Their thirteen Victoria Crosses and numerous  other
             bravery awards speak for themselves.  I am very keen to ensure
             that we recognise their role in the history of our country and
             the part they have played in protecting us.  This  is  why  we
             have  put  together  the  best  possible  package  to   enable
             discharged Gurkhas to apply for settlement and citizenship.  I
             hope that the  decision  I  have  made  today  will  make  our
             gratitude clear.  Those  high  military  standards  have  been
             mirrored in their demeanour in civilian life.  Their  families
             too have shown devotion and commitment  by  travelling  across
             continents to support the brigade."


         In Limbu Blake J also relied on the Military Covenant which states:


             "Soldiers will be called upon to make  personal  sacrifices  -
             including the ultimate sacrifice - in service of  the  nation.
             In putting the need of the nation and the  army  before  their
             own, they forego some of the rights enjoyed by  those  outside
             the armed forces.  In return, British soldiers must be able to
             always expect their treatment, to be valued and  respected  as
             individuals  and  that  they  (and  their  families)  will  be
             sustained and rewarded by commensurate terms and conditions of
             service."


    The Authorities


    18.     Neither party has sought to argue that the principles  set  out
         in  AG  (Kosovo)  were  incorrect  or  should  be  supplemented  or
         modified.   The  argument  between  the  parties  is  whether   the
         appellants are able to bring themselves within the unusual category
         of case identified in  para  50  of  the  determination  where  the
         Tribunal following a finding that the respondent's decision is  not
         in accordance with the law can make a substantive decision  in  the
         appellant's favour.  Before setting out its findings on that issue,
         the Tribunal (Mr CMG Ockelton DP, SIJ King, SIJ Grubb)  set  out  a
         number of principles in its analysis of the issues arising  when  a
         policy outside the Rules has to be taken into consideration  in  an
         appeal which, as in the present appeals, also raises  human  rights
         issues. These are set out in paras 27-32 of the  determination  and
         in so far as they are relevant to the present appeals  can  briefly
         be summarised as follows: A claim based on human rights even if  it
         depends on the assessment of proportionality is different in nature
         from one based on  an  assertion  that  an  appellant  should  have
         benefited from the exercise of discretion  within  a  policy.   The
         assessment of proportionality is a matter for the Tribunal  but  it
         does not follow that the exercise of a discretion within  a  policy
         is also a matter for the Tribunal in a case where an appellant  has
         not shown that a decision adverse to him is incompatible  with  his
         Convention rights.  The Tribunal is a creature of statute and  only
         has the powers given to it by statute.  There  are  some  areas  of
         discretionary judgment where an appellant's search for a beneficial
         outcome is not an assertion  of  his  human  rights.  Human  rights
         claims should be assessed in priority to claims based on  the  hope
         of a favourable exercise of discretion.   Within  the  category  of
         rights, issues relating to the assessment of proportionality  ought
         to yield priority to specific provisions of national law.


    19.     The Tribunal  then  considered  a  submission  that  where  the
        respondent had published a policy incorporating a discretion  which
        might be exercised in favour of a  person  who  did  not  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules, the Tribunal was not  merely
        to decide whether the respondent had acted in accordance  with  the
        law but was to go on to make the discretionary decision for itself.
         It rejected this argument explaining why the observations made  by
        the Court of Appeal in  Baig  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1246  and
        Tozlukaya v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 379 did not support such  a  broad
        proposition.  In paragraph 43 of  its  determination  it  concluded
        that the Tribunal was not bound or entitled to consider  or  review
        the exercise of a discretion outside the Immigration Rules as  both
        principle and statute were against it.  But when assessing  article
        8 the Tribunal was bound to consider whether a particular  decision
        was proportionate and in doing so  should  take  into  account  any
        declared policy that incorporated a  presumption  that  immigration
        control would not be enforced against persons of  a  category  into
        which an appellant fell.  The reason for taking such a policy  into
        account was that it threw light on the need for immigration control
        and so helped to assess the proportionality of the  decision.   The
        Tribunal then said in para 44:


             "If the claimant does not establish (whether by reference to a
             policy or otherwise) that his Convention rights  prohibit  his
             removal, then the Secretary of State has (whether by reference
             to a policy or otherwise) a discretion to allow him  to  stay:
             but, because of s.86(6), the exercise of  that  discretion  is
             not reviewable by the Tribunal.  Where, however, the Secretary
             of State has declared a policy in relation to a category  into
             which the claimant falls, a decision that on its face fails to
             apply the policy may found a successful appeal on  the  ground
             that the decision 'was not in accordance with  the  law'.   In
             such a case (subject to an  observation  we  make  below)  the
             effect of allowing the  appeal  would  not  be  to  grant  the
             appellant the substantive relief he seeks but  merely  to  set
             aside the unlawful decision so that a lawful decision (whether
             in favour or against the  appellant)  may  in  due  course  be
             made."


    20.     The Tribunal's further observations on these issues are set out
        in paras 48-51 and they need to be set out in full:


             "48. Our second additional point is in relation to cases  where
             the policy does not incorporate a discretion, or where  on  the
             facts of the case  there  is  no  proper  opportunity,  by  the
             application of the policy, to make a decision  unfavourable  to
             the claimant.  This is not the usual position.   In  SS  [2005]
             UKAIT 00167 the Tribunal said this:


               "30.    ... .   Most  published  policies  are  not  in  the
               absolute terms of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Most  policies
               contain words like 'normally'.  Many policies do not declare
               that a particular relief will be granted:  they provide that
               the Secretary of State will consider whether it  should  be.
               A claimant who has not obtained the substantive  grant  that
               he seeks can succeed on the policy only if he shows that the
               policy itself was not (or was not properly) applied.  If the
               policy says that the Secretary of State 'will consider'  his
               case on certain terms, he cannot succeed unless he can  show
               that the Secretary of State did not  consider  his  case  on
               those  terms.   If  the  policy  says  that  something  will
               'normally'  be  granted,  he  is  likely  to  be   in   some
               difficulties  if  the  Secretary  of  State  refers  to  any
               consideration that shows that the case is less than normal.


               31.     In any event, unless  the  policy  is  expressed  in
               terms that are absolute or have to be regarded  as  absolute
               in the individual  facts  of  the  case,  the  effect  of  a
               successful appeal will be merely that the decision is  found
               to have been an unlawful one, so that there  is  outstanding
               an application before the Secretary of State.  ... ."


             49.  That decision, however, clearly  envisages  that  where  a
             policy is expressed  in  absolute  terms,  a  claimant  may  be
             entitled to succeed substantively.  IA [2006] UKAIT  00082  was
             such a case.  The one reason given by the  Secretary  of  State
             for refusing to  apply  a  policy  that  would  otherwise  have
             operated  in  favour  of  the  appellant  was  found   by   the
             Immigration  Judge  to  be  factually  wrong.   For  procedural
             reasons the Tribunal was content, on reconsideration, to affirm
             the Immigration Judge's decision to allow the appeal  on  human
             rights grounds; but it did so only after saying  that,  in  the
             circumstances of the case, it  would  have  been  difficult  to
             criticise him if he had allowed the appeal on the ground  that,
             given the facts, the reason for the decision and the  terms  of
             the policy, an adverse decision was not "in accordance with the
             law".


             50.  For ourselves we have little doubt that - contrary to  the
             submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State  before  us  -
             there are cases in which a finding that a decision is  "not  in
             accordance with the law" on the ground of failure  to  apply  a
             policy should lead to a substantive decision in the  claimant's
             favour, with a direction that leave be granted.  There will  be
             no need to base  such  a  decision  on  human  rights  grounds,
             because it is demanded by the more detailed provisions  of  the
             2002 Act.  But the cases in question  are  unusual.   They  are
             those in which (1) the claimant proves the precise terms of the
             policy, which (2) creates a presumption, on the  facts  of  his
             case, in favour of granting leave,  and  (3)  there  is  either
             nothing at all to displace the presumption,  or  nothing  that,
             under the terms of the policy, falls for consideration.  If all
             those factors apply to the case, the appeal should be  allowed,
             with a direction as indicated.


             51.  If (2) or (3) do not apply, and if the Secretary of  State
             has not yet considered  the  claim  within  the  terms  of  his
             policy, the appeal should be allowed with a direction  that  he
             do so.  But if the appellant fails to establish the terms of  a
             policy, or if the  Secretary  of  State  has  already  properly
             considered the claim within the terms of any applicable policy,
             then (given that none of  these  considerations  apply  at  all
             unless the appellant's removal would not breach his  Convention
             rights) the appeal should be dismissed."


    21.     The polices  we  are  considering  in  this  appeal  have  been
        considered in a number of  previous  determinations.   In  CT,  the
        Tribunal considered a similarly worded policy although qualified by
        a requirement of exceptional circumstances.   It  was  argued  that
        where an individual fell within  one  or  more  of  the  categories
        identified in the bullet points there was an expectation  that  the
        discretion would be exercised in his or her  favour  in  accordance
        with the principles set out in para 50 of AG.  The Tribunal (Mr CMG
        Ockelton  VP  and  SIJ  Grubb)  rejected  this  submission  in  the
        following terms:


             "17.      We are unable to see that the  terms  of  para  13.2
                  begin to fulfil the  criteria  there  set  out.  The  IDIs
                  simply do not indicate any presumption that leave will  be
                  granted to adult children.  They indicate merely  that  it
                  may be granted in exceptional circumstances, following the
                  consideration of criteria including  those  set  out.   We
                  therefore reject Mr Howell's [counsel for  the  appellant]
                  submission that this was a case in which  the  immigration
                  judge should have allowed the appeal on the basis that the
                  Secretary of State's guidance required a decision  in  the
                  appellant's favour."


    22.     The policy as currently  worded  has  been  considered  by  the
        Tribunal in UR. The  immigration  judge  had  allowed  the  appeals
        following a finding that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
        accordance with the law. On appeal the Tribunal  (Owen  J  and  SIJ
        McKee) said:


              "12.  In seeking leave to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
             respondent made no complaint  about  the  judge's  findings  of
             fact.  What  was  sought  was  simply  the  deletion  from  the
             determination of the direction for  entry  clearance,  and  its
             substitution with a direction that the Entry Clearance  Officer
             consider his policy in the light of the facts as found.  Before
             us, detailed and  persuasive  submissions  were  made  by  both
             representatives  on  the  question  whether,  given  that   the
             appellants remain dependent upon their sponsor  in  the  United
             Kingdom, who has  been  joined  by  their  mother  and  younger
             sibling, the policy should be regarded as 'absolute', such that
             no  other  outcome  is  rationally  possible  but  that   entry
             clearance for settlement be granted.


             13.  The representatives will, we trust, forgive us  if  we  do
             not set out their arguments in extenso here.   It  simply  does
             not seem to us that, on the facts of the present  appeals,  the
             policy is 'absolute'.  It does indeed, as the judge below said,
             evince an intention "not  to  split  a  family  solely  on  the
             grounds of the majority of  one  family  member."   The  desire
             appears  to  be  to  avoid  the  phenomenon  of  the  'stranded
             sibling', whose parents and younger siblings have all  gone  to
             the United Kingdom, leaving him alone in his own country.  That
             is somewhat different  from  several  overage  siblings  living
             together in their own country, as is the case here.  The fourth
             bullet point of SET 12.16 reinforces the impression  that  what
             might prompt the  favourable  exercise  of  discretion  is  the
             prospect of the applicant "living alone outside the UK."


             14.  We observed above that the first bullet point is listed as
             a free-standing factor,  although  it  is  really  a  condition
             precedent for any application to join a sponsor who is  settled
             here under the HM Forces rule, whether  the  application  falls
             for consideration within or outwith the Immigration Rules.   As
             such, it is actually irrelevant to the exercise of  discretion.
             The other  factors  listed  under  SET  12.16  clearly  do  add
             something to the basic requirement that  the  applicant  should
             have  a  settled  sponsor.   An   applicant   who   meets   the
             requirements of the first bullet point, but none of the others,
             should not expect the discretion to be exercised in his favour,
             without more.  Although the express wording of SET 12.16  might
             suggest otherwise,  we  remind  ourselves  of  the  distinction
             between rules and policies  made  by  Lord  Justice  Sedley  in
             Pankina [2010] EWCA Civ 719.  The Immigration Rules  have  been
             "elevated to a status akin to that  of  law"  and  so  must  be
             construed  more  strictly  than  was  the  case  in  the  past.
             Policies, on the other hand, are meant to be applied  flexibly,
             and to allow  the  sensible  exercise  of  discretion.    Their
             wording does not have to be construed with all  the  strictness
             of a statute.


             15.  What all this boils down to is that this  is  not  one  of
             those rare cases where, on its  facts,  no  rational  decision-
             maker could fail to exercise his  discretion  favourably  under
             the relevant policy.  There is even some confusion as  to  what
             the relevant policy actually is.  The treatment  of  dependants
             over the age of 18 at Chapter 15 of the IDIs is very brief, and
             simply insists upon exceptional circumstances.  SET 12.16 deals
             with dependants over the age of 18 in  much  more  detail,  and
             does not use the term 'exceptional circumstances', although  it
             may be that the factors listed in SET  12.16  are  intended  to
             encompass 'exceptional circumstances'.   It  follows  that  the
             appropriate course is to remit these appeals to the ECO in  New
             Delhi for him to apply the policy  SET  12.16,  in  conjunction
             with Chapter 15 of the IDIs and in the light of  the  facts  as
             found.


    23.     The issue was again considered in KG where  the  Tribunal  (SIJ
        McKee) again set aside a decision by an immigration judge  allowing
        an appeal following a finding that the respondent's decision  under
        the policy was not in accordance with the law.  SIJ McKee  set  out
        his reasons for finding that the judge erred in law by taking  this
        course as follows:


             "8.  The first ground was, on the other hand, the focus of very
             lucid and persuasive submissions when the appeal came before me
             today.  I shall not set out those submissions in  extenso,  but
             shall refer to them in giving my reasons  for  concluding  that
             the policy contained in Chapter 29.14 of the Diplomatic Service
             Procedures/Entry  Clearance   Guidance   (and   more   recently
             appearing in the document SET 12) is not of such a kind that an
             immigration judge can allow an appeal  outright  if  he  thinks
             that the appellant  comes  within  the  terms  of  the  policy.
             Bullet points being a feature  of  this  particular  policy,  I
             shall give my reasons also in bullet point form.


           . Mr Howells sets great store by the fulsome praise bestowed upon
             the Gurkhas by both the Prime Minister and the  Home  Secretary
             when, in 2004, a new policy was announced  which  would  permit
             settlement in the United Kingdom by Gurkhas discharged from the
             British Army after the handover of Hong Kong to China, provided
             that they had served for at least four years in the Brigade  of
             Gurkhas and that they had been discharged  not  more  than  two
             years before the  date  of  their  application  for  indefinite
             leave.  This policy entered the Immigration Rules on 25 October
             2004 as paragraphs 276E-K of HC 395.  It does not,  of  course,
             provide for the admission of Gurkhas who left the British  Army
             before 1 July 1997, and the sponsor in the  instant  case  left
             the Army in 1984.  Mr Howells contends that the  acknowledgment
             by the holders of two of the Great Offices of State  that  this
             country owes the Gurkhas a  great  debt  of  gratitude  somehow
             invests the policy catering for Gurkhas who  fall  outside  the
             Immigration Rules, and their family members,  with  a  peculiar
             status,  requiring  its  terms  to  be  applied   broadly   and
             generously.  I do not think, however, that Chapter  29  of  the
             DSPs can be distinguished in this way from other policies.
           . Mr Howells prays in aid the concession made on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State in Limbu,  when  Steven  Kovats  of  counsel
             suggested a  way  of  exercising  the  discretion  embodied  by
             Chapter 29.4,  dealing  with  Gurkhas  who  did  not  meet  the
             requirements of paragraphs 276E-K of HC 395.  If one or more of
             the factors listed at the four bullet points were present, then
             the guidance that "ECOs may exercise discretion and grant entry
             clearance"  ought  to  be  read  as   "ECOs   should   exercise
             discretion."  In the same way, says Mr Howells,  the  identical
             phrase at Chapter 29.14 ~ "If one or more of the factors listed
             above are present, the ECO may exercise  discretion  and  grant
             entry clearance"  ~  ought  to  be  read  with  'should'  being
             substituted for 'may'.  That cannot,  in  my  view,  be  right.
             Chapter 29.14 was wholly outside the purview of the Limbu case,
             which was only concerned with the  admission  of  Gurkhas,  not
             with the  admission  of  the  overage  dependants  of  Gurkhas.
             Besides, Chapter 29.14 concerns  not  just  the  dependants  of
             Gurkhas, but the dependants of other foreign  and  Commonwealth
             nationals who were members of HM Forces.
           . There is a stronger reason for  not  construing  the  terms  of
             Chapter 29.14 as if they were contained in a statute or,  given
             the elevation of the Immigration Rules -  as  held  in  Pankina
             [2010] EWCA Civ 719 - into quasi-law, in an  immigration  rule.
             Policies are, by  their  nature,  intended  to  be  implemented
             flexibly and sensibly.  They may well be drafted  more  loosely
             that a rule or statute.  That is certainly the case here.   The
             first of the five bullet points requires the applicant to  have
             a parent or a relative settled, or  about  to  become  settled,
             here under the HM Forces rule (i.e.  paragraphs  276E-Q  of  HC
             395, covering both Gurkhas and other foreign  and  Commonwealth
             nationals who have been discharged from HM forces). But that is
             also required by the minor children of  former  members  of  HM
             Forces, who have  an  entitlement  to  indefinite  leave  under
             paragraphs 276X-Z of HC 395.  If the policy  were  to  be  read
             literally,  and  if  its  terms  were  mandatory,  then   entry
             clearance for settlement would have to be  granted  to  overage
             dependants, since having a parent settled under the  HM  Forces
             rule is one of the five factors listed in the policy, and  only
             one of the  factors  need  be  present  for  discretion  to  be
             exercised.   That  would  eliminate  any  distinction   between
             overage and minor children, and render the  other  four  bullet
             points otiose.  Indeed, the policy is not confined  to  overage
             children but embraces any relative over 18 of a former soldier.
              It would be astonishing if the policy envisaged the  admission
             of all dependent relatives.  The first bullet  point  does  not
             even require dependency.
           . A further example of how the policy is not to be construed with
             all the strictness of a statute  comes  at  the  fourth  bullet
             point.  Mr Parkinson is, I think, right when he says  that  the
             wording  "refusal  of  the  application  would  mean  that  the
             appellant would be living alone outside  the  UK"  envisages  a
             situation where the ex-soldier has obtained settlement  in  the
             UK and is calling his wife and children to join  him.   One  of
             those children is over 18, and if the rest of the family depart
             for the UK, he will be left behind  as  a  'stranded  sibling'.
             That is the kind of scenario which the fourth bullet  point  is
             intended to avoid, says Mr Parkinson.  It is  not  intended  to
             facilitate the admission of a middle-aged  child  who  has  not
             lived with his parents  for  many  years.   But  on  a  literal
             reading, a child of any age  would  have  to  be  admitted,  if
             living alone and financially dependent.
           . There is a problem with the interpretation of  "living  alone".
             Mr Howells cites KC & ors [2007] EWCA Civ  327  as  an  aid  to
             construction, but in that case the court  was  looking  at  the
             phrase as it occurs in paragraph 317(i)(e) of  the  Immigration
             Rules, and could not see what it  added  to  the  already  high
             hurdle of "the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances."
             The court did not in fact venture to define what "living alone"
             meant, but thought that a mother who would have the support and
             companionship of two  teenage  children  (the  scenario  in  KC
             itself) could not be  described  as  'living  alone'.   In  the
             instant case, the appellant is living at  her  father's  house,
             which she shares with her uncle and his children.  She  is  not
             without support and companionship from them.


    24.     SIJ McKee went on to remake  the  decision  not  purporting  to
        exercise the discretion under the policy but by considering whether
        the decision refusing entry clearance would be in breach of Article
        8.  He found that it would be and in particular he took the  policy
        into account in the context of a consideration of the weight to  be
        given  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  firm  and   fair
        immigration control saying on this issue:


             "15...    but  in  coming  to  the  proportionality   balancing
             exercise required by the  fifth  question,  I  think  that  the
             public  interest  in  maintaining  firm  and  fair  immigration
             control is not as strong as usual.


             16.  There are two reasons for this.  First, the existence of a
             policy outside  the  Rules,  providing  for  the  admission  of
             overage relatives of former  soldiers  on  much  more  generous
             terms than paragraph 317 of the Rules, makes the  exclusion  of
             this overage relative harder  to  justify,  especially  as  she
             appears to meet criteria in the policy which  would  attract  a
             favourable exercise of discretion.  Secondly,  if  Gurkhas  had
             not had to wait until 2004 before becoming able  to  settle  in
             the United  Kingdom,  it  would  have  been  possible  for  the
             appellant to come to this country while she was still a  minor.
             This may not  be  an  'historical  wrong'  as  severe  as  that
             perpetrated upon female British Overseas citizens, which played
             a part in the Article  8  balancing  exercise  conducted  by  a
             Presidential  panel  of  the  Tribunal  in  NH  (female   BOCs,
             exceptionality, Art 8, para 317) India  [2006]  UKAIT  85,  and
             subsequently approved in NH (India) [2007] EWCA Civ 1330.   But
             it was acknowledged by same Home Secretary  that  it  had  been
             wrong to prevent Gurkhas from settling here with their families
             in the past.  Mr Howells handed  up  the  case  of  JB  (India)
             [2009]  EWCA  Civ  234,  in   which   Lord   Justice   Sullivan
             acknowledges that "where there is an interference  with  family
             life sufficient to engage Article 8(1),  recognition  that  the
             family has been the victim of a 'historic injustice'  may  well
             be  relevant,  in  some  cases  highly   relevant,   when   the
             proportionality of the interference is considered under Article
             8(2)."  In the present case, the long overdue recognition  that
             Gurkhas should have had their service to this country  rewarded
             by being allowed to settle here does reduce the  weight  to  be
             put into the public interest side of the balance, even  if  not
             by very much.  But the upshot is that  the  Article  8  balance
             comes down in the present case on the side of the appellant and
             her family in this country.


    25.     We were referred to two Upper Tribunal determinations in  which
        it was held that an immigration judge  has  not  erred  in  law  by
        substituting a decision allowing an appeal following a finding that
        the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law.   In
        Gurung  (OA/08774/2007)  the  Tribunal  relied  primarily  on   the
        concession said to be made  by  Mr  Kovats  in  Limbu.   In  Gurung
        (OA/50741/2008) the Tribunal took a similar view, again relying  on
        what had been said in Limbu but in this case the  appeal  was  also
        allowed on Article 8 grounds.


    Conclusions


    26.     We now set out our conclusions on the  issue  of  whether  when
        there is a finding that a decision under para 29.14 or  SET  12  is
        not in accordance with the law, the proper course is to direct  the
        grant of  entry  clearance  or  to  remit  the  appeal  for  lawful
        decision.  We accept that when construing this policy  its  wording
        does not have to be construed with the strictness of a statute  and
        that policies are meant to be applied flexibly.  We agree with  and
        adopt the guidance given by the Tribunal in para 14 of UR as to the
        approach to construing the meaning of a policy.  This  approach  is
        consistent with the guidance of Beatson J in K where he held that a
        policy was to be interpreted in terms  of  what  a  reasonable  and
        literate man would understand it to mean.


    27.     We are satisfied from the wording of the policy  that  it  sets
        out a true discretion to be exercised  outside  the  Rules  by  the
        respondent and cannot reasonably be interpreted as  setting  out  a
        number of different requirements where the  fulfilment  of  one  or
        more leads to an entitlement to a grant of  entry  clearance.   The
        wording of the policy itself is inconsistent with a finding that an
        applicant need only fulfil one or perhaps two of the bullet  points
        to qualify without more for entry clearance.  The policy says  that
        applications for settlement from dependants who are 18 years of age
        or over will be considered and the discretion to  grant  settlement
        outside the rules may be exercised in individual cases.  The bullet
        points  are  preceded  by  the  following:  "In  assessing  whether
        settlement in the UK is appropriate the  ECO  should  consider  the
        following factors".  The paragraph ends by saying if one or more of
        the  factors  listed  above  are  present,  the  ECO  may  exercise
        discretion and grant entry clearance for settlement in the  UK.  In
        our judgment it is impossible to read this  policy  as  creating  a
        presumption of the kind referred to within para  50  of  AG  or  as
        requiring the grant of entry clearance if one or more of the bullet
        points are met and we do not think that a  reasonable  or  literate
        man could read it in such a way.


    28.     In UR the Tribunal described  the  first  bullet  point  as  in
        effect a condition precedent. The point being made by  the  use  of
        this phraseology was that bullet point 1 will apply in  respect  of
        any applicant as a dependant will inevitably be seeking to  join  a
        parent or relative  present  and  settled  or  being  admitted  for
        settlement in the UK.  This bullet point cannot  be  a  stand-alone
        requirement  permitting  settlement.   The  other   bullet   points
        potentially cover a spectrum of factual  circumstances.   The  fact
        that an appellant has previously been granted leave  within  bullet
        point 2 as a dependant of a member of HM  Forces  leaves  open  the
        question of when the leave was granted and for how long.  Similarly
        bullet point 3 leaves open when the  full-time  course  of  studies
        was.  Bullet points 4 and 5 raise factual issues which are  broadly
        stated and will inevitably be case specific.


    29.     We are satisfied that the clear wording of  para  29.14  is  to
        create a broad discretion to be  exercised  in  the  light  of  the
        individual facts and circumstances of each case taking into account
        but not limited to the identified bullet points.   These  serve  to
        identify some factors which may be relevant  whilst  not  excluding
        other factors which may depending on  the  facts  of  the  case  be
        equally relevant.


    30.     We are satisfied that no particular significance is to be given
        to the opening sentence  of  the  paragraph  that  it  is  not  the
        intention to split a family unit solely because a dependant  is  18
        years of age or over.  The policy must be read  as  a  whole.   The
        rest of the paragraph gives  substance  to  the  intention  stated.
        This  interpretation  of  the  policy  is   consistent   with   the
        Parliamentary and ministerial statements which have been  made  and
        with the Military Covenant as this policy sets out  an  exceptional
        course outside the Rules being taken in respect of adult dependants
        of former members of HM Forces.


    31.     The appellants have sought to rely on the  concession  made  in
        Limbu. We are not satisfied that Mr  Kovats' comments were or  were
        intended to be a formal concession as to how the policy  should  be
        operated and in any event what was said must be looked  at  in  the
        context in which it was made.   The  issues  being  addressed  were
        different and related to para 29.4 where  the  specific  issue  was
        whether there was a requirement  to  fulfil  one  or  more  of  the
        specified examples.   The  submission  as  recorded  in  Blake  J's
        judgment is that:


         "(iv) The policy is a genuine discretionary one not trammelled by a
             mandatory requirement to fulfil one or more of  the  specified
             examples, whatever the  individual's  decision  rejecting  the
             claims might at first blush have indicated.   The  essence  of
             the policy is whether 'there are strong reasons why settlement
             in the UK is appropriate'.  This is a judgment formed  by  the
             individual ECO using the factors as a guide.  If one  or  more
             of  the  identified  factors  existed  discretion  should   be
             exercised favourably, but it could be so  exercised  if  other
             unspecified conditions led to the same conclusion."


    32.     The submission makes no reference to and does  not  purport  to
        address what approach should be taken if there  are  countervailing
        factors such as a criminal record or other features falling  within
        Part 9 of the Immigration Rules.   Further,  the  wording  of  this
        submission must be read as whole.  The final sentence including the
        purported concession that "discretion should be exercised" must  be
        read in the light of the preceding sentences and in particular "the
        policy is a genuine discretionary one not trammelled by a mandatory
        requirement to fulfil one or more of the  specified  examples"  and
        "this is a judgment formed by the individual ECO using the  factors
        as a guide".  There is no justification  for  treating  Mr  Kovat's
        submissions  as  a  formal,  binding  concession  as  to  how   the
        respondent's discretion will be exercised. If  that  had  been  the
        intention, it would doubtless have  been  done  with  much  greater
        clarity and certainty.


    33.     We do not accept that the policy is legally  uncertain  or  not
        sufficiently transparent.  A  balance  has  to  be  struck  between
        flexibility and uncertainty and the need  to  do  justice  in  each
        individual case.  The exercise of  discretion  will  inevitably  be
        fact specific and depend on the particular  circumstances  of  each
        applicant.  For these  reasons  we  reject  the  argument  that  an
        appellant is entitled to a grant of leave if he is able to meet one
        or more of the bullet points set out in the policy.  We agree  with
        the decisions and the reasoning in CT UB and AG and find  that  the
        decisions in Gurung & Gurung are not to be followed on this issue.


    34.     When there is a finding that a decision made under a policy was
        not in accordance with the law the proper course is for the  appeal
        to be allowed to the extent that the application is remitted to the
        respondent for a lawful decision.   However, there  will  be  cases
        albeit falling in a narrow category where even though  there  is  a
        discretion within the policy an appeal can be allowed where on  the
        facts of the case it  would  not  be  open  to  the  respondent  in
        applying  the  policy  to  make  a  decision  unfavourable  to  the
        appellant.  We agree with the determination in AG (Kosovo) in paras
        48-50.  To take any other course would be to exercise a  discretion
        outside the Rules: a jurisdiction  the  Tribunal  simply  does  not
        have.


    35.     A witness statement of David Enright, a solicitor at Howe & Co,
        dated 12 April 2011 was put in evidence before us.  This  statement
        sets out two examples of the way in which immigration  applications
        of Gurkha dependent children have been dealt with by  UKBA  and  in
        substance complains about extensive delays in dealing with them and
        in particular where further decisions have had to be made following
        successful applications for judicial review or a successful  appeal
        where the decision was shown not to be in accordance with the  law.
        However, these concerns do not relate directly to the issues  being
        dealt with at this stage. As we have already indicated, it  is  not
        for the Tribunal to substitute its own decision or exercise its own
        discretion under a policy falling outside the Rules but there  will
        normally be  jurisdiction  to  consider  an  appeal  on  article  8
        grounds.  This was the course taken by the Tribunal in  KG  and  we
        note that in UR article 8 was not dealt with as a full case had not
        been put together on that ground (para 18).  We have not yet  heard
        full submissions on the issues arising in the article 8 appeals and
        make no further comment on these matters save to draw the  parties'
        attention to paras 27-32 of the determination in AG (Kosovo).

Summary of the Facts in the Appeals

First Appeal

4.    The first appellant is a citizen of Nepal born  on  18  November  1981
    and the second appellant his sister, also a citizen of Nepal, born on 5
    October 1983.  On 28 March 2007 they and their sister applied for entry
    clearance to join their  parents  in  the  UK,  who  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to enter based on their father's service as  a  Gurkha
    soldier with the British Army.  Their applications were  refused  under
    the provisions of paras 276X and 317 of the Rules as the respondent was
    not satisfied that they were under the age of 18, living alone  outside
    the UK in the  most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances,  mainly
    dependent financially on a relative settled in the UK or that they were
    not leading an independent life.  They appealed against  this  decision
    on 8 June 2007.  Their applications were reviewed in the light of  the
    respondent's policy in relation to applications by adult dependants but
    on 3 May 2010 the respondent maintained his decision.

5.    Their appeals were heard on 25 June 2010.  An appeal by  their  sister
    (OA/27775/2007) was withdrawn as a result of her changed  circumstances
    in Nepal following her marriage. The judge found  that  the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules but the appeal was allowed
    on the basis that the policy set out in Chapter 29 of the DSP created a
    presumption in favour of a grant within the meaning of para  50  of  AG
    (Policy; the executive discretion;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo  [2008]
    UKAIT 0082.  On 17 August 2010 permission to appeal was granted to  the
    respondent on the basis that the judge may have made an error in law by
    failing to give adequate reasons for his findings on material  matters.




Second Appeal

6.    The appellant is a citizen of Nepal  born  on  14  January  1979.   He
    applied for entry clearance on 8 March  2007  to  join  his  father,  a
    former Gurkha soldier, in the UK.  The appeal  was  refused  under  the
    Rules and the decision was maintained following a review on 4  February
    2010.  The judge found the appellant could not meet the requirements of
    the Rules or the relevant policy as he could not show that at the  date
    of decision one or both of his parents were present and settled in  the
    UK.  The appeal was also dismissed on  article  8  grounds.  The  judge
    could not be satisfied that  the  appellant  had  real,  effective  and
    existing family life with a family member settled in the UK as  neither
    of his parents was settled in the UK at the date of  decision.   On  19
    July 2010 the appellant was granted permission to appeal on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge had erred in law both in respect of
    the application of the policy and in his assessment of article 8.

Third Appeal

7.    The appellants are brothers born on 9 February 1987 and 14 April 1990
    respectively.  They applied for entry clearance on 23 September 2009 to
    join their father, a  former  Gurkha  soldier,  who  had  been  granted
    settlement on 6 July 2009.  Their applications were refused  under  the
    Rules and under the policy.  The judge dismissed the appeals under  the
    Rules but  found  that  the  decision  under  the  policy  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  He said that whilst  the  appropriate  course
    would normally be for the appeal to be allowed with  a  direction  that
    the respondent should consider the matter again under  the  policy,  in
    the light of the facts as he found them that was  not  the  appropriate
    outcome and the appeals should  succeed  on  article  8  grounds.   The
    respondent was granted permission to appeal.

Fourth Appeal

8.    The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born  on  10  January  1986.   She
    applied for entry clearance (the date of application is not clear  from
    the application form) to join her father in the UK.   However,  it  was
    refused on 8 April 2010.  The judge found that the respondent  had  not
    applied the policy correctly and that the appellant was entitled  to  a
    substantive decision on the merits in her favour rather than  merely  a
    remittal to apply the correct policy.  He went on to  consider  in  the
    alternative article 8 and found that the appeal should also be  allowed
    on that ground.  Permission to appeal was granted on 18  November  2010
    to the respondent on the basis that it was arguable that  the  decision
    under the policy should have been sent back to the respondent  for  him
    to exercise the relevant discretion rather than the judge doing so  for
    himself.




Further Submissions

First Appeal

9.    Mr Blundell submitted that not only had the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    allowing the appeal under the  policy  but  also  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for his finding that the appellants  were  financially
    dependent on their sponsor.  He argued that the documents submitted  in
    support of the application all post-dated the date of  decision.   This
    issue had been specifically  identified  at  para  3.7  of  the  review
    decision and the judge had failed to  deal  with  this  aspect  of  the
    evidence.  He had also failed to engage with s.85 of the  2002  Act  by
    not considering the position as at the date of decision.  The judge had
    also erred, so he argued, by not dealing adequately  with  whether  the
    appellants could properly be described as living alone, the  respondent
    having found that they had extended family members in Nepal they  could
    turn to for financial support.  He argued that the  proper  course  was
    for the appeal to be sent back for the decision to be  re-made  by  the
    respondent in accordance with the policy.

10.   Ms Stickler submitted that there was no reason to  believe  the  judge
    had failed to deal with the evidence as a  whole.   He  had  found  the
    sponsor to be a truthful witness and it  was  clear  from  his  written
    statement, at page 19 of the bundle  of  documents  and  in  particular
    paras 5, 6, 8 and  12,  that  his  evidence  was  that  he  had  always
    maintained the appellants.  The judge was entitled to  find  that  they
    were living alone outside the UK within the meaning of the policy.  The
    judge had not dealt with article 8 in the light of his  decision  under
    the policy but it was open to the Tribunal to do so in  line  with  the
    approach taken by the Tribunal in KG.  She  submitted  that  there  was
    clear evidence of family life and referred to the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in Kugathas v IAT  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  as  considered  and
    applied in JB (India) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] EWCA Civ 234, RP
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ
    825 and Secretary of State for the Home Department v HK (Turkey) [2010]
    EWCA Civ 583 and by the Upper Tribunal in RG v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKUT 273.

11.    She  argued  that  the  appellants  had  always   remained   entirely
    financially dependent on their father and they had not left his  family
    unit to form  their  own  families  having  remained  living  in  their
    parents' home.  They had made  applications  promptly  in  anticipation
    that their family life would continue in  the  UK  and  had  maintained
    strong mutual links with their parents.  She argued that the legitimate
    aims within article 8(2)  should  not  be  interpreted  narrowly.   The
    assessment of proportionality should take  into  account  the  historic
    injustice to Gurkhas and their families which had been rectified by the
    UK Government in 2004 and again after the successful challenge  to  the
    respondent's policy in 2008.  She argued that the approach taken by SIJ
    McKee in KG should be followed.

12.   In reply Mr Blundell submitted that  issues  of  financial  dependency
    only took matters so far under article 8  and  were  not  determinative
    particularly in circumstances where the appellants were aged 24 and  26
    at the date of decision.  He argued that something more was  needed  to
    demonstrate that article 8 was engaged.   There  was  little,  if  any,
    evidence  about  continuing  emotional  support  from  the  appellants'
    parents.   He  submitted  that  immigration   control   justified   any
    interference and argued that any question of historical wrong had  been
    put right by the current  policy  which  put  the  children  of  Gurkha
    soldiers in a stronger position than other  dependent  adult  children.
    He argued that the Tribunal in KG had overlooked the provisions of para
    45 of AG (Kosovo) and had failed to examine article  8  as  a  distinct
    ground of appeal which should be considered without reference to policy
    considerations.

Second Appeal

13.   Ms Stickler submitted that the judge had applied the wrong policy  and
    had erred in law in this respect.  She also argued  that  he  had  been
    wrong to find that  article  8  was  not  engaged  simply  because  the
    appellant's parents were not present and settled in the UK at the  date
    of decision.  This was merely one factor to be taken into  account  and
    was not determinative.  She argued that the decision should be  re-made
    by the Tribunal  on  article  8  grounds  and  relied  on  the  witness
    statement submitted in evidence before  the  judge.   She  argued  that
    there was sufficient evidence to find that the appellant was  dependent
    on the sponsor, that article 8 was engaged  and  that  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance was disproportionate to a legitimate aim.

14.   Mr  Blundell  accepted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of the policy and that  those  errors  had  affected  his
    decision on article 8.  He argued that the decision should be set aside
    as a whole.  The evidence before the judge did not adequately cover the
    issues arising  on  dependency  and  whether  there  was  family  life.
    Evidence had been produced which did not relate to the date of decision
    and there was no evidence about any emotional ties.  He submitted  that
    the proper course was for both the appeal in relation to the policy and
    article 8 to be sent back to the respondent for decision.  In reply  Ms
    Stickler indicated that if the Tribunal took the view  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence for a decision properly to be made under  article
    8, she would have no objection to it being sent back to the respondent.

Third Appeal

15.   Mr Blundell argued that the judge erred in  law  by  not  sending  the
    article 8 appeal back to the respondent for decision so that  it  could
    be decided as the same time as  the  decision  was  re-made  under  the
    policy.  He also argued that the judge had  further  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider whether  the  appellants'  dependency  was  one  of
    necessity.  Although this was not specifically set out in  the  policy,
    authority established that this should be the  case.   He  referred  to
    Bibi v ECO, Dhaka [2000] Imm AR 385 and to para 11.136  of  Macdonald's
    8th edition.   In  the  grounds  it  had  been  also  argued  that  any
    interference  with  the  family  life  between  the  sponsor  and   the
    appellants had been caused by the sponsor's choice in joining the armed
    forces but Mr Blundell said that he did not now seek  to  pursue  this
    ground in the light of the Tribunal jurisprudence on this issue.

16.   He submitted that the judge had erred in  law  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality within article 8.  He had referred in general terms  to
    considerations weighing in  favour  of  the  refusal  but  it  was  not
    sufficient, so Mr Blundell argued,  to  deal  with  such  an  important
    matter in such general terms  particularly  when  under  the  Rules  an
    applicant  between  18  and  65  generally  had  to  show   exceptional
    compassionate circumstances when seeking entry as a dependent relative.
     He also argued that the judge had  impermissibly  taken  into  account
    policy considerations in the assessment of proportionality.  The  adult
    dependency policy in respect of Gurkhas  was  not  a  policy  generally
    telling in favour of a grant and for that reason it  should  have  been
    left out of account.  The fact that the judge had given undue weight to
    the question of the policy was indicated by his comment in para  49  of
    his determination that the appellants met at least two of  the  factors
    identified in the policy.

17.   Mr Jacobs submitted that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  law.   When
    considering proportionality he was entitled to take  into  account  any
    relevant policies and it would have been in error to leave them out  of
    account.  The judge was entitled to find that  article  8  was  engaged
    having accepted that the relationship  of  the  appellants  with  their
    parents extended beyond ordinary emotional ties.  He  was  entitled  to
    assess article 8 even though a decision under the policy  itself  would
    have had to be referred back to  the  respondent.   His  assessment  of
    proportionality was consistent with the guidance given by the House  of
    Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 in paras 11 and 12.  The judge  had
    been entitled to have regard to the elements of public policy in favour
    of the reunification of  Gurkha  families  when  one  or  members  were
    settled in the UK: R (Tozlukaya) v Secretary of State [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    379.  In substance the judge had reached a decision  properly  open  to
    him on the evidence taking all relevant matters into account.

18.   Mr  Jacobs  argued  that  the  judge's  findings  on  dependency  were
    properly open to him and it would be wrong to impose a strict  test  of
    necessity.   There was no reason why someone should not be  financially
    dependent on their parents when studying.  To  a  certain  extent  this
    could be said to be a dependency of choice but it would be unreasonable
    to require such a person to seek employment and so have to give up  his
    education.  So far as proportionality  was  concerned,  the  judge  had
    reached a decision properly open to him.

19.   In reply Mr Blundell repeated his argument that the  judge  had  erred
    in law by bringing into the assessment of proportionality factors  from
    the respondent's policy. That policy was itself more generous than  the
    Rules and when assessing proportionality  the  judge  should  not  have
    simply identified two  factors  relevant  to  the  application  of  the
    policy.  When considering dependency it was open  to  the  Tribunal  to
    consider whether it was genuine or a contrivance.  He argued  that  the
    judge's assessment of family life and proportionality in paras  50  and
    52 of the determination was  inadequate  and  that  he  had  failed  to
    consider all relevant  matters,  whether  in  the  appellants'  or  the
    respondent's favour.  In so far as the  statement  of  Mr  Enright  was
    relied on, the fact there had been difficulties in other cases did  not
    have an impact on the present appeal.

Fourth Appeal

20.   In the fourth appeal Mr Blundell submitted that the proper course  was
    for this appeal to be sent back to the respondent for a decision to  be
    made in accordance with  the  policy  and  that  the  judge's  decision
    allowing the appeal under article 8 had been  affected  by  the  errors
    made in respect of the policy.

21.   Mr Jacobs submitted the judge made it clear that he was  dealing  with
    article 8 on an alternative basis.  He had taken a clear  view  on  the
    nature of the dependency, both financial  and  emotional,  between  the
    appellant and her parents but in any event the respondent's grounds had
    not sought to challenge the article  8  decision:  it  was  clear  that
    permission was granted simply in relation to the policy.   In  response
    Mr Blundell said it  could  clearly  be  inferred  from  the  grant  of
    permission that there was a clear linkage between the  policy  and  the
    article 8 appeal and if the judge's decision  on  article  8  had  been
    affected by the way he approached the policy, the proper  course  would
    be for the matter to be  sent  back  to  the  respondent  for  a  fresh
    decision.

Issues arising under Article 8

22.   Each of the appeals has raised issues under  article  8.   It  is  not
    necessary for us to refer to all the authorities cited at this  hearing
    as the general principles have been set out in the well-known  opinions
    of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Huang [2007] UKHL  7and
    EB (Kosovo) where Lord Bingham emphasised that the search  for  a  hard
    edged or bright line rule to be applied to the generality of cases  was
    incompatible with the difficult evaluative  exercise  which  article  8
    required and that, in general, there was no  alternative  to  making  a
    careful and informed evaluation of the facts  of  the  particular  case
    keeping in mind the core value that article 8 existed to  protect.   On
    this issue Lord Bingham said:

         "This is not, perhaps, hard to recognise.  Human beings are  social
         animals.  They depend on others.  Their family, or extended family,
         is the group on which many people most  heavily  depend,  socially,
         emotionally and often financially.  There comes a point  at  which,
         for some, prolonged and  unavoidable  separation  from  this  group
         seriously inhibits their ability to live full and fulfilling lives.
           Matters  such  as  the  age,  health  and  vulnerability  of  the
         applicant, the closeness and previous history of  the  family,  the
         applicant's dependence on the financial and  emotional  support  of
         the family, the prevailing cultural conditions in  the  country  of
         origin and many other factors may all be relevant."


23.   These matters are all relevant in  considering  of  whether  there  is
    family life within article 8, but in Kugathas, the Court of Appeal held
    that such family life was not established between an  adult  child  and
    his parent or other siblings unless something more existed than  normal
    emotional ties, but such ties might exist if an applicant was dependent
    on his family or visa versa: Arden LJ at  para  25.   The  other  cases
    referred to in submissions such as JB (India),  RP  (Zimbabwe)  and  HK
    (Turkey) are illustrations of the application of this  broad  principle
    to the facts of those particular cases.   Ms Stickler argued  that  the
    principle which could be drawn from  these  authorities  was  that  the
    further dependence necessary for family life to be engaged  in  respect
    of an adult child was a requirement of "real, effective  and  committed
    support" which could be  demonstrated  by  a  strong  family  bond  and
    financial dependence.  Where this is shown on the facts of a particular
    case, we accept that it will be a factor of some  weight  to  be  taken
    into account subject to any countervailing factors.  However, it  would
    be wrong in principle for  such  a  formulation  to  be  treated  as  a
    necessary requirement or as determinative of the issue of whether there
    is family life within article 8.  To do so would be to put a  gloss  on
    the wording of the article.


24.   The need for an evaluation of the facts of each particular case  seems
    to us to provide the answer  to  Mr  Blundell's  submission  that  when
    assessing article 8 any financial dependence should be of necessity not
    choice by analogy with a  similar  requirement  to  the  assessment  of
    dependency under the Rules.  Even if such an approach is required under
    the Rules,  and  it  does  seem  to  us  that  this  may  be  an  over-
    simplification of what the court was saying in Bibi, it would be  wrong
    to impose such a limitation when assessing dependency within article 8.
      Each case must be looked at on its own facts.   We  certainly  accept
    that a contrived dependency will carry little, if  any,  weight  within
    article 8 either when deciding  whether  family  life  exists  or  when
    assessing proportionality, but if financial dependency is of choice  to
    the extent that an applicant is dependent so that he or she can  pursue
    further  studies  this  should  not  without  more  mean  that  such  a
    dependency cannot properly be taken into account.

25.   Similar considerations apply to the argument that when a  decision  is
    pending on a policy outside the Rules, the terms of that policy  should
    not be taken into account when  assessing  proportionality.   We  agree
    that article 8 cannot be used as a  device  to  exercise  a  discretion
    outside the Rules which otherwise would not be open  to  the  Tribunal,
    but where an assessment is being made  of  whether  a  decision  is  in
    breach of article 8, it would be artificial to leave out of account any
    relevant  policy  particularly  when  assessing  proportionality.   The
    Tribunal is entitled to take into account the provisions of  the  Rules
    and any relevant policies.  When we dealt with the preliminary issue we
    summarised in paragraph 18 the principles set out in paras 27 to 32  of
    AG (Kosovo).

26.   In the light of the further submissions on article 8 we will  now  set
    out those paragraphs in full.  They read as follows:

    "27.   First, a claim  based  on  the  asserted  human  rights  of  the
         claimant  is,  even   if   it   depends   on   an   assessment   of
         proportionality, different in nature from one based on an assertion
         that the claimant  should  have  benefitted  from  an  exercise  of
         discretion  in  his  favour.   If  authority  is  needed  for  this
         proposition it can be found in Edore v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 716  at
         [18].


    28.    Secondly, though as a result of the decision House of  Lords  in
         Razgar v SSHD [2004], UKHL 27 and SSHD v Huang [2007] UKHL 11,  the
         assessment of proportionality in human rights claims  is  a  matter
         for the Tribunal, it  does  not  follow  that  the  exercise  of  a
         discretion is a matter  for  the  Tribunal  in  a  case  where  the
         claimant  has  not  shown  that  a  decision  adverse  to  him   is
         incompatible with his Convention rights.


    29.    Thirdly, the Tribunal is a creature of statute and  has  any  of
         the powers given to it by statute.  Like any other public authority
         its decision making is governed by the Human Rights Act  1998  but,
         subject to that, an immigration  judge  is  bound  to  observe  the
         statutory restrictions on jurisdiction.  One of them is in s.86(6),
         which we have set out above.  If any were needed, the existence  of
         that sub-section in the appeals  provisions  of  the  2002  Act  is
         confirmation that there are areas of discretionary judgment where a
         claimant's search for a beneficial outcome is not an  assertion  of
         his human rights.


    30.    Fourthly, as a matter of principle and logic,  claims  based  on
         human rights ought to be assessed in priority to  claims  based  on
         the hope of a favourable exercise of a discretion.  It makes little
         sense to consider whether the Secretary of  State  may  (or  indeed
         ought to) choose to give the claimant the benefit that  he  already
         has as a right.  Having said that, there are of course cases  where
         judicial economy allows a judge to go straight to the  end  of  the
         process and missing earlier steps.  And we recognise there are good
         grounds in legal theory for recognising the continued existence  of
         a discretion even where, in the circumstances of the case,  it  can
         be exercised only in one way.  The order must generally be: rights,
         first then possibilities.


    31.    Fifthly, within the category of rights issues  relating  to  the
         assessment of proportionality ought to yield priority  to  specific
         provisions of national law.  This is the thinking underlying Razgar
         and Huang.   One looks first at the  legal  rules  that  appear  to
         govern the case.  It is  only  if  those  rules  do  not  give  the
         claimant the result that he  seeks,  that  there  is  any  need  to
         consider whether his Convention rights are such that he is entitled
         to the result despite  the  rules.   This  is  also  the  principle
         underlying the European Court of Human  Rights  jurisdiction  under
         the Convention, as set out in article 33.1.


    32.    Sixthly, the phrase 'in accordance with the law' in article  8.2
         of the ECHR does not import the whole of the national  legal  order
         into the assessment of proportionality (see MA [2005] UKIAT 00090).
          The phrase does not make disproportionate (and therefore a  breach
         of article 8) every governmental Act that can be the subject  of  a
         successful legal challenge.  Rather, the phrase requires that  'the
         impugned measure should have some basis in  domestic  law,  and  it
         also refers to the quality of the law in question,  requiring  that
         it should be accessible to the person concerned, and foreseeable as
         to its affects' (Silvenko v Latvia) 48321/99, [2003]  EWHR  498  at
         (100), which is a summary  of  the  position  explored  in  greater
         details in earlier cases such as Class v Germany [1978]  2HRR  214,
         Silver v UK [1983] 5EHRR 347 at [86], and Sunday Times v UK  [1979]
         2EHRR 245 at [49])."


27.   We emphasise the point made  in  para 27  of  AG  (Kosovo)  that  the
    assessment of an appeal under article 8  is  a  separate  and  distinct
    exercise from whether an appellant is able to meet the requirements  of
    the Rules or whether the exercise of a policy  outside  the  Rules  has
    been carried out properly by the respondent even though there  will  be
    in most cases a common basis of primary  fact  and  the  existence  and
    purpose of the Rules and any relevant policies can properly been  taken
    into  account   when   assessing   issues   of   legitimate   aim   and
    proportionality.  The  fact  that  the  respondent  does  not  exercise
    discretion under a policy in an appellant's  favour  does  not  without
    more amount to a decision contravening his human rights any  more  than
    an adverse decision made under the Rules.

28.   We agree with what is said at para 30 of AG  (Kosovo)  that  it  makes
    sense to deal with rights  before  possibilities  but  in  the  present
    appeals where the human rights claims are set in  the  context  of  the
    amendments to the Rules to deal with a particular historical issue, and
    with specific published policies dealing with the approach to be  taken
    in the case of adult  dependants  not  falling  within  the  Rules,   a
    decision under article 8 will inevitably be informed by the  provisions
    of the Rules and the policy and we are satisfied that  in  these  cases
    the proper course to follow would  be  to  consider  issues  under  the
    Rules, then under the policy and then under article 8.  If it is  found
    that there has been an error of law in the way the decision  under  the
    policy has been made so that the decision needs to be  re-made  by  the
    respondent, that sets the context for a decision on whether the article
    8 appeal should be treated in the same way or whether the proper course
    is for the Tribunal to make its own determination.

29.   It may be that in a particular case  the  proper  course  is  for  the
    decision under article 8 to await a decision under the policy but  that
    depends upon the facts of each individual case including whether  there
    are sufficiently clear findings of  fact  on  which  a  decision  under
    article 8 can properly be made. It is a matter for the  discretion  for
    the Tribunal whether to deal separately with an article 8 appeal before
    the decision is made under the policy or whether the proper  course  is
    for both matters to be considered by the respondent and any delay which
    has already taken place and which may well take place pending a further
    decision can properly be taken into account.  However, as a  matter  of
    principle an appellant is entitled to a decision on any  appeal  before
    the Tribunal and an appeal should not be adjourned or the decision sent
    back to be re-made by the respondent where this course is  resisted  by
    the appellant unless there is a compelling reason  for  doing  so.   In
    this context we note that in UR article 8 was not dealt with as a  full
    case had not been put together on that ground  and  the  appellant  was
    content, probably wisely, for article 8 to be considered afresh by  the
    respondent when reconsidering  the  decision  under  the  policy.   The
    position is similar in the second appeal before us.

30.   If the Tribunal does decide an article 8 appeal when a decision  under
    the policy is sent back to the  respondent,  that  appeal  as  we  have
    already said cannot be treated as a way for the Tribunal to exercise  a
    discretion under the policy but must be determined in  accordance  with
    the principles identified by the House of Lords in the  cases  we  have
    already referred to.  We now turn to deal with the  issues  arising  in
    the individual appeals.

Assessment of the Appeals

The First Appeal

31.   In the light of our findings set out in the preliminary issue, we  are
    satisfied that the judge erred in law by allowing  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    relevant policy.  He found that one of the factors identified  in  para
    29.4 was met and that the stated intention of  the  policy  effectively
    created a presumption that entry clearance  for  settlement  should  be
    granted in such a case unless there were good reasons not to do so.  In
    taking this view he erred in law.

32.   Mr Blundell also sought to argue that the judge erred in  law  in  his
    assessment of whether the appellants were in fact  dependent  on  their
    sponsor.  In summary, he argued that the judge  only  considered  post-
    decision evidence,  failing  to  deal  with  the  point  taken  by  the
    respondent that there was no evidence of  financial  remittals  in  the
    period before the decision and that  he  therefore  wrongly  relied  on
    evidence focusing on the date  of  hearing  rather  than  the  date  of
    decision.  We are not satisfied that this ground is made  out  for  the
    following reasons.

33.   In para 10 of his determination the judge reminded  himself  that  the
    point in time at which he had to consider the relevant facts  for  both
    immigration and human rights issues was the date of  decision.   Having
    reminded himself of this we are not satisfied that he did not go on  to
    apply that principle.   When the judge referred to the funds  sent  via
    Western Union in para 38 of his determination he said that he had  seen
    evidence of regular money transfers and he accepted that the appellants
    were still wholly reliant upon the sponsor.  We are satisfied that  the
    natural reading of what the judge is saying is  that  not  only  is  he
    satisfied at the date of decision, but also at the  hearing,  that  the
    appellants were wholly reliant financially upon the sponsor.

34.   We also take into account the fact that the judge  found  the  sponsor
    to be a  truthful  witness:  para  35.   Although  the  judge  did  not
    summarise the sponsor's witness statement it is clear that he had  this
    well in mind, referring in para  7  to  the  fact  that  he  had  heard
    evidence from the sponsor and had  taken  into  account  the  documents
    including the bundle on behalf of the appellant.  We are not  satisfied
    that the judge's decision discloses any error of law such as to vitiate
    his findings or to give rise to any concern as to whether all  relevant
    matters were taken into account.

35.   So far as the point about living alone outside the United  Kingdom  is
    concerned, the policy is clearly prefaced on the intention not to split
    a family unit solely because a dependant is over the age  of  18.   The
    fourth bullet point requires the respondent  to  consider  whether  the
    refusal of the application would  mean  that  the  applicant  would  be
    living alone outside the UK but the fact that there may be other adults
    or relatives in a household does not in itself disqualify an  applicant
    from a positive decision under the policy.  There may be  a  number  of
    domestic or cultural reasons why another adult will be  living  in  the
    same household but that is simply a factor to be taken into account  in
    the exercise of discretion under the policy.  We are not satisfied that
    there is any error of law undermining the judge's findings of  fact  as
    to the appellants' circumstances in Nepal and their dependency  on  the
    sponsor.

36.   We were asked by Ms Stickler to determine  the  appeal  on  article  8
    grounds.  The judge had not done so in the light  of  his  findings  in
    respect of the policy.  We do not think that it would be right  for  us
    to defer the decision  under  article  8  in  circumstances  where  the
    appellants are asking for a decision in a pending appeal. We take  into
    account the delay in the appeal process in this case.  The decision was
    made on 14 May 2007.  There has been a  considerable  delay  while  the
    decision was reviewed in the light of court judgments on the  scope  of
    the policy.  Even though we must assess the matter as at 14  May  2007,
    we take into account the delay that has already occurred and  the  fact
    there will be further delay and find that it would not be right for  us
    to defer the decision on the appeal on article 8  grounds  or  send  it
    back to be re-made by the respondent.

37.   We are satisfied that there was at the date  of  decision  (and  still
    is) family life within article 8(1) between the  appellants  and  their
    sponsor.  The appellants have been and still are financially  dependent
    on their father.  Neither have moved away from the father's family unit
    to form their own families or sought to live independently  from  their
    parents.  Their applications to join their parents were  made  promptly
    following the grant of settlement to the sponsor and we accept that the
    family has maintained strong mutual links evidenced by  the  fact  that
    the appellants' mother returned to live with  them  during  June  2009.
    Although this is something taking place over two years after  the  date
    of decision, nonetheless it does cast light on the nature  and  quality
    of the family life.   We  are  satisfied  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance does amount to an interference  of  sufficient  substance  to
    engage article 8.  The decision is in accordance with the  law  and  we
    find that the interference is necessary in a democratic society to  the
    extent that the need to maintain an  effective  system  of  immigration
    control comes within a legitimate aim.

38.   We have been referred to the decision of the Tribunal  in  RG  and  on
    this issue  we  agree  with  the  reasons  given  in  para  16  of  the
    determination of SIJ McKee that in the particular cases of adult Gurkha
    dependants the public interest in the proper maintenance of immigration
    control does not carry the weight it would in other  cases.   In  these
    circumstances we are satisfied that had the judge proceeded to consider
    article 8 he would, in the light of  his  findings,  have  allowed  the
    appeal on article 8 grounds and in any event assessing the  matter  for
    ourselves we are satisfied taking into account his findings of  primary
    fact, that the refusal of entry clearance would be  a  disproportionate
    interference with the right to respect for the appellants' family life.
     Accordingly we allow the appeal on article 8 grounds.

The Second Appeal

39.   So far as this appeal is concerned it is common ground that the  judge
    erred in law in his assessment  of  the  questions  arising  under  the
    policy.  He also erred in his assessment of article 8 by  finding  that
    it did not apply as the sponsors were not in the UK as at the  date  of
    decision.  For the reasons argued by Ms Stickler  and  conceded  by  Mr
    Blundell, the article 8 decision is erroneous in point of law.  We were
    not satisfied that there were sufficient findings of fact on  which  we
    could properly evaluate and balance the relevant issues under article 8
    and in these circumstances Ms Stickler did not seek to argue that  this
    was a case where the article 8 appeal should  be  dealt  with  at  this
    stage.  We therefore allow the appeal against the judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeals and substitute a decision to allow  the  appeal  to
    the extent that the decision under the policy is  to  go  back  to  the
    respondent for a further decision when, if appropriate, article 8  will
    also be considered.

The Third Appeal

40.   These  appeals  were  allowed  on  article  8  grounds  and  in  these
    circumstances the judge made no direction for a further decision to  be
    made under the policy.  For the reasons we  have  already  outlined  at
    some length in our preliminary decision we are satisfied that the judge
    did not err in law in the way he dealt with the policy.  In so  far  as
    Mr Blundell sought to argue that he should have remitted the case under
    article 8 to be determined by the respondent together  with  a  further
    decision on the policy, we are satisfied that the judge was entitled to
    proceed to hear the article 8 appeal.  There  were  clear  findings  of
    primary fact; the appellant was seeking a decision on article 8 and  in
    these circumstances the judge was entitled to proceed.

41.   We are not satisfied that he erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider
    whether the appellants' dependency was one of necessity.   It  was  for
    him to look at the circumstances as a whole to consider  whether  there
    was family life and assuming the other requirements of article  8  were
    met, whether the decision to refuse was proportionate to  a  legitimate
    aim.  As at the date of the decision on 23 June  2010,  the  appellants
    were 22 and 19 years' respectively.   Their  father  had  been  granted
    settlement on 6 July 2009 and their mother on  14  January  2010.   The
    judge was satisfied that both appellants were students and  that  their
    father met the cost of their student  fees  and  living  expenses.   He
    found there was no evidence that the  respondents  had  any  family  in
    Nepal other than their mother and grandmother with whom they lived.

42.   We do not accept that when assessing  proportionality  the  judge  did
    not take proper account of the public interest  factors.   He  reminded
    himself in paragraph 45 that the decision pursued the legitimate aim of
    the maintenance of effective immigration control.  He then went  on  to
    look at the matters relevant to the appellants and found  the  decision
    would in  their  particular  circumstances  be  disproportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim.  He took into account the fact that  their  mother  was
    still in Nepal despite having been  granted  entry  clearance,  because
    they needed a parent with them as that was what they were used  to  and
    what in their view was needed.  Their mother would settle in the UK  in
    the event that their appeals were allowed.  There was  no  question  of
    the grandmother being able to take care of them.  The judge  took  into
    account the comments of Blake J in Limbu and was fully entitled to take
    into account the fact that two of the factors  specifically  identified
    in the policy were met.  That was not determinative but  there  was  no
    reason why the general purpose of the policy  or  the  specific  issues
    identified in it should not be taken into account  provided  the  judge
    was not seeking to exercise the discretion under the policy as  opposed
    to considering whether the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate.

43.   In summary we are satisfied that the judge's findings and  conclusions
    under article 8 were properly open to him  for  the  reasons  he  gave.
    There was no reason for him to set out his findings on article 8 at any
    greater  length  having  already  set  out  the   relevant   facts   in
    considerable detail when dealing with  the  issues  arising  under  the
    policy.  Accordingly, the respondent's appeal is dismissed.

The Fourth Appeal

44.   We are satisfied that the judge erred in law by  purporting  to  allow
    the appeal under the policy. We agree  with  Mr  Blundell's  submission
    that the judge's findings on this issue, set out in  paras  12  and  14
    were wrong in law for the reasons we have set out in  our  decision  on
    the preliminary issue.

45.   The judge went on to consider in the alternative  whether  the  appeal
    should  be  allowed  on  article  8  grounds.   We  accept  Mr  Jacobs'
    submission that on the facts of this case the judge reached a  decision
    properly open to him.  The  appellant  was  aged  23  at  the  date  of
    decision.  She had a younger sister who was granted settlement with her
    mother, as dependants of her father.  Her sister returned to  Nepal  to
    complete her studies in Kathmandu and their mother  remained  in  Nepal
    until May 2009 after the grant of her leave so  as  not  to  leave  the
    appellant alone there.  It  was  accepted  that  she  continued  to  be
    maintained by her father.  Taking into  account  the  factors  we  have
    already referred to in relation to the other appeals, we are  satisfied
    that as at the date of decision  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant, her mother, father and younger  sister  such  as  to  engage
    article 8 and that the refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate.



46.   In any event there is more basic reason why  the  respondent's  appeal
    should be dismissed.  The grounds of appeal do not  seek  to  challenge
    the decision made on article 8 grounds but simply  the  decision  under
    the  policy.   We  are  not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  necessary
    implication in the grounds that the decision on the policy and  article
    8 stood or fell together.  No subsequent application has been  made  to
    amend the grounds and we are not satisfied that  it  was  open  to  the
    respondent to raise article 8 issues on this appeal in the  absence  of
    an amendment to the grounds or at least  a  clear  indication  that  he
    proposed to take that course.  In any event for  the  reasons  we  have
    given, even if the matter was properly raised,  we  are  satisfied  the
    judge did not err in law.   In  these  circumstances  the  respondent's
    appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision in  relation  to  the
    policy outside the rules is allowed to the extent that it  should  have
    been sent back to the respondent for further decision, but in any event
    the judge's decision allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds stands.

47.   At the conclusion of  the  hearing  Mr  Jacobs  raised  the  issue  of
    whether, if the decisions in the third and  fourth  appeals  were  sent
    back to the respondent to be re-made, they should be  considered  under
    the terms of SET 12 which we have been considering in  this  appeal  or
    under the amended policy that discretion would  only  be  exercised  in
    exceptional circumstances.  The policy was amended on 4 June  2009  but
    there is a dispute between  the  parties  arising  from  the  fact  the
    previous policy continued to be accessible on the UK Visa  website.  We
    gave leave to the parties to file further evidence and  submissions  so
    that we could consider this  issue  subject  to  our  findings  on  the
    article 8 appeals.  As we have  dismissed  the  appeals  against  those
    decisions, the issue is not material to  the  outcome  of  the  present
    appeals and in these circumstances we will  leave  that  matter  to  be
    resolved in an appeal where it does arise.    However, we are  grateful
    to the parties for their comprehensive submissions on this issue.

Summary of Decisions

48.   In the first appeal the respondent's appeal is allowed in relation  to
    the decision under the policy which would have to  be  re-made  by  the
    respondent but the Tribunal remakes the decision under  article  8  and
    allows the appeals.

49.   In the second appeal the respondent's appeal is allowed to the  extent
    that the decision under the policy is sent back to the respondent to be
    re-made together with the decision on article 8 grounds.

50.   In the  third  appeal,  the  appeal  by  the  respondent  against  the
    decision to allow the appeal on article 8 grounds is dismissed.

51.   In the fourth appeal, the respondent's appeal against the decision  to
    allow the appeal under the policy is allowed.  That appeal should  have
    been sent back to the respondent for further decision  but  the  appeal
    against the decision to allow  the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds  is
    dismissed.




Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Latter
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

