
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Okondu and Abdussalam) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department (wasted costs; SRA referrals;  Hamid)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
00377(IAC)



                                                                   Heard on:
                                                        Tuesday, 20 May 2014

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GREEN
                                     And
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                           ROLAND okechukwu okondu
                       ABDUL WAHAB ADEBAYO ABDUSSALAM

                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Okondu (the first Applicant) was not present or represented.

Mr S Harding Counsel appeared in the case of Mr Abdussalam (the second
Applicant). The Applicant's representatives were G Singh Solicitors.

Mr M Donmall, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of
the Respondent in both cases.


(1)  Section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  confers
      on the Upper Tribunal a discretionary power to order a legal or  other
      representative to pay "wasted costs"  incurred  by  the  other  party.
      "Wasted costs" are defined in section 29(5) as  costs  incurred  by  a
      party: "(a) as a result of any improper, unreasonable or negligent act
      or omission on the part of any legal or other  representative  or  any
      employee of such a representative, or (b) which, in the light  of  any
      such act or omission occurring after they were incurred, the  relevant
      Tribunal considers it is unreasonable to expect that  party  to  pay."
      The words: "improper, unreasonable or negligent act or  omission"  are
      explained in Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] EWCA Civ 40. Rule 10 of the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 is  also  relevant.  It
      provides (inter alia) that the Upper Tribunal may not make an order in
      respect of costs except in judicial review proceedings, under  section
      29(4) of the TCEA and "if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party or
      its representative has acted unreasonably in  bringing,  defending  or
      conducting the proceedings".  The wasted costs jurisdiction applies to
      all parties. It can arise  in  the  case  of  a  winning  party  whose
      conduct, on the  way  to  success,  has  fallen  below  the  requisite
      standard and caused wasted costs to be incurred by the  losing  party.



(2)  The overriding duty of all representatives  is  to  the  court  or  the
      Tribunal.  It is improper for any practitioner  to  advance  arguments
      which they know to be false or which they know, or  should  know,  are
      inconsistent with their  own  evidence,  including  medical  or  other
      expert evidence.  It is also incumbent upon  practitioners  to  ensure
      that the Tribunal is provided with a fair and comprehensive account of
      all relevant facts, whether those facts are in favour or  against  the
      legal representative's client.  It will also not be acceptable to  say
      that  as  of  the  date  of  the  service  of  the   application   the
      representative was not in possession of all relevant facts because  of
      time constraints.  Time pressures might mean  that  applications  that
      are less than perfect or comprehensive or  complete  might  in  actual
      fact reflect the very best that can be done in  urgent  circumstances.
      However, this does not excuse a  failure,  following  service  of  the
      application, to complete the fact finding and  verification  exercise,
      and then seek to amend the application accordingly  so  as  to  ensure
      that the Tribunal is fully informed of the relevant facts and matters.



(3)  The attention of representatives is drawn to the judgment of  the  High
      Court (Divisional Court) in R (on the application  of  Hamid)  v  SSHD
      [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin), the  importance  of  which  is  underscored.
      Given the assumption by the Upper Tribunal of much of the jurisdiction
      of the High Court for dealing with judicial reviews in  the  field  of
      immigration, the Tribunal will, as  it  has  in  this  case,  adopt  a
      similar  procedure  in  those  circumstances  where  it  considers  it
      appropriate to do so.

(4)  The Upper Tribunal recognises  that  applicants  with  weak  cases  are
      entitled to seek to advance their case and have it  adjudicated  upon;
      that is a fundamental aspect of having a right of access to  a  court.
      But there is a wealth of difference between the advancing  of  a  case
      that is held to be unarguable  in  a  fair,  professional  and  proper
      manner and the advancing  of  unarguable  cases  in  a  professionally
      improper manner.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


A.   Introduction and Issue

mr justice green:  There are before the Tribunal  two  renewed  applications
    for permission to apply for judicial review.  Both cases raise an issue
    of some importance concerning the jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal in
    relation  to  the  making  of  wasted  costs  orders  and  as  to   the
    circumstances when the  Tribunal  might  refer  the  conduct  of  legal
    representatives to the Solicitors Regulation Authority ("SRA"). In both
    cases, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul made a direction in an Order sealed
    on 3 March 2014 that the parties must lodge with the Tribunal  skeleton
    arguments dealing with, inter alia, the issue of wasted  costs  against
    the  legal  representatives.  We  heard  oral  argument  on  both   the
    jurisdiction of the  Tribunal  to  make  such  orders  and  as  to  the
    circumstances in which the jurisdiction should be exercised on  20  May
    2014. The jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal to hear  judicial  reviews
    is a relatively recently-acquired jurisdiction and it  is  appropriate,
    at this early stage, to lay down some markers as  to  the  jurisdiction
    and power of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ensure  that  legal  and  other
    representatives acting for applicants in  judicial  review  proceedings
    act in a manner which is  commensurate  with  their  duty  towards  the
    Tribunal. To date, there have been three cases that deal with the issue
    of costs in the Upper Tribunal: R (LR) v.  First-tier  Tribunal  (HESC)
    and Hertfordshire CC (Costs) [2013]  UKUT  0294  (AAC);  R  (Kumar  and
    another) v. SSHD [2014] UKUT 00104 (IAC) and the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in R (TH (Iran)) v East Sussex CC [2013] EWCA Civ 1027.

 2. We start by setting out the jurisdiction of the Tribunal with regard to
    costs.  We then  consider  the  application  of  those  powers  to  the
    individual applications for permission to  apply  for  judicial  review
    before us and we finally consider alternate  powers  available  to  the
    Tribunal under the heading of a general warning to practitioners.

B.   Statutory Framework

 3. The jurisdiction to  award  costs  emanates  from  section  29  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("TCEA 2007").   Section  29
    TCEA 2007 confers upon the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal a
    "discretion" to determine the costs "of and incidental to"  proceedings
    in the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.  Indeed section 29(1)(a)
    and (b) make it clear that this  power  applies  to  "all"  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal. Pursuant to section 29(2) each Tribunal  has
    the "full power" to determine both by whom costs are to be paid and  as
    to the extent.

 4. Section 29 also contemplates the making of a "wasted costs" order.  The
    jurisdiction is conferred by section 29(4) which provides as follows:

         "(4) In any proceedings mentioned in subsection (1),  the  relevant
               Tribunal may -

                (a)    disallow, or

                (b)    (as the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal  or  other
                    representative concerned to meet,

                the whole of any wasted costs or such part of them as may be
               determined in accordance with Tribunal Procedure Rules."

 5. The powers are subject to Tribunal Procedure Rules: section  29(3)  and
    (4).

 6. Section 29(5) provides a definition of "wasted costs".  These mean:

         "(5) ...any costs incurred by a party -

                (a)     as  a  result  of  any  improper,  unreasonable   or
                    negligent act or omission on the part of  any  legal  or
                    other  representative  or  any  employee   of   such   a
                    representative, or

                (b)    which, in the light  of  any  such  act  or  omission
                    occurring  after  they  were  incurred,   the   relevant
                    Tribunal considers it is  unreasonable  to  expect  that
                    party to pay."

     Section 29(5) thus makes clear that wasted costs may be  costs  ordered
    against a winning or a losing  party.  Although  the  point  should  be
    obvious this means that wasted costs may be awarded against either side
    to proceedings and regardless of whether they win or lose.

 7. The concepts on "improper"  "unreasonable"  and  "negligent"  are  well
    known terms and have been subjected to judicial analysis upon a  number
    of occasions  in  the  context  of  wasted  costs.    In  Ridehalgh  v.
    Horsefield [1994] EWCA Civ 40, Sir Thomas Bingham MR, interpreting  the
    words "improper, unreasonable  or  negligent"  in  section  51  of  the
    Supreme Court Act 1981, stated:


         "Improper" ... covers, but is not confined to, conduct which  would
        ordinarily be held to justify disbarment, striking off,  suspension
        from practice or other serious professional penalty. It covers  any
        significant breach of a substantial duty imposed by a relevant code
        of professional conduct. But it is not in our judgment  limited  to
        that. Conduct which would be regarded as improper according to  the
        consensus of  professional  (including  judicial)  opinion  can  be
        fairly stigmatised as such whether or not it violates the letter of
        a professional code.

         "Unreasonable" also means what it has been understood  to  mean  in
        this context for at least half  a  century.  The  expression  aptly
        describes conduct which is vexatious, designed to harass the  other
        side rather than advance the resolution of the case, and  it  makes
        no difference that the conduct is the product of excessive zeal and
        not  improper  motive.  But  conduct   cannot   be   described   as
        unreasonable  simply  because  it  leads  in  the   event   to   an
        unsuccessful  result  or  because   other   more   cautious   legal
        representatives would have acted  differently.  The  acid  test  is
        whether the conduct permits of a reasonable explanation. If so, the
        course adopted may be regarded as optimistic and as reflecting on a
        practitioner's judgment, but it is not unreasonable.

         The term "negligent" ...... should be understood in an  untechnical
        way to denote failure to act with the competence reasonably  to  be
        expected of ordinary members of the profession.

         In adopting an untechnical approach to the  meaning  of  negligence
        in this context, we would however wish firmly to discountenance any
        suggestion that an applicant for a wasted costs  order  under  this
        head need prove anything less than he would have  to  prove  in  an
        action for negligence : "advice, acts or omissions in the course of
        their professional work which no member of the profession  who  was
        reasonably well- informed and competent would have given or done or
        omitted to do"; an error "such as no reasonably  well-informed  and
        competent member of that profession could have made"  (Saif  Ali  v
        Sydney Mitchell & Co, at pages 218 D, 220 D, per Lord Diplock).

          We  were  invited  to  give  the   three   adjectives   (improper,
        unreasonable and negligent) specific, self-contained  meanings,  so
        as to avoid overlap between the three. We do not  read  these  very
        familiar expressions in that way. Conduct which is unreasonable may
        also  be  improper,  and  conduct  which  is  negligent  will  very
        frequently be (if it is not by definition) unreasonable. We do  not
        think any sharp differentiation between these expressions is useful
        or necessary or intended."

 8. We use the meanings attributed to those terms in that case as  guidance
    in the present case.  There are more recent authorities which  will  be
    considered if and when the opportunity presents itself.

 9. Section 29(6) makes clear that a "legal or  other  representative"  who
    may be made the subject of a wasted costs order in relation to a  party
    to proceedings means any person exercising a right of audience or right
    to conduct the proceedings on a party's behalf.

10. The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the  2008  Rules")
    lay down the relevant  rules  relating  to  costs  as  contemplated  by
    section 29(3) and (4) TCEA 2007.  In particular Rule 10(3) states  that
    the Upper Tribunal may not make an order for costs  except  in  certain
    defined circumstances.  For present purposes Rule  10(3)  and  (d)  are
    relevant.  The provision provides as follows:

         "(3) ...The Upper Tribunal may not make  an  order  in  respect  of
                costs... except -

                (a)    in judicial review proceedings;

                (b)    ...;

                (c)    under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act (wasted costs);

                (d)    if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party  or  its
                    representative  has  acted  unreasonably  in   bringing,
                    defending or conducting the proceedings...".

11. It is clear from section 29 TCEA 2007 and from Rule 10 that  the  power
    to make wasted costs orders applies to all proceedings whether they are
    in the context of judicial review or otherwise.

12. Rule 10(5)-(8) lays down the procedure which must be adopted  prior  to
    the making of any order for costs.  Under Rule 10(5) a person making an
    application for a wasted costs order must send  or  deliver  a  written
    application to the Upper Tribunal and to the person against whom it  is
    proposed that  the  order  be  made;  and  send  or  deliver  with  the
    application a schedule of the costs or expenses claimed  sufficient  to
    allow summary assessment of such costs by the  Upper  Tribunal.   Under
    Rule 10(6) an application for an order for costs may  be  made  at  any
    time during the proceedings but may not be made later  than  one  month
    after the date upon which the Upper Tribunal sends  a  decision  notice
    recording the decision which finally disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings; or notice of a withdrawal under Rules 17  which  ends  the
    proceedings.

13. Rule 10(7) provides for a person against whom an order is  applied  for
    to be given an opportunity to make  representations.   It  provides  an
    important procedural  safeguard  to  such  a  person.   It  is  in  the
    following terms:

         "(7) The Upper Tribunal may not make an order for costs...  against
                a person ("the... person") without first -

                (a)     giving  that   person   an   opportunity   to   make
                    representations; and

                (b)    if the paying person is an individual and  the  order
                    is  to  be  made  under  paragraph  (3)(a),(b)  or  (d),
                    considering that person's financial means.

14. Rule 10(8) and (9) not only confer a power of summary  assessment  upon
    the Upper Tribunal but also provide that the sum  to  be  paid  may  be
    determined by agreement between the parties or subject to a process  of
    more detailed assessment.  It is not necessary, for  present  purposes,
    to address in this judgment the process of assessment.

15. There may be a parallel jurisdiction which the Upper Tribunal possesses
    to order costs.  Section 25 TCEA 2007 provides that the Upper  Tribunal
    has "...the same powers, rights, privileges and authority as  the  High
    Court...".  However,  section  25(1)  makes  clear  that  such  powers,
    rights, privileges and authority are only in relation  to  the  matters
    mentioned in section 25(2).  Those matters are:

         "(a) The attendance and examination of witnesses,

          (b) the production and inspection of documents, and

          (c)  all  other  matters  incidental  to  the   Upper   Tribunal's
               functions."

16. Given that one "function" of the Upper Tribunal is to make  orders  for
    costs pursuant to section 29 TCEA 2007, the  ability  to  award  wasted
    costs can be seen as a  "matter  incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    functions" for the purpose of section 25(2)(c) TCEA 2007.  As  we  have
    explained this power has been elaborated upon in the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  However nothing in those Rules  expressly
    limits the powers, rights,  privileges  and  authorities  of  the  High
    Court.  Had the Rules acted so as to circumscribe those powers, rights,
    privileges and authorities then, pursuant to Section  25(3)  TCEA  2007
    those powers,  rights,  privileges  and  authorities  would  have  been
    limited by the Rules.  However since that has not happened it  follows,
    it is  possible  to  say,  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  a  parallel
    jurisdiction pursuant to Section 25 TCEA which simply places the  Upper
    Tribunal in the same position as the High Court.

17. On the other hand, such  an  interpretation  would  effectively  render
    Section 29 and Rule 10 meaningless. For  this  reason  and  given  that
    there is specific provision in section 29 TCEA and in  the  2008  Rules
    with regard to the Upper Tribunal, it seems to us that  we  should,  at
    least in this case and without prejudice to other cases, exercise those
    powers and not any parallel powers we may have under Section 25 and the
    CPR.

C.   Abdussalam

     (a)      Facts

18. We turn now to the application of these provisions  to  the  two  cases
    before us.

19. The facts of Abdussalam may be summarised in the following way.  On  26
    May 2003 the Applicant entered the UK with leave valid until 31 October
    2004.  However upon the expiry of that  leave  the  Applicant  remained
    present in the jurisdiction.  On 9 August 2012  the  Applicant  applied
    for leave which application was refused on 28 November 2013.  The basis
    of the application for leave to  remain  was  the  Applicant's  medical
    condition.  In support of the application various medical  reports  and
    psychiatric reports were submitted to the Respondent.

20. The decision letter contains a detailed account of the medical evidence
    submitted but also of the reasons for rejecting it.  Put  shortly,  the
    evidence was rejected upon the  basis  that  in  the  Applicant's  home
    country  (Nigeria)  the  Applicant  would  not  be  denied   treatment.
    Further, it was pointed out that removal would not infringe  Article  3
    of the Convention since it was  a  well-established  principle  that  a
    person could not claim an entitlement to remain in the UK  to  continue
    to benefit from medical, social or other forms of assistance  that  had
    been provided for him or her.  It was pointed  out  by  the  Respondent
    that only in exceptional circumstances would a medical claim reach  the
    high threshold required to  engage  Article  3.   In  relation  to  the
    Applicant's Article 8 claim it was noted that following the  expiry  of
    his entry clearance visa on 31 October 2004 the Applicant had  made  no
    attempt to regularise his immigration status and had  been  working  in
    the United Kingdom notwithstanding that he did not have  permission  to
    seek or obtain employment.  Further, he failed to provide any  credible
    evidence  confirming  that  he  had  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously since his last entry.  Indeed the Respondent  pointed  out
    that there was no evidence of what the Applicant had been doing in  the
    United Kingdom "apart from remaining here to access free medical  care"
    (Respondent's decision, paragraph 13).  Further,  it  was  pointed  out
    that the Applicant had spent almost 30  years  living  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom which far  outweighed  the  time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

21. In the light of this an extensive application for permission  to  apply
    for judicial review was lodged. This included a summary of the  medical
    evidence and in effect repeated the Applicant's  medical  case  earlier
    advanced to the Respondent.  In  particular  it  was  argued  that  the
    Applicant was suicidal and psychotic and that the  persistent  risk  of
    his suicide was high.

22. In the Respondent's Acknowledgement of Service and Summary  Grounds  of
    Defence the Respondent urged the  Tribunal  to  consider  the  specific
    medical evidence itself "rather  than  the  summary  of  that  evidence
    within  the  Applicant's  grounds"  (cf  paragraph  17  Grounds).   The
    Respondent pointed out that contrary to the specific averments made  in
    the application for permission a November 2013 report  prepared  by  Dr
    Amir Bashir for the Applicant diagnosed the Applicant as being "down in
    mood" and "miserable".  However  paragraph  7.1  of  that  same  report
    stated that the Applicant "didn't have worthlessness of life and  there
    were no suicidal thoughts".  Further it concluded  that  the  Applicant
    "didn't have any psychotic symptoms".  The report further  stated  that
    the Applicant's cognitive functions were intact and he had insight into
    his illness.  With specific regard to the Applicant's suicide risk  the
    report stated that in  view  of  the  Applicant's  history  and  mental
    examination the risk was "low".  The psychiatrist  concluded  that  the
    Applicant was able to work in a supported environment and was  able  to
    travel alone.

23. The Respondent pointed out that  both  in  the  pre-action  letter  and
    grounds of claim the summaries  provided  of  the  Applicant's  medical
    evidence were, it was submitted, "grossly misleading".  In  particular,
    but by way of example only, the Respondent identified sixteen incidents
    of statements made by the Applicants which exaggerated the  Applicant's
    medical  condition.   The  legal  representatives  for  the   Applicant
    submitted: that the Applicant had such a high level of risk to  suicide
    that his removal would breach Article 3; that the Respondent had failed
    to engage with the medical evidence; and that the  Applicant's  medical
    condition was such that  he  was  so  depressed  that  he  might  "kill
    himself".  It was submitted that he suffered from post-traumatic stress
    disorder and depressive order with psychotic symptoms.

24. Following Judge Rintoul's direction in the  order  sealed  on  3  March
    2014, the Applicant lodged an application on 2 May 2014 to withdraw his
    claim. In a statement dated 14 May 2014 which was  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal with a letter from G Singh Solicitors dated 15 May  2014,  the
    Applicant explained his  reasons  for  withdrawing  his  claim.  It  is
    appropriate to quote his letter:

         "I, Abdulwahab Adebayo  Abdussalam  -  17-03-75,  hereby  write  to
         inform the Upper Tribunal that the reason  for  my  application  to
         withdraw from judicial review proceedings is because the matter  is
         privately funded and I cannot financially afford to continue.

         I am in receipt of judge Rintoul's Order  date  03/03/14.  The  low
         merits concerning  my  judicial  review  application  were  clearly
         explained to me prior to issuing proceedings  nevertheless  it  was
         upon my  instructions  that  my  solicitors  lodged  my  permission
         application to apply for judicial review.

         In light of my finances and potential costs issued against  me,  it
         is  upon  my  instructions  that  my  solicitors  have  issued   an
         application notice to withdraw the proceedings.

         Kindly treat this as my further letter of authority."

25. Pursuant to Rule 17 of the 2008 Rules a party may give  notice  of  the
    withdrawal of its case or any part of it at any time before  a  hearing
    to consider the disposal of the proceedings or  orally  at  a  hearing.
    Rule 17(2) makes that notice of withdrawal subject to  the  consent  of
    the Upper Tribunal:

         "(2) Notice of withdrawal will not take  effect  unless  the  Upper
                Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in relation to an
                application for permission to appeal."

26. We do not consider that this is an appropriate case in  which  to  give
    our consent to the withdrawal, as it is  important  that  we  give  our
    views on the merits of the grounds.

    (b)  Refusal of permission

27. It is evident from our summary of the report of Dr. Bashir,  that there
    was no medical evidence to support the contentions in the grounds  that
    the applicant was: "mentally stunted" and  of  low  intelligence;  that
    removing him should be considered on the same  footing  as  removing  a
    child who could not fend for himself (para 5 of the grounds);  that  he
    had mental retardation (para 14); that he suffered from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and depressive  order  with  psychotic  symptoms  (para
    18(d);  that  it  was  arguable  that  he  would  need   anti-psychotic
    medication  (para  18(e));  and  that   he   presents   morbid/suicidal
    deliberations, in view of alleged past suicidal attempts (para  18(g)).
    To the contrary, whilst Dr. Bashir's report stated that  the  Applicant
    suffered from Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, he also  said  that  there
    was no past history of suicide attempts, that  the  Applicant  did  not
    have suicidal thoughts and that his risk of suicide was low. Para 18(b)
    of the grounds asserted that  the  Applicant  had  poor  living  skills
    whereas Dr. Bashir's report said that he was  able  to  cook  and  look
    after himself and live an independent life.


28. The medical evidence before the Respondent showed  that  the  applicant
    had received treatment for urological symptoms  and  also  asthma.  The
    medication he was receiving was described at para  7  of  the  decision
    letter. The Respondent received information from "Project MedCOI"  from
    which  she  concluded  that  adequate  treatment  and  medication   was
    available in Nigeria. The grounds do not engage with this assessment.

29. We can see no arguable error in the  Respondent's  conclusion,  on  the
    evidence of the applicant's medical condition and the information  from
    MedCOI, that the Article 3 threshold was not reached.

30. Although Article 8  was  also  pleaded  in  the  grounds,  it  was  not
    explained why the Respondent's decision on the article 8 was  wrong  in
    law even if the Article 3 threshold was not reached.

    (c)  Wasted costs

31. We therefore refuse permission. We turn to the wasted costs issue.

32. In the light of the misstatements in the grounds, the Respondent sought
    an order for wasted costs upon the basis that the Applicant's solicitor
    pay the Respondent's costs  for  the  preparation  and  filing  of  the
    Acknowledgment of Service and Summary Grounds of Defence;  specifically
    it  was  submitted  that  the  conduct   of   the   Applicant's   legal
    representatives was  "at  best  negligent  or  at  worst,  deliberately
    misleading"  (grounds,  paragraph  30).  The  Respondent  set  out  the
    foundation for this submission as being the extent of the  exaggeration
    contained in the pre-action letter and that the grounds "... exaggerate
    the facts to such an  extent  that  parts  of  those  grounds  bear  no
    resemblance to the Applicant's circumstances at all."

33. We therefore need to consider whether to  accede  to  the  Respondent's
    application  for  an  award  of  wasted   costs   against   the   legal
    representatives for the Applicant.  We propose to conduct this exercise
    pursuant to Section 29(4) and (5) TCEA 2007 and Rule  10  of  the  2008
    Rules.  We start by considering whether the appropriate  procedure  has
    been adopted which would enable us to impose  a  costs  order  of  this
    sort.

34. As to this we have no doubt that an application for  wasted  costs  has
    been made.  The requirement that the Applicant's legal  representatives
    be  given  notice  of  the  application  was  plainly  satisfied.   The
    application for costs was made on 29 January 2014 and  was  served  not
    only upon the Upper  Tribunal  but  also  upon  the  Applicant's  legal
    representatives. Further, directions were given by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Rintoul on 3 March 2014. The  Judge  requested  a  skeleton  from  both
    parties dealing both with the merits of the application for  permission
    and wasted costs and the powers of the Upper Tribunal  in  relation  to
    the same.  The Applicant was ordered to lodge a  skeleton  argument  on
    these issues not less than seven days prior to the  hearing.   However,
    the Applicant did not comply with this order.  Instead by notice  of  2
    May 2014 the Applicant sought to withdraw the  claim.   The  Respondent
    urges the Upper Tribunal to continue, notwithstanding  this  letter  of
    withdrawal.  We are therefore satisfied that the procedure pursuant  to
    which the Upper Tribunal may rule upon an application for wasted  costs
    has been satisfied.

35. The next procedural matter which we need  to  address  is  whether  the
    application to withdraw the claim by the Applicant served to extinguish
    the Respondent's application for wasted costs against  the  Applicant's
    legal representatives.  As to this we have no doubt but that the  Upper
    Tribunal had continuing jurisdiction to dispose  of  the  appeal  until
    such time as this Tribunal  has  made  an  order  with  regard  to  the
    application to withdraw the claim.

36. We turn now to consider whether we should exercise the jurisdiction  to
    make an order for wasted costs against the Applicant's representatives.
     We start by considering whether the conduct of the  Applicant's  legal
    representatives falls within the provisions of Section 29(5) TCEA 2007.
     The first question to which we must address ourselves is  whether  the
    Applicant's legal representatives through their improper,  unreasonable
    or negligent acts or omissions have caused any party to incur costs.

37. As to this we have come to the conclusion that this is  an  appropriate
    case in which to make an order for wasted costs. The basis for this are
    the following matters when taken individually and/or collectively:  (i)
    the conduct of the firm in question in this case standing  alone;  (ii)
    the conduct of the firm when viewed in the context of the  other  cases
    of a similar nature (referred to below); and (iii) the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal considers that the firm has been  less  than  frank  with  the
    Tribunal and with the Respondent in the course  of  these  proceedings.
    The particular facts and matters upon which we rely are as follows.

38. First, the very making of this claim  in  circumstances  in  which  the
    Applicant had, at all material times, expert evidence available to  him
    which fatally undermined  the  very  claim  being  made  was  improper,
    unreasonable and/or negligent.  We have already set out those  portions
    of the  medical  evidence  of  Dr  Bashir  which  fatally  refuted  the
    Applicant's grounds. We take the view that we can justify the making of
    wasted costs order under any one  of  the  three  jurisdictional  bases
    (propriety, reasonableness,  negligence).   In  our  view  it  was  not
    "proper" for the legal representatives to advance,  on  behalf  of  the
    Applicant, submissions which were inconsistent with  their  own  expert
    evidence. We take the view that the firm  must  have  been  aware  that
    there was this glaring inconsistency but nonetheless thought that  this
    could be concealed or camouflaged in the drafting of  the  application.
    We consider that this was also "unreasonable".  We also  consider  that
    in advancing these arguments the legal representatives were "negligent"
    in that the firm has fallen  well  below  the  standards  with  may  be
    expected  of  a  reasonable  professional  acting   in   this   regard.
    Accordingly, we take the view that the costs incurred by the Respondent
    in addressing the application from start to finish were "wasted  costs"
    within the meaning of Section 29(5).

39. Secondly, we rely upon the facts and matters which we set out below  in
    some detail in relation to our further decision to refer  the  firm  in
    question to the SRA.  As is set out below we conclude that the  present
    case formed part of a course of conduct or series of cases  where  very
    similar misleading and deceitful conduct was deployed in the pursuit of
    a variety of different applications for  permission  to  seek  judicial
    review of decisions of the Secretary of  State.  This  strengthens  our
    conclusion that  the  conduct  in  the  present  case  fell  far  below
    acceptable standards and warrants an order for wasted costs.   We  also
    rely upon the fact, also set out in greater detail below, that the firm
    in question has failed to act in a candid manner with the Tribunal.   A
    number of matters were only brought to our attention by the  Respondent
    and even then this did not trigger full and  frank  disclosure  by  the
    solicitors.

40. For these reasons we have decided  to  exercise  our  discretion  under
    section 29(4) and order the Applicant's legal  representatives  to  pay
    wasted costs incurred by the Respondent which we  assess  summarily  at
    �1,492, inclusive of VAT. In our view the application was  flawed  from
    start to finish and it is, in these circumstances, appropriate that  we
    should make an order for wasted costs in relation to the full amount of
    the Respondent's costs as set out in the served schedule. We  add  that
    the Applicant's solicitors did not challenge this figure  and,  in  any
    event have agreed to pay  this  sum  without  admitting  negligence  or
    misconduct.

    (e)  Reference to the SRA

41. We turn now to consider whether we should make a reference of the  firm
    in question to the SRA. As noted above the facts that we set out  below
    also form a part of our reasoning in relation to wasted costs. When  we
    heard oral argument in this case Mr Achyuth Rajagopal, a representative
    of the applicant's solicitors, appeared in person to proffer an apology
    and to provide an explanation for his firm's conduct on behalf  of  the
    Applicant.  In the event we permitted his position to be  explained  to
    us through counsel.  Mr Rajagopal is one of the  two  partners  in  the
    firm. He explained to us how the application came to be  drafted  by  a
    junior member of staff during a busy period  prior  to  Christmas.   He
    explained that there was a regrettable  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    partners, including himself, to supervise or  check  the  work  of  the
    relevant junior staff.  He and his firm accepted unreservedly that this
    amounted to an unacceptable failure.  He explained that the firm  would
    no longer permit any  junior  member  of  staff  to  draft  substantive
    grounds which would in the future be prepared either by a partner or by
    a Counsel.

42. At that stage, we were provisionally inclined to accept the apology and
    therefore not refer the firm to the SRA. However,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    received a letter dated 28 May 2014 from the Treasury  Solicitor  which
    drew the Tribunal's attention to the fact that there was a wider  group
    of claims, as identified in a schedule attached to the letter (which we
    attach as  an  annex  to  this  judgment).  The  Respondent's  schedule
    contained details of ten cases, including the instant case,  for  which
    claims had been filed by G Singh Solicitors, the earliest of which  was
    filed on 13 September 2013. The claims alleged breaches of  Articles  3
    and 8 on grounds based upon the adverse mental health of the  applicant
    in question. The claims were supported by reports from Dr. Amir Bashir,
    with (in most cases) little other medical evidence being provided.

43. From our analysis of these claims it transpired that grounds that  were
    very similar to those submitted in the  present  Abdussalam  case  were
    being used in this wider group  of  claims.  The  grounds  are  grossly
    misleading in our view. In many cases, the grounds contended  that  the
    applicant in question was mentally retarded or was of low IQ when  this
    was  either  not  stated  in  the  medical  evidence  or  was  in  fact
    contradicted by it. The grounds alleged that  the  applicant  had  been
    diagnosed with, for example, PTSD or depressive disorder with psychotic
    symptoms when this did not  appear  in  the  medical  evidence  or  was
    inconsistent  with  that  evidence.  The  grounds  also  alleged   that
    applicants had a history of suicide attempts when it was apparent  they
    either they did not or that the medical evidence was  silent  upon  the
    issue.

44. Our conclusion based upon this schedule is that G Singh Solicitors have
    been responsible for submitting  grossly  misleading  grounds  in  nine
    cases, including the Abdussalam case. This is on any view a significant
    number.

45. The next event in the chronology was that G Singh  Solicitors  sent  to
    the Upper Tribunal a letter dated 28 May 2014 in which the firm stated,
    inter alia, that it accepted that "common discrepancies  and  incorrect
    terminology" were used in  the  wider  group  of  cases;  that  it  was
    apparent that the wider group of  claims  contained  identical  grounds
    which should have been omitted or altered; and that this  had  occurred
    due to "inattentive approach in tailoring specific submissions" and not
    with a view to misleading the court.

46. The next event that we need to record was that G Singh Solicitors  sent
    to the Upper Tribunal a further letter dated 6 June 2014 in  which  the
    firm stated: "We write to inform the  Tribunal  that  having  carefully
    considered the matter at length and of our  obligation  to  report  the
    matter to [the SRA] we would like to notify the Tribunal  that  we  are
    taking steps (within 7 days from the date of  this  letter)  to  "Self-
    Report" ourselves to [the SRA]".

47. By an order sealed on 12 June  2014,  the  Tribunal  informed  G  Singh
    Solicitors that its provisional view was that the  failings  were  wide
    ranging and accordingly  warranted  a  referral  of  the  firm  by  the
    Tribunal to the SRA and to the  Legal  Aid  Authority  if  any  of  the
    applicants in the wider group were legally aided (which now appears not
    to be the case).  This view was taken notwithstanding the letter from G
    Singh Solicitors dated 6 June 2014 stating that they were taking  steps
    to self-report to the SRA.

48. On 17 June 2014, the Tribunal received a  yet  further  letter  from  G
    Singh Solicitors with a witness statement dated 17 June 2014  from  Mr.
    Rajagopal. The second paragraph of the letter states that the firm  did
    not know about the other cases on the Respondent's schedule at the time
    of the hearing but since having them drawn to the firm's  attention  by
    the Respondent, the  firm  had  conducted  its  own  investigation  and
    discovered "several others ourselves". In the third  paragraph  on  the
    first page, the letter stated that the firm had contacted the SRA  with
    a view to self-reporting and, following their conversation with the SRA
    and the firm's analysis of the SRA Solicitors Handbook,  the  firm  had
    taken the "provisional view" that this was not a matter  for  the  SRA,
    although the penultimate paragraph on the fourth (and  final)  page  of
    the letter states: "We also would respectfully submit  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal need to refer the matter onward".


49. We should make one matter quite clear:   Our  view  as  to  whether  we
    should  refer  this  case  to  the  relevant  regulatory  authority  is
    unaffected by any stance or position adopted by the firm of  solicitors
    concerned.


50. In the circumstances of this case we have decided that we should  refer
    the firm to the SRA.  There is no stated test in law which governs when
    the High Court or Tribunal should refer a firm to the SRA.  We consider
    (without attempting to  set  out  a  definitive  test)  that  one  such
    circumstance which warrants the making of  a  reference  is  where  the
    individual or firm in question has acted in defiance or breach  of  the
    overriding duty owed to the  Court  and/or  acted  in  a  manner  which
    undermines or risks undermining the due administration of justice. Such
    conduct would amount to a breach of the SRA Code of conduct. Chapter  5
    of the SRA Code of Conduct deals with  the  obligations  of  solicitors
    litigators and advocates) to  the  Court  and  sets  out  the  expected
    outcomes which not surprisingly include not attempting  to  deceive  or
    knowingly or recklessly mislead the court, not permitting clients so to
    do, and ensuring that advocates and litigators comply with their duties
    owed to the court.

51. The mere fact that grossly misleading /  incorrect  grounds  have  been
    submitted in nine cases is sufficient to warrant such  a  referral  not
    least because the explanation given (failures  in  supervision)  raises
    serious questions concerning the way in which litigation  is  regulated
    and supervised within the firm. However, if  the  firm  has  discovered
    other cases, as it says it has,  the  concern  is  even  greater.  This
    concern remains  notwithstanding  the  departure  of  the  employee  in
    question and the undertaking that grounds for judicial review will only
    be settled at partner level or by instructing counsel in the future.

52. We have also noted that, although the letter dated 17 June 2014  states
    (in the 7th paragraph on the second page) that the Tribunal's attention
    has been drawn to the other cases found by the firm, the  Tribunal  has
    not in fact had its attention to any specific cases; it has  just  been
    informed in general terms that there is an unspecified number of  other
    unidentified cases.

53. The SRA ought therefore to be given the opportunity to investigate this
    matter,  including  issues  as  to  how  widespread  the   problem   of
    supervision is within the firm and whether, and the  extent  to  which,
    the firm has written to individual claimants to advise them of its  own
    failings. In this respect, we note that, although  Mr.  Abdussalam  has
    said in his letter explaining his reasons  for  withdrawing  his  claim
    (quoted at para 22 above) that the low merits of  his  judicial  review
    application were explained to him before the proceedings  were  issued,
    the letter does not indicate that he had been  told  that  the  grounds
    lodged in his case were misleading and incorrect.

54. Furthermore, in its letter dated 28 May 2014, the firm stated that,  in
    relation to those cases on the Respondent's schedule  which  awaited  a
    permission decision, the firm would be seeking permission to  add/amend
    the applicants' grounds for review. This relates to the following  five
    cases:  JR/5797/2013,  JR/2118/2014,  JR/2121/2014,   JR/960/2014   and
    JR/2610/2013. However, as at the date  on  which  the  Orders  refusing
    permission  in  those  cases  were  sealed  (3  July  2014),  no   such
    applications had been made, save that,  in  relation  to  JR/5797/2013,
    there was an application to withdraw made on 11 June 2014.

55. Whilst the witness statement  of  Mr.  Rajagopal  states:  "We  enclose
    herewith letter dated 17 June 2014  addressed  to  the  [SRA]  in  this
    matter, which is self-explanatory", the letter was not in fact attached
    to the witness statement.

56. This is not a case where there has been any  form  of  full  and  frank
    disclosure to the Tribunal.

57. We bear in mind that making a reference to the SRA is  a  serious  step
    for the Tribunal and for the  firm  concerned.   Nonetheless,  we  have
    decided that we would be failing in our duty if we  did  not  refer  G.
    Singh Solicitors to the SRA.

58. We should also make clear that although the problem has  been  advanced
    to us as one of failure of supervision it is by no means  obvious  that
    this is in actual fact the case and that the  unacceptable  conduct  is
    limited to the behaviour of junior members  of  staff,  as  opposed  to
    reflecting  an  endemic  problem  running  throughout  the  firm.   Our
    recitation of the explanations given to us is not therefore to be taken
    as an acceptance that the explanations are necessarily  true.  We  have
    however not considered it necessary to decide this issue  in  order  to
    come to the conclusion that a reference to the SRA is  justified.  This
    is a matter upon which the SRA may need to form its own view.




D.   Okondu

     (a) Facts

59. The Applicant in this case entered the United Kingdom in or about  June
    2010 with a visa to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor, having  been
    issued (on 8 June 2010) with an entry clearance Family Visit Visa valid
    until 8 December 2010 i.e. for six months.  On  12  July  2010  he  was
    encountered by police and immigration officials on suspicion of using a
    false British driving licence in "The Money Shop".  On 16 July 2010  he
    was sentenced to six  months'  imprisonment  at  Woolwich  Crown  Court
    having been convicted of possessing  false/improperly  obtained  and/or
    another person's  identity  documents.   On  9  February  2013  he  was
    arrested by officers for criminal and immigration matters  involving  a
    sham marriage to a French national who had admitted all offences.  On 8
    March 2013 at Nottingham Crown Court he was convicted and sentenced for
    seeking to obtain leave to enter the United Kingdom on an illegal basis
    and was sentenced to sixteen months imprisonment.  The sentencing judge
    commented in imposing the custodial  sentence  upon  the  Applicant  as
    follows:

         "In your case, Okondu, you are 29, a Nigerian  National  who  lived
         here as a child, went back to Nigeria, came lawfully on  a  6-month
         visa in 2010  and  unlawfully  overstayed.   You  have  a  previous
         conviction for using a false identity document, a driving  licence,
         to collect some cash.  I am told that, that was not  in  connection
         with immigration.  Logic says that must be right because it was  in
         the period when you were lawfully in this country  but  logic  also
         tells me that it was overt dishonesty because you must have  needed
         a false identity to pick up money sent in a false name or sent to a
         genuine person who was not you.  You, Okondu, stood to gain status,
         immigration status in this country."

60. In deciding to remove  the  Applicant  the  Respondent  considered  his
    position under Article 8 of the Convention and took  into  account  not
    only the history of criminality but also his family position.  In  this
    regard he claimed to be in a civil partnership but failed to supply any
    details of the civil partner.  The Respondent concluded that he was not
    in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  or,  otherwise,  met  the
    conditions for being granted leave.  It was also considered that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances granting leave outside of the Rules.

    (b)  Refusal of permission

61. An application seeking permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  was
    submitted on 6 November 2013 prepared by  the  applicant's  solicitors.
    It is, almost on any sensible reading, an extraordinary  document.   In
    Section 6 detailing the remedy sought the following was stated:

         "1.  Order that I must be removed from the UK.

         2.   Order that the decision of the Defendant  is  disproportionate
             and thereby unlawful.

         3.   Order that the decision not to grant me a right of  appeal  is
             not in accordance with the law and thereby unlawful.

         4.   Order that right of appeal be granted to me.

         5.   Order that the costs be paid by the Defendant."

62. The statement of facts and grounds of application  runs  to  ten  short
    paragraphs spanning just over a single side of A4.  It contains nothing
    more than a bare recitation  of  various  abstract  grounds  under  the
    headings "Illegality", "Irrationality",  "Procedural  Impropriety"  and
    "Other Grounds".  Under these headings no particulars or  evidence  are
    referred to and no case  law  is  cited.   No  facts  relating  to  the
    Applicant or his personal circumstances are set out.  No  reference  is
    made to his history of  criminality.  There  is  no  reference  to  the
    decision of the Respondent or its contents;  indeed  it  was  not  even
    annexed to  the  application  and  only  the  removal  directions  were
    attached.

63. A statement of truth was however signed by a  solicitor  (who  we  have
    since  been  told  is  the  principal  (the  Principal))  of  the  firm
    (Moorehouse Solicitors).  The Statement of Truth provides:  "I  believe
    (The Applicant believes) that the facts stated in this claim  form  are
    true". The application was accompanied by  an  equally  terse  document
    purporting to be the Applicant's witness statement.  It is  not  signed
    in the document submitted to the Tribunal.  It is as opaque  and  brief
    as are  the  grounds.   Equally,  it  fails  to  set  out  any  of  the
    Applicant's history of criminality.

64. No material changes or amendments were made to this application between
    the date of its service (November  2013)  and  the  date  of  the  oral
    hearing (May 2014).

65. The Respondent,  in  support  of  her  application  for  wasted  costs,
    complains that the grounds are almost entirely lacking in particularity
    and that it is difficult to discern upon what basis the Applicant is in
    fact contesting the impugned decision other than that it was a decision
    said to be "without right of appeal".  However, it is  plain  from  the
    decision itself that the Applicant was notified  that  he  had  an  in-
    country right of appeal which had to be exercised,  if  it  was  to  be
    exercised at all, within five business days.   It  is  plain  that  the
    Applicant elected not to exercise this right and on 22 October 2013  he
    was served with a notice of deportation arrangements for removal  on  6
    November 2013.  He issued the judicial review proceedings on 6 November
    2013, but service was not effected until 18 November 2013 by which time
    he had been removed.

66. It is in our view  manifest  that  there  never  was  even  a  remotely
    arguable basis for applying for judicial review.  We  therefore  refuse
    permission.

    (c)  Wasted costs

67. We turn now to consider whether we should exercise our power  to  award
    wasted costs against the solicitors  who  prepared  and  advanced  this
    hopeless application.  In order to explain our decision we need to  set
    out the main stages in the chronology which has led up to the  decision
    to make the order for wasted costs.

68. First, so far as procedure is  concerned,  the  Applicant's  solicitors
    were notified of the application for wasted costs, not least by  virtue
    of the direction of Judge Rintoul referred to  in  paragraph  1  above.
    Indeed, on the day  of  the  oral  hearing,  we  ensured,  through  the
    administrative office of the Upper Tribunal, that the  solicitors  were
    in actual fact aware that the hearing was to take place.  We wished  to
    avoid any  possibility  (however  remote)  that  for  some  reason  the
    solicitors had not been notified of the  forthcoming  hearing  to  deal
    with costs. Calls were made. The  administrative  office  was  notified
    that the solicitors considered the case to  be  closed  and  that  they
    would not be attending the hearing.  Nobody from the  solicitors'  firm
    therefore attended to proffer an explanation for the firm's conduct  or
    an apology for the manner in which  it  was  presented.  There  was  no
    compliance  with  the  direction  from  Judge  Rintoul  that   skeleton
    arguments be served on the Tribunal in relation to the issue of  costs.
    We take these matters into consideration.

69. By an order sealed on 6 June  2014,  the  Upper  Tribunal  ordered  the
    solicitors to show cause in writing by 4 pm, seven calendar  days  from
    the date of the order, why the Upper Tribunal should not refer the firm
    to the SRA, stating, inter alia, that the Tribunal considered that  the
    deportation of the applicant did  not  detract  in  any  way  from  the
    seriousness of the issues raised in the Respondent's summary grounds of
    defence and the Order of Judge Rintoul dated 3 March 2014.

70. On 13 June 2014, the Tribunal, very belatedly, received a letter  dated
    7 June 2014 from the Principal of the firm.  She  apologised  profusely
    and repeatedly to the Tribunal and to us  for  the  firm's  failure  to
    attend the hearing. More importantly, she explained the  very  detailed
    steps she had taken to ascertain what had  happened.  In  summary,  she
    explained that the Applicant telephoned the firm  on  22  October  2013
    seeking legal representation. He said he had just been  served  with  a
    deportation order and that he was going to be  removed  on  6  November
    2013 notwithstanding the fact that he had claimed asylum  in  detention
    and the Respondent had not decided the asylum claim. The caseworker  in
    question asked the Applicant to fax to the firm his immigration papers.
    The firm only received the directions for the Applicant's removal on  6
    November 2013. The Applicant was informed of the firm's fees.  However,
    the fees were not paid until the morning of 5 November 2014. Due to the
    time constraints and the removal that was scheduled to take place (on 6
    November 2013 at  20:50)  the  firm  lodged  a  judicial  review  claim
    notwithstanding that it had limited information on file.

71. The Principal confirmed that the firm had no objection  to  paying  the
    Respondent's costs. She went on to explain the steps she had  taken  to
    investigate the matter internally and said she was satisfied  that  the
    Applicant had failed to disclose that he had been convicted and that he
    had been given a right of appeal which he failed to exercise  and  that
    the lodging of the claim  eventuated  from  the  time  constraints  the
    caseworker faced when taking instructions from the Applicant as he  was
    due to be removed the following day.

72. The Principal said that the firm had not received the Notice of hearing
    for the hearing on 20 May 2014 and that the firm and other law firms in
    the same building had experienced similar  difficulties  since  January
    2014. On 19 January 2014, the Applicant's file  was  collected  by  his
    relative who informed the firm that he had been instructed to take over
    conduct of the matter. As a result of these  events,  individually  and
    cumulatively, the hearing date was not entered in the firm's electronic
    diary. These were the reasons  why  the  caseworker  had  informed  the
    administrative staff of the Tribunal that the case had been closed  and
    no one from the firm would be attending the hearing.

73. The Principal gave undertakings to ensure that this incident would  not
    be repeated.

74. We note the apology and the detailed explanations given both as to  the
    events that led to this claim being lodged in these terms and as to the
    steps she has undertaken to put in place in order to prevent a  similar
    situation occurring again.

75. On the material before us we accept that this might represent a one-off
    problem. Nonetheless, we consider that on the specific  facts  of  this
    case wasted costs remain warranted.

76. First, the Principal accepts that the caseworker and the firm  did  not
    make adequate enquiries before lodging  the  claim.  We  are  satisfied
    that, if the firm had made adequate enquiries, even  allowing  for  the
    time constraints in the light of the Applicant's impending  removal  it
    would have become readily  apparent  that  the  case  was  an  entirely
    hopeless one. For instance it appears that no one  actually  sought  or
    obtained the relevant decision letter; if the client did not provide it
    then it was always open to the firm to  contact  the  Home  Office  for
    relevant information once the firm had been duly instructed and was  in
    possession of the applicant's Home Office reference number.

77. Secondly, even accepting  that  in  cases  of  real  urgency  and  time
    pressure there may arise errors and mistakes in the formulation of  the
    application for judicial review by reason of the firm not being able to
    obtain full and accurate instructions there can be no  excuse  for  the
    firm not to take steps,  once  the  application  has  been  lodged,  to
    complete the verification exercise and to  then  make  any  corrections
    necessary to the documents as served. The duty to  act  reasonably  and
    professionally does not  come  to  an  end  with  the  service  of  the
    application. It is a continuing duty.  In the present case the firm was
    content to lodge an application without even having seen  the  decision
    letter that was the subject of the application yet it took no steps  to
    correct that application or to place before the Tribunal the  full  and
    proper facts. The firm remained on the record for some months following
    service and no remedial steps were taken.

78. When the application is measured and assessed as of  the  date  of  the
    hearing it therefore remained utterly defective. First, the application
    omitted to provide full and frank disclosure of the  Applicant's  prior
    criminality.  It failed to address any of the matters set  out  in  the
    impugned decision of the Respondent, of which the solicitors were fully
    aware, certainly by the time of the hearing.  We cannot conceive of any
    circumstances  where  solicitors  could  maintain  an  application  for
    judicial review without annexing and  addressing  the  actual  decision
    impugned.  If, in order to test the proposition, the solicitors are not
    given the decision by their client they would be perfectly entitled  to
    obtain a copy from the Respondent  upon  proof  that  they  had  lawful
    authority to act for the client. If time prevents this  from  happening
    prior to the lodging of the application  it  can  be  done  immediately
    thereafter.  Secondly, the drafting of the application remained so  far
    below the minimum standard which may  reasonably  be  expected  of  any
    competent legal representative that it was always bound  to  fail.   It
    is, put simply, improper  for  legal  representatives  to  maintain  an
    application upon the basis that  it  is  ostensibly  complete  when  in
    actual fact it is  so  sparse  on  relevant  details  that  it  cannot,
    sensibly, be adjudicated upon without  substantial  further  amendment.
    Thirdly, we would emphasise that the statement of  truth  is  not  mere
    flummery.   When  it  is  signed  it  stands  as  a  representation  by
    responsible legal  advisers  that  the  matters  they  advance  in  the
    application are true to the best of their  knowledge  and  belief.   It
    assumes, at the very least, that they have done  their  level  best  to
    verify facts. If, as we have observed, time pressures mean that  as  of
    the date of signature the signatory cannot be sure that the application
    reflects the full picture then it  is  that  representative's  duty  to
    conduct further, post-service, checks to ensure that  the  Tribunal  is
    given the  full  facts  since  only  in  those  circumstances  can  the
    statement of truth have real meaning.

79. For all these reasons we consider that the conduct  of  the  solicitors
    constituted negligent acts and omissions  which  gave  rise  to  wasted
    costs on the part of the Respondent.  We also consider that the conduct
    was "improper" in the broader sense set out in Ridehalgh (ibid).

80.  The  Respondent  has  submitted  a  schedule  of  costs  for   summary
    assessment.   We  conclude  that  the  failings  on  the  part  of  the
    Applicant's solicitors occurred from the very outset and that,  in  the
    circumstances, all of the Respondent's costs may properly be  recovered
    under the "wasted  costs"  jurisdiction.   We  therefore  exercise  our
    discretion   under   section   29(4)   and   order   the    Applicant's
    representatives to pay the wasted  costs  incurred  by  the  Respondent
    which we summarily assess at �932, inclusive of VAT.

    (d)  Reference to SRA

81. We consider next whether on the facts of this case we should refer  the
    case to the SRA and/or to the Legal Aid Authority.  We have decided not
    to do so.  This is essentially for the reason  that,  on  the  material
    before us, we accept that the errors were one-off failings and we  have
    noted the apology of the firm in question and the undertaking to ensure
    against future repetition.  Had there been a prior history  of  similar
    failings then we might well have taken a different view. The fact  that
    no reference is being made in this case  does  not  mean  that  in  the
    future, and  depending  upon  the  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  would
    necessarily refrain from referring a firm to the SRA and/or  Legal  Aid
    Authority upon a first occasion.

E.   General Warning

82. We take this opportunity to remind all  representatives  of  applicants
    applying for permission for judicial review (and indeed all  acting  in
    any other proceedings before the Tribunal) that the overriding duty  of
    all representatives is to the court, and in this context this means the
    Tribunal.  It is improper for any  practitioner  to  advance  arguments
    which they know to be false or which they know,  or  should  know,  are
    inconsistent with their own evidence, including medical or other expert
    evidence.  It is also incumbent upon practitioners to ensure  that  the
    Tribunal is provided with a  fair  and  comprehensive  account  of  all
    relevant facts, whether those facts are in favour or against the  legal
    representative's client.  It will  not  be  treated  as  an  acceptable
    explanation for an alleged failure to say that  this  was  inconsistent
    with the  representative's  duty  to  the  client;  that  would  be  an
    abnegation of the representative's duty to the court  and  to  the  due
    administration of justice.  It will also not be acceptable to say  that
    as of the date of the service of the application the representative was
    not in possession of all relevant facts because  of  time  constraints.
    The Tribunal accepts that time pressures might mean  that  applications
    that are less than perfect or comprehensive or complete might in actual
    fact reflect the very best that can be done  in  urgent  circumstances.
    However, this does not excuse  a  failure,  following  service  of  the
    application, to complete the fact finding  and  verification  exercise,
    and then seek to amend the application accordingly so as to ensure that
    the Tribunal is fully informed of the relevant facts and matters.

83. We would specifically draw the attention  of  representatives  to  (and
    endorse) the judgment of the High Court (Divisional Court) in R (on the
    application of Hamid) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin)  which  concerned
    failings on the part of legal representatives to act professionally  in
    the preparation of applications for judicial review. At paragraphs 6-11
    the President of the Queen's Bench Division, Sir John Thomas, stated:

         "6.  The court has required the attendance of the solicitor  today.
             It has received an apology on his behalf. Neither he  nor  the
             caseworker appreciated that this information is now  required.
             It is for that reason that on this occasion  we  do  not  name
             either the employee or the firm.
         7.   However, we will for the future do the following. If any  firm
             fails to provide the information required on the form  and  in
             particular explain the reasons for urgency, the time at  which
             the need for immediate consideration was first appreciated and
             the efforts made to  notify  the  defendant,  the  court  will
             require the attendance in open court of the solicitor from the
             firm who was responsible, together with his senior partner. It
             will list  not  only  the  name  of  the  case  but  the  firm
             concerned. Non-compliance cannot be allowed to continue.
         8.   That will not be the only consequence of failing  to  complete
             the requirements set out in this form. First, one  consequence
             may be that, if the form  is  not  completed,  the  judge  may
             simply refuse to consider the application. Second, if  reasons
             are not properly set out or do not explain why there has  been
             delay or the reasons are otherwise inadequate, the  court  may
             simply refuse to consider the application for that reason  and
             that reason alone.
         9.   These remarks apply equally to the form soon to be  introduced
             for out of hours applications and the form for  renewals  when
             an application has been refused on the papers.
         10.  These late, meritless applications by people who face  removal
             or deportation are an intolerable waste  of  public  money,  a
             great strain on the resources of this court and an abuse of  a
             service this court offers. The court therefore intends to take
             the most vigorous action against any legal representatives who
             fail to comply with its rules. If people persist in failing to
             follow the procedural requirements,  they  must  realise  that
             this court will not hesitate to refer those concerned  to  the
             Solicitors Regulation Authority.
         11.  That is  a  warning  for  the  future.  We  hope  it  will  be
             unnecessary to have to have any further hearings of this  kind
             or to refer anyone to the Solicitors Regulation Authority, but
             we will not hesitate to do so where  there  is  a  failure  to
             comply with the court's requirements."
84. Regrettably,  and  notwithstanding  the  warning  from  the  President,
    solicitors have continued to bring meritless  claims  before  the  High
    Court and the procedure has  been  evolved  pursuant  to  which  judges
    considering permission applications who consider that  the  application
    in question is hopeless can (when refusing  paper  leave)  require  the
    senior partner of the representative firm to write  and  explain  their
    conduct to the court.  This has, on occasion, led to  further  hearings
    before a full Divisional Court during which  the  solicitors  concerned
    are required to explain themselves.  The  Administrative  Court  Office
    has also maintained records of solicitors who may be treated as "repeat
    offenders".  In some circumstances files  have  been  referred  to  the
    relevant regulatory authorities, including  the  Legal  Aid  Authority.
    The Upper Tribunal's decision in a recent case gave rise to  a  request
    by the Legal Aid Agency to  inspect  the  Tribunal's  file,  which  was
    granted.

85. We conclude with three observations.

86. First, the mere fact that legal representatives advance an  application
    that fails on paper, or on a renewed oral  basis,  is  not  in  and  of
    itself a reason for the Tribunal to impose  any  sanction.   Applicants
    with weak cases are entitled to seek to advance their case and have  it
    adjudicated upon; that is a fundamental aspect of  having  a  right  of
    access to a court.  But there is a wealth  of  difference  between  the
    advancing of  a  case  that  is  held  to  be  unarguable  in  a  fair,
    professional and  proper  manner  and,  which  is  what  we  have  been
    concerned with in these cases, the advancing of unarguable cases  in  a
    professionally improper manner.

87.  Secondly,  although  in  these  cases  we  are  dealing  with   failed
    applications for permission we have  explained  in  the  section  above
    dealing with statutory framework that the costs jurisdiction applies to
    all parties and can, for example, arise in the case of a winning  party
    whose conduct, on the way to success, has fallen  below  the  requisite
    standard and caused wasted costs to be incurred by the losing party.

88. Thirdly, we underscore the importance of the observations made  by  the
    President of the QBD in  Hamid.  Given  the  assumption  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal of much of the jurisdiction of the High Court for dealing with
    judicial reviews in the field of immigration, the Tribunal will, as  it
    has in this case, adopt a  similar  procedure  in  those  circumstances
    where it considers it appropriate to do so.

  ~~~~0~~~~


SCHEDULE OF CASES ATTACHED TO RESPONDENT'S LETTER DATED 28 May 2014

...
|Case Name   |TSol ref|TSol    |Notes                        |Stage      |
|and AC/UT   |        |Case    |                             |           |
|Reference   |        |Officer |                             |           |
|ABDUSSALAM  |Z1400244|        |As set out in our summary    |Oral       |
|            |        |        |grounds:                     |hearing of |
|JR/6038/2013|        |        |                             |20 May 2014|
|            |        |        |Misrepresents claimant's     |(no paper  |
|            |        |        |diagnoses                    |decision) -|
|            |        |        |Claims the Claimant is       |           |
|            |        |        |mentally retarded when it is |           |
|            |        |        |clear the Claimant has a     |Decision   |
|            |        |        |history of pursuit of higher |reserved.  |
|            |        |        |education (came to UK for his|           |
|            |        |        |Masters)                     |           |
|            |        |        |Significantly exaggerates    |           |
|            |        |        |suicide risk in both the PAP |           |
|            |        |        |and the grounds of claim.    |           |
|            |        |        |States previous suicide      |           |
|            |        |        |attempts occurred when they  |           |
|            |        |        |have not.                    |           |
|            |        |        |Confuses Claimant's gender   |           |
|            |        |        |several times (suggests      |           |
|            |        |        |template grounds).           |           |
|            |Z1329078|        |Significantly misrepresents  |Respondent |
|JR/5797/2013|        |        |claimant's diagnoses.        |has offered|
|            |        |        |Medical evidence only        |reconsidera|
|            |        |        |discloses a diagnosis of     |tion but   |
|            |        |        |depression of moderate       |consent    |
|            |        |        |severity and makes no comment|order not  |
|            |        |        |on suicide risk at all.      |yet        |
|            |        |        |                             |finalised. |
|            |        |        |Grounds however, include:    |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Mentally stunted, low level  |           |
|            |        |        |intelligence, mental         |           |
|            |        |        |retardation, below average IQ|           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Psychotic symptoms           |           |
|            |        |        |"Real risk of claimant       |           |
|            |        |        |committing suicide"          |           |
|            |        |        |.                            |           |
|            |Z1320746|        |Significantly misrepresents  |Permission |
|            |        |        |claimant's diagnoses:        |refused on |
|JR/2976/2013|        |        |                             |7 March.   |
|            |        |        |Mentally stunted, low level  |           |
|            |        |        |intelligence, mental         |Costs to   |
|            |        |        |retardation, below average IQ|SSHD.      |
|            |        |        |(do not appear in medical    |           |
|            |        |        |evidence).                   |Not        |
|            |        |        |Generalised anxiety disorder,|renewed.   |
|            |        |        |post-traumatic stress        |           |
|            |        |        |disorder, depressive order   |           |
|            |        |        |with psychotic symptoms (none|           |
|            |        |        |of which appear in the       |           |
|            |        |        |medical evidence)            |           |
|            |        |        |.                            |           |
|            |Z1406584|        |Arguably the most misleading |AoS/Grounds|
|            |        |        |of this group of cases.      |filed 27   |
|JR/2118/2014|        |        |Grounds misrepresent the     |March 2014.|
|            |        |        |claimant's diagnoses         |           |
|            |        |        |(psychiatric report diagnoses|           |
|            |        |        |Adjustment Disorder and      |           |
|            |        |        |Alcohol - Problem Drinking), |Await      |
|            |        |        |whereas the grounds:         |permission |
|            |        |        |                             |decision.  |
|            |        |        |Claim he is mentally         |           |
|            |        |        |retarded, low IQ, low        |           |
|            |        |        |intelligence, mental         |           |
|            |        |        |hindrance - in fact the      |           |
|            |        |        |Claimant completed two years |           |
|            |        |        |of an engineering degree and |           |
|            |        |        |came to the UK to pursue     |           |
|            |        |        |higher education.            |           |
|            |        |        |Claims 'depressive order with|           |
|            |        |        |psychotic symptoms' - this is|           |
|            |        |        |not in the evidence.         |           |
|            |        |        |Significantly exaggerates    |           |
|            |        |        |suicide risk in the grounds  |           |
|            |        |        |of claim.  Suicide risk in   |           |
|            |        |        |the report is given as 'low'.|           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Claim he has suffered        |           |
|            |        |        |'physical, emotional and     |           |
|            |        |        |carnal abuse' - none of which|           |
|            |        |        |appears in the Claimant's    |           |
|            |        |        |history in the report.       |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |The medical report actually  |           |
|            |        |        |suggests how the Claimant    |           |
|            |        |        |could return to India safely,|           |
|            |        |        |noting the family connections|           |
|            |        |        |he has and how those could be|           |
|            |        |        |used to support his return.  |           |
|            |        |        |The grounds do not engage    |           |
|            |        |        |with this point, rather they |           |
|            |        |        |state the claimant "has no   |           |
|            |        |        |network to support him or    |           |
|            |        |        |help him seek out the        |           |
|            |        |        |appropriate care".           |           |
|            |Z1329017|        |Significantly misrepresents  |Permission |
|            |        |        |claimant's diagnoses.        |refused 7  |
|JR/5800/2013|        |        |Medical evidence shows the   |March 2014.|
|            |        |        |Claimant struggling with     |           |
|            |        |        |depression but frequently    |           |
|            |        |        |states no suicidal           |Costs to   |
|            |        |        |thoughts/intentions and no   |SSHD.      |
|            |        |        |previous suicidal attempts,  |           |
|            |        |        |no psychotic symptoms.       |Not        |
|            |        |        |Grounds however, include:    |renewed.   |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Mentally stunted, low level  |           |
|            |        |        |intelligence, mental         |           |
|            |        |        |retardation, below average IQ|           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Generalised anxiety disorder,|           |
|            |        |        |post-traumatic stress        |           |
|            |        |        |disorder (which do not appear|           |
|            |        |        |in the medical evidence); and|           |
|            |        |        |psychotic symptoms (which is |           |
|            |        |        |directly contradicted by the |           |
|            |        |        |medical evidence).           |           |
|            |        |        |Claims that there are        |           |
|            |        |        |suicidal deliberations and   |           |
|            |        |        |past suicide attempts when   |           |
|            |        |        |there are none and were none.|           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Frequently confuses the      |           |
|            |        |        |claimant's gender            |           |
|            |        |        |Claims that the claimant has |           |
|            |        |        |lived a life deprived of     |           |
|            |        |        |basic needs and suffered     |           |
|            |        |        |"physical, emotional and     |           |
|            |        |        |carnal cruelty" throughout   |           |
|            |        |        |existence - this is not      |           |
|            |        |        |mentioned in the patient's   |           |
|            |        |        |history section of the       |           |
|            |        |        |medical evidence.            |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |The medical evidence does    |           |
|            |        |        |make comment that there would|           |
|            |        |        |be a higher suicide risk on  |           |
|            |        |        |return to Nigeria.           |           |
|            |Z1328912|        |Misrepresents claimant's     |Permission |
|            |        |        |diagnoses (the following     |refused 15 |
|JR/5581/2013|        |        |appear in the grounds but not|March 2014.|
|            |        |        |in the medical evidence:     |           |
|            |        |        |mental retardation, low IQ,  |           |
|            |        |        |generalised anxiety disorder,|Costs to   |
|            |        |        |depressive order with        |SSHD.      |
|            |        |        |psychotic symptoms).         |           |
|            |        |        |Exaggerates suicide risk     |No renewal.|
|            |        |        |(claimant specifically noted |           |
|            |        |        |as having no suicidal        |           |
|            |        |        |intentions).                 |           |
|            |        |        |Confuses claimant's gender   |           |
|            |        |        |(suggests template grounds). |           |
|            |Z1405198|        |Misrepresents claimant's     |AoS/Grounds|
|            |        |        |diagnoses.  Claimant was     |filed 7    |
|JR/2121/2014|        |        |diagnosed with a depressive  |April 2014 |
|            |        |        |episode of moderate severity |           |
|            |        |        |with somatic symptoms.       |Await      |
|            |        |        |                             |permission |
|            |        |        |The following appear in the  |decision   |
|            |        |        |grounds but not in the       |           |
|            |        |        |medical evidence:            |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Mental retardation, low IQ   |           |
|            |        |        |Depressive order with        |           |
|            |        |        |psychotic symptoms           |           |
|            |        |        |Post traumatic stress        |           |
|            |        |        |disorder                     |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Grounds claim previous       |           |
|            |        |        |suicide attempts occurred    |           |
|            |        |        |when they are not mentioned  |           |
|            |        |        |in the medical report.       |           |
|            |        |        |                             |           |
|            |        |        |Grounds claim physical,      |           |
|            |        |        |emotional and carnal cruelty |           |
|            |        |        |suffered by the claimant but |           |
|            |        |        |none of this is mentioned in |           |
|            |        |        |the background summary in the|           |
|            |        |        |medical evidence.            |           |
|            |Z1323566|        |Misrepresents claimant's     |AoS/Grounds|
|            |        |        |diagnoses (the following     |filed on 12|
|CO/15505/201|        |        |appear in the grounds but not|March 2014.|
|3           |        |        |in the medical evidence:     |           |
|(Admin      |        |        |mental retardation, low IQ,  |           |
|Court)      |        |        |depressive order with        |Await      |
|            |        |        |psychotic symptoms).         |permission |
|            |        |        |States previous suicide      |decision.  |
|            |        |        |attempts occurred when they  |           |
|            |        |        |have not.                    |           |
|            |Z1322178|        |                             |           |
|JR/513/2014 |        |        |[OMITTED]                    |[OMITTED]  |
|            |Z1403157|        |Misrepresents claimant's     |AoS/Grounds|
|            |        |        |diagnoses (the following     |filed on 27|
|JR/960/2014 |        |        |appear in the grounds but not|March 2014.|
|            |        |        |in the medical evidence:     |           |
|            |        |        |mental retardation, low IQ,  |           |
|            |        |        |post-traumatic stress        |Await      |
|            |        |        |disorder and depressive order|permission |
|            |        |        |with psychotic symptoms).    |decision.  |

