


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               ALI AHMED SAFI
                                KHALIL ULLAH
                               & SEVEN OTHERS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants
(other than Khalil Ullah): Mr D Seddon & Mr P Jorro, instructed by Duncan
                   Lewis & Co,  Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For Khalil Ullah:      Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Hammersmith & Fulham Law
                      Centre
For the Respondent:        Mr A Payne, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


(1) It is essential for a judge who is granting permission  to  appeal  only
on limited grounds to say so, in terms, in the section of the standard  form
document that contains the decision, as  opposed  to  the  reasons  for  the
decision.


(2) It is likely to be only  in  very  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission that  a  decision
which, on its face, grants permission to appeal without  express  limitation
is to be construed as anything other than a grant of permission  on  all  of
the grounds accompanying the application for permission, regardless of  what
might be said in the reasons for decision section of the document.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

 1. On 6 February 2000, the appellants, and a number of others, hijacked  a
    commercial aircraft in Afghanistan and forced the pilots to fly  it  to
    the United Kingdom, where the aircraft arrived on 7 February 2000.

 2. The legal proceedings in the United Kingdom  that  resulted  from  this
    event have been both various and protracted. For present  purposes,  we
    are  concerned  with  a  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,
    promulgated on 7 July 2015,  in  which  that  Tribunal  held  that  the
    appellants  were  excluded  from  the  1951  Refugee  Convention   and,
    accordingly, not entitled to the status of "refugee" within the meaning
    of that Convention, because of the operation of Article 1F(b) thereof.


 3.  Article 1F(b) provides that the Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
    person "with respect to whom there are serious reasons for  considering
    that ... he has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
    country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee".





B. Applications for permission to appeal


 4. Each of the appellants applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  All of  them
    advanced four grounds of appeal; but  Khalil  Ullah  also  advanced  an
    additional ground.


 5. In essence, ground 1 contended that the acquittal of the appellants  on
    criminal charges brought in respect of the hijacking meant  that  on  a
    "principled approach", their exclusion by reason of Article  1F(b)  was
    wrong. Ground 2 contended that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law
    in relation to the defence of duress. Ground 3 said that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in finding that the hijacking of the aircraft
    was non-political. Ground 4 challenged the lawfulness of the First-tier
    Tribunal's  rejection  of   the   appellants'   submissions   regarding
    expiation.


 6. As well as advancing an additional reason why the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in relation to  ground  4,  based  on  his  "complex  medical
    problems", Khalil Ullah advanced an additional ground,  also  based  on
    his medical condition, which was that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    failing to apply discretion in his case.




C. The effect of the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal


 7. The purpose of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 12 October 2018 was
    to determine the scope of the grant of permission to  appeal,  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on  18  January  2018  and,  depending  on  our
    conclusions on that issue, to determine whether  permission  to  appeal
    should be granted on any grounds on which the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    refused permission.


 8. After the usual headings, the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  of  18
    January 2018 read as follows:-


         "Application by Appellants




         Permission to Appeal is Granted




         REASONS FOR DECISION (including any decision on extending time)


          1. The Appellants, Afghans, were  all  hijackers  of  an  airline
             (sic).  They were acquitted of criminal charges on  appeal  to
             the  Court  of  Appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  jury   were
             misdirected as to what constituted duress.


          2. The Appellants above are 9 of the original 27.


          3. They had all claimed asylum and the Secretary of State claimed
             that they were excluded from the Refugee Convention as Article
             1F(b) applied to them.


          4. The First-tier Tribunal heard the appeals  on  three  separate
             occasions to determine discrete issues  but  directed  at  the
             conclusion of the third that the date of promulgation  of  the
             last, 21st Decision [sic] 2017 should be taken as the date  to
             trigger  applications   for   permission   to   appeal.    The
             applications are thus in time.


          5. The Appellants seek permission to appeal in relation  to  only
             one of the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal, that taken on
             7th July 2015, which found that the  Appellants  are  excluded
             from the Refugee Convention.  The Appellants  were  successful
             on the first occasion (October 2013) in relation to A.3 of the
             ECHR.


          6. While I am not persuaded that there is an  arguable  error  of
             law in the First-tier Tribunal decision in relation to  duress
             or its finding that the "crime" was not a political  crime,  I
             do consider it arguable that the Tribunal may  have  erred  in
             its consideration of whether Article 1F(b) was  applicable  at
             all given that the Appellants had  all  been  acquitted  after
             trial.


                 Signed


                 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
                 Date: 18th January 2018"


 9. What is the  scope  of  the  grant  of  permission  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal?  The fact that this question needs to be asked is, in itself,
    regrettable.  It is made worse by the fact that it has caused there  to
    be further delay in the resolution of legal proceedings that have  been
    on-going for the best part of two decades.


10. The appellants contend that the First-tier Tribunal  has  granted  them
    permission on all the grounds that  they  respectively  advanced.   The
    respondent submits that permission has been granted only on ground 1.


D. Procedure Rules


11. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  &
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides as follows:-

         "Tribunal's consideration  of  an  application  for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal

         34.-(1)  On receiving an application for permission to  appeal  the
                  Tribunal  must  first  consider  whether  to  review   the
                  decision in accordance with rule 35.


             (2)  If the Tribunal decides not to review  the  decision,  or
                  reviews the decision and decides  to  take  no  action  in
                  relation to the decision, or part of it, the Tribunal must
                  consider whether to give permission to appeal in  relation
                  to the decision or that part of it.


             (3)  The Tribunal must send a record of its  decision  to  the
                  parties as soon as practicable.


             (4)  If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must send
                  with the record of its decision-


                   a) a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and


                   b) notification of the right to make an  application  to
                      the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  and  the
                      time within which, and  the  manner  in  which,  such
                      application must be made.


             (5)  The Tribunal may give permission  to  appeal  on  limited
                  grounds, but must comply with paragraph (4) in relation to
                  any grounds on which it has refused permission."


12. So far as relevant, the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    provide as follows:-


         "Application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal


         21.-(1)  ...


             (2)  A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission
                  to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of
                  another tribunal only if-


                   a) they have  made  an  application  for  permission  to
                      appeal  to  the  tribunal  which  made  the  decision
                      challenged; and
                   b) that application has been refused  or  has  not  been
                      admitted or has been granted only on limited grounds.


                  ..."


E. Guidance Note 2011 No. 1

13. Blake J, the first President of the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of
    the Upper Tribunal, issued Guidance Note 2011  No.  1:   Permission  to
    appeal to UTIAC. Paragraph 25 of the Guidance Note reads as follows:-


         "Limited or restricted grounds

         25.  Whilst both the FtT when dealing with  a  "first  application"
             for PTA (FtT Rules, r.25(5)) and the UT when  dealing  with  a
             "second application" for PTA (UT Rules, r.22(4)) may  restrict
             the grant of permission to specified grounds, the right of the
             applicant to apply to the UT for permission to appeal on other
             grounds and its practical consequences lead to  the  pragmatic
             suggestion that such a course is frequently more trouble  than
             it is worth.  A judicial observation on the  merits  of  other
             grounds that have not caused permission to be granted  may  be
             of value to the judge seised of the appeal, who will  be  able
             to direct the parties to those grounds which are considered to
             have arguable merit.  If nevertheless it is decided permission
             should only be granted or limited [on] restricted grounds, the
             Judge should state this expressly (and precisely), so that  it
             is clear that he or she contemplates the  possibility  of  the
             applicant applying to the UT in respect of the other grounds."




14. Also, of relevance are the following paragraphs:-


         "The grounds of appeal


         29.  Where permission to appeal is  being  refused  on  competently
             drafted grounds, it is desirable that  the  decision  and  the
             reasons for it  should  engage,  however  briefly  with  those
             grounds.  The maxim that an appellant is entitled to know  why
             he  or  she  has  won  or  lost  also  has  utility  for   PTA
             applications. There is a limit to what is required if  grounds
             are overlengthy, rambling, incoherent and imprecise, but there
             should be some attempt to respond to the  case  as  presented.
             What is called for is not  description  of  the  grounds,  but
             evaluation."


         ...


         31.  Resort to very generalised or formulaic reasons or conclusions
             for refusing PTA do not give assurance that the point has been
             understood and engaged with.  In an 11 February 2010 speech to
             the UTIAC judiciary the President highlighted  the  need  when
             dealing with PTAs to respond to the grounds of appeal  and  to
             identify succinctly and clearly why PTA has  been  granted  or
             refused."


15. The references in paragraph 25 of the Guidance Note to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Rules were to a former version of those Rules. The  references
    now need to be read to the equivalent provisions  of  the  2014  Rules.
    However, the points made in paragraphs 25, 29 and 31  of  the  Guidance
    Note remain as valid today as when they were issued.


16. The reason why paragraph 25 of the Guidance Note  made  the  "pragmatic
    suggestion" regarding granting permission on limited  grounds  is  that
    the making of a renewed application for permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds which the First-tier Tribunal has refused  will,  in  practice,
    often delay the progress of the appeal which, in view  of  the  (albeit
    limited) grant by  the First-tier Tribunal, has been set in motion.   A
    physical (i.e. paper) file cannot be in two places at once.   Thus,  if
    the file is before an Upper  Tribunal  judge  who  is  considering  the
    application  in  respect  of  the  "refused"  grounds,  the  Tribunal's
    administrative staff will, in practice, need to await a result of  that
    judge's decision before listing the appeal for hearing.


17. Where permission is, nevertheless,  intended  to  be  granted  only  on
    limited grounds, paragraph 25 of the Guidance  Note  states  that  this
    should be expressly and precisely articulated.


18. As the present case demonstrates, one important  reason  for  requiring
    clarity and  precision  in  this  regard  is  to  avoid  the  need  for
    professional and judicial time and effort to be expended upon  deciding
    the scope of the grant.  It is, to say the  least,  difficult  for  the
    parties and the judges of the Upper Tribunal to prepare for  a  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal if the ambit of the case to be  advanced/resisted
    is unknown.


19. A second reason, which paragraph 25 expressly articulates,  is  that  a
    person who is being granted permission by the First-tier Tribunal  only
    on limited grounds needs to know that fact.  This  is  the  purpose  of
    rule 34(4)(b) and (5) of the 2014 Rules, whereby the  person  concerned
    must be notified by the First-tier Tribunal of his or her right to make
    an application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to  appeal  on  the
    refused grounds.   This  also  means  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    administrative  staff  need  to  see  whether  the  judge's  grant   of
    permission is a  limited  one,  in  order  to  send  out  the  required
    notification.



F. Case law


20. In Ferrer (limited appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304  (IAC),
    difficulties arose in respect of a grant of  permission  that  did  not
    make it clear whether permission was granted only on  limited  grounds.
    The Upper Tribunal said this:-


         "22. It is necessary at this stage  to  make  two  general  points.
             First, as the present case illustrates, if on  an  application
             for permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal,  Immigration
             and Asylum Chamber intends to grant permission only in respect
             of certain of the grounds, then  the  judge  considering  that
             application should make it abundantly plain that this  is  so,
             both in his or her decision under rule 25(5) and  by  ensuring
             that the Tribunal's administrative staff send out  the  proper
             notice (currently IA68) so as to comply with rule  25(5).   It
             should also be noted  that  rule  25(4)(a)  requires  "written
             reasons for a decision under  this  rule",  which  means  that
             written reasons are required both for granting an  application
             on particular grounds and  for  refusing  the  application  on
             particular grounds."
         23.  Secondly, as  a  practical  matter,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             should consider carefully the utility of  granting  permission
             only on limited grounds.  Given that the effect of  any  grant
             of permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to  set  in  train
             proceedings on the case in question in the Upper  Tribunal,  a
             grant of permission on limited grounds will not, in  practice,
             often be as helpful to the parties or to the Upper Tribunal as
             would a general grant of permission by reference to all of the
             applicant's grounds, which nevertheless  expressly  identifies
             the ground or grounds that are considered  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal to have the strongest prospect of success.   In  this
             way, the First-tier Tribunal identifies the  likely  ambit  of
             the forthcoming Upper Tribunal proceedings, which  -  if  that
             Tribunal concurs - can then form the backdrop  for  the  Upper
             Tribunal's subsequent case management directions under rule  5
             of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  ("the
             Upper Tribunal Rules").  It should also  be  noted  that  rule
             15(1)(a) and (b) of those Rules expressly  enables  the  Upper
             Tribunal to give directions as  to  the  issues  on  which  it
             requires  evidence  or  submissions  and  the  nature  of  the
             evidence or submissions it requires."


21. As is apparent, in Ferrer the  Upper  Tribunal  was  dealing  with  the
    predecessors of the 2014 Rules.  Nothing of materiality turns on  this,
    however.


22. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez; Mandalia and
    Patel v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 2, the Court of Appeal  had  to  interpret
    the scope of permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, as granted by the Upper Tribunal.  In the  case  of  Mr
    Mandalia, it became important to decide whether the Upper Tribunal  had
    granted permission on one or both of two grounds, since  this  impacted
    upon the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.


23. The operative parts of the  Upper  Tribunal's  permission  decision  in
    Rodriguez were as follows:-


         "Permission to appeal is granted


         Reasons (including any decision on extending time)


         The Tribunal is  bound  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  authority,  and
         therefore the challenge to the  decision  of  that  court  in  Alam
         [regarding the Secretary of State's evidential flexibility  policy]
         cannot avail the  appellant  before  the  Tribunal.   However,  the
         decision in Ahmadi [2012] UKUT 00174 ... is of clear  relevance  in
         this case and in respect of that point in particular permission  is
         granted."


24. At the substantive appeal before the Upper Tribunal, the judge  dealing
    with the matter took the view that the grant  of  permission  had  been
    limited to the Ahmadi point (that is to say, the validity of a  removal
    decision  made  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006).  Giving the judgment of the court, Davis LJ said
    as follows:-


         "72. The position of Mr  Gullick  [Counsel  for  the  Secretary  of
             State] is straightforward. He says that  the  Order  of  Upper
             Tribunal Judge Allen of 9 October 2012 is  to  be  read  as  a
             whole.  By it, he submits, by reference to the  Reasons  there
             set out, permission to appeal was limited only to  the  Ahmadi
             ground.  No permission to appeal  was  granted,  he  says,  in
             respect of what  may  be  styled  the  Evidential  Flexibility
             policy/Alam ground.  That, accordingly, was the way  in  which
             judges of the Upper  Tribunal  -  and,  in  particular,  Upper
             Tribunal Judge Martin - subsequently approached  matters.  For
             the purposes of s.13 of the Tribunals, Court  and  Enforcement
             Act  2007,  so  the  argument  goes  on,  an  application  for
             permission to appeal is an excluded  decision.   Consequently,
             there is no right of appeal available, since an appeal to this
             court on a point of law can only be brought from a decision of
             the Upper Tribunal which is  not  an  excluded  decision:  see
             s.13(1) and (8) of the 2007 Act.
          1. The logic of the argument is impeccable.  Nor does Mr Mahmood,
             appearing for Mr Mandalia, dispute that logic.   But  his,  no
             less straightforward, argument is to dispute the premise.   He
             says that, on its true  interpretation,  the  Order  of  Upper
             Tribunal Judge Allen was not limited to the Ahmadi ground.
          1. Having considered the arguments, I agree with Mr Mahmood.
          1. It is true that, as Mr Gullick emphasised, a number  of  Upper
             Tribunal judges thereafter in this  case  have  construed  the
             permission as so limited.  But while of course one should have
             regard to those views, they cannot be decisive on the point of
             interpretation arising.
          1. There is a degree of ambiguity in  the  Order  as  made.   The
             actual grant of permission, taken on its own, is unrestricted:
             "permission to appeal is granted".  That  plainly  favours  Mr
             Mahmood's stance.  Turning, however, to the Reasons, the first
             sentence is, I would accept, indicative of the Upper  Tribunal
             judge being flatly against what may be called the Alam  point.
             But equivocation is then introduced in the second sentence  by
             use of the phrase "in particular": that connotes a wider grant
             of permission than just on the  Ahmadi  point.   Mr  Gullick's
             argument in effect involves rewriting the second  sentence  of
             the Reasons, either so as notionally to delete the  words  "in
             particular" or so as to have  it  read  "in  respect  of  that
             particular point".  Moreover, the written  grounds  of  appeal
             before the judge were extensive as to the asserted application
             of the policy: and  Mr  Mahmood  reminded  us  that  sometimes
             judges, where minded to give leave on one ground, may be  more
             receptive, in consequence, to giving leave on  other  grounds.
             In this regard he referred us, if any authority  were  needed,
             to the Tribunal determination  in  Ferrer  [2012]  UKUT  00304
             (IAC),  and  in  particular  to  the  observations   made   in
             paragraphs 22 and 23 of that determination.  He suggested that
             it is quite possible that Upper Tribunal Judge Allen may  have
             had that approach in mind.
          1. This is not at all straightforward.  But overall, in the light
             of the wording of the Order read as  a  whole,  I  incline  to
             think that it is to be construed as an unrestricted  grant  of
             permission.  In any event, if there is ambiguity arising  from
             the language of the Reasons  given  then  I  think  that  such
             ambiguity is to  be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  applicant:
             particularly where the opening part of  the  Order  concerning
             the actual grant of permission was unqualified.
          1. This court announced, after hearing oral argument on the point
             at  an  early  stage  of  the  hearing  before  us,  that  the
             application to set aside the grant of permission was  refused.
             The foregoing represent my reasons for  being  party  to  that
             decision.

          1. It was also suggested to us that  general  guidance  might  be
             given by this court as to how limited grants of permission  to
             appeal are to be framed.  I would decline that invitation.  To
             the extent that general guidance is needed for  tribunals,  it
             can be found in the  Guidance  Note  2011/No  1,  as  amended,
             issued by Blake J (President) in 2011.
          1. I would, however, add this.  The  guiding  consideration  must
             always be, where it is intended that a grant of permission  to
             appeal is to be limited  or  restricted,  that  the  grant  is
             unambiguously clear.  It thus should, in my view, be  regarded
             as good practice to be followed in such cases that the wording
             of the actual grant itself is explicit that the permission  to
             appeal is limited or restricted: for  example  "permission  is
             granted, limited to grounds 1  and  4  [or  as  the  case  may
             be]..." or "permission is granted, limited  as  hereafter  set
             out..."  It  is  not  good  practice  to  give  an  ostensibly
             unlimited grant and then to impose limitations in the  Reasons
             thereafter given in the order: indeed  such  a  procedure  may
             only result in the kinds of problems thrown up in the  present
             case.   Ultimately,  as  Blake  J  said  in  his  Presidential
             Guidance:  "If nevertheless it is  decided  permission  should
             only be granted on limited or restricted  grounds,  the  judge
             should state this expressly  (and  precisely)....".   That  is
             guidance to be followed."
25. In R (Behary) v Secretary of State for the Home Department and  Another
    [2016] EWCA Civ 702, the Court of Appeal considered  the  scope  of  an
    order granting permission to bring judicial review:-

         "34. Mr Malik submits that the judge erred in concluding  that  His
             Honour Judge Gilbart QC, who granted permission on the papers,
             had limited the grant of permission.  In  my  judgment  he  is
             correct in that submission but there is no  substance  in  the
             underlying argument.  I would therefore refuse  permission  to
             appeal on this ground.

         35.  The order made by Judge Gilbart QC  when  granting  permission
             was "Permission is hereby granted".  In the observations  that
             followed the judge indicated that he  had  considered  whether
             there was an arguable case relating to the  decision  refusing
             Mr Ullah's application.  He continued: "In my  judgment  there
             is an arguable case, based upon the combination of  grounds  1
             and 2."  Ground one was a de minimis  argument,  i.e.  that  a
             narrow  failure  to  comply  with  the  Immigration  Rules  in
             question should be ignored. Ground 2 related to the meaning of
             "established presence".  It was in  those  circumstances  that
             the Home  Office  contended,  and  the  judge  accepted,  that
             despite the generality of the order made by Judge  Gilbart  QC
             permission was in fact limited to those two grounds.

         36.  A similar question arose in Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2, which was not  cited
             to the judge when she considered this issue, in the context of
             the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal to the
             Court of Appeal.  Davis LJ dealt with the question at para  76
             and following. The  order  was  unrestricted,  "permission  to
             appeal is granted", but  the  reasons  focussed  on  only  one
             ground.  The task was to construe the order as a whole.  Where
             the opening words of the order suggested an unqualified  grant
             of permission and what followed in the reasons was  ambiguous,
             the ambiguity should be resolved in favour of  the  applicant:
             para 77.

         37.  It is commonplace to see an order granting permission  stating
             that it is  limited  to  one  or  only  some  of  the  grounds
             advanced.  It is also  commonplace  to  see  the  observations
             following what appears to be a  general  grant  of  permission
             explicitly limiting the grounds: "For these  reasons  I  grant
             leave on grounds x,  y  and  z  only".   Equally,  it  is  not
             uncommon to see in observations an indication that  the  judge
             considers only some of the grounds to have potential merit but
             nonetheless to give general permission.  Although in this case
             it is apparent that Judge Gilbart QC focussed on  two  of  the
             grounds, the overall position  was  ambiguous  and  should  be
             resolved in favour of Mr Ullah."



G. Discussion

(a) Construing the grant of permission

26. In the light of the Court of Appeal judgment in Rodriguez, we  consider
    that the grant of permission in the present case falls to be  construed
    as general or unlimited.   In  other  words,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission on each of the  four  grounds,  in  respect  of  the
    appellants other than Khalil Ullah, and on all five of  Khalil  Ullah's
    grounds.

27. As can be seen from paragraph 8 above, the standard  form  of  document
    produced by the First-tier Tribunal falls into two  discrete  sections.
    First. there is  the  decision  itself,  which,  in  this  case,  reads
    "Permission to Appeal is Granted". The decision is separated  from  the
    second part by a black horizontal line. The second section is described
    as "REASONS FOR DECISION". On its face, therefore, the  second  section
    distinguishes itself from  the  first  section:  the  first  being  the
    decision and the second being the reasons for that decision.

28. It is clearly significant that, in the reasons for decision section  of
    the document, permission  to  appeal  is  categorically  stated  to  be
    "granted"; and that there are no words of limitation in  that  section.
    Given the terms of the decision, Rodriguez  makes  it  plain  that  any
    ambiguity in the reasons which follow the decision fall to be  resolved
    in favour of the appellants.

29. This means that Mr Payne's attempt, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  to
    argue that the document, taken as a whole, amounts only  to  a  limited
    grant, faces considerable difficulties.

30. The high point of Mr Payne's argument is that, in paragraph  6  of  the
    reasons, the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated, in terms, that  she  was
    "not persuaded that there is an arguable error of law"  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision regarding duress and regarding the "crime" not
    being a political one.  Mr Payne submitted that since permission cannot
    be granted unless there is an arguable error of law, the judge must  be
    taken to have excluded grounds 2 and 3.

31. It is not, in fact, the  case  that  permission  to  appeal  cannot  be
    granted to the Upper Tribunal unless the granting  judge  is  satisfied
    that there is an arguable error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Section 11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 confers a right of appeal "on any point of law arising from  a
    decision", other than an excluded decision.  It is, therefore, possible
    for permission to be granted, even where it is not  considered  by  the
    granting judge that the First-tier Tribunal has arguably made  a  legal
    error, if the point of law in question  is,  in  the  granting  judge's
    view, of such significance as  to  make  it  desirable  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to become seized of the matter.

32. Having said this, it is plain that, in the present case, the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not consider grounds 2 and 3 to be of such a nature.
     Nevertheless, the fact remains that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    properly invoked section 11(1) by granting permission on ground 1.   In
    those circumstances, there would have been nothing wrong with the judge
    formally granting permission on all grounds, notwithstanding  that  she
    considered certain of them to be independently incapable of giving rise
    to an appeal under section 11(1) of the 2007 Act.

33. Indeed, as we have seen, that is the plain thrust of  paragraph  25  of
    the Guidance Note.  It is open to a judge, in these  circumstances,  to
    grant permission generally even though he or she might think particular
    grounds are not, in themselves, sufficiently arguable.  Indeed, much of
    paragraph 25 would be rendered a  dead  letter  if  the  position  were
    otherwise.

34. In seeking to distinguish Rodriguez from the  present  case,  Mr  Payne
    laid emphasis upon the significance attributed by the Court  of  Appeal
    to  the  words  "in  particular"  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  grant  of
    permission in that case.  He correctly pointed out that no  such  words
    were used by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present case.

35. Whilst that is true, we do  not  consider  it  materially  affects  the
    position.  As we have said, given that the decision to grant permission
    was, on its face, unrestricted, the "reasons" section of  the  document
    would need to be unambiguous in order to contradict that general grant.
     That is simply not the case.

36. The appellants derive additional support, we find, from the  fact  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  said  nothing  at  all  about  ground  4
    (expiation) or about Khalil Ullah's ground  5.   This  strengthens  the
    inference that, in saying what she did about grounds 2 and 3, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was merely opining about the relative merits of the
    grounds, so as to give an indication to the appellants of what might be
    worth concentrating upon in the Upper Tribunal.

37. We therefore conclude that the proper  construction  of  the  grant  of
    permission in the present case is that it is entirely unrestricted.  At
    the conclusion of the hearing on 12 October, we informed the parties of
    our conclusion, which meant we did not require to hear  submissions  on
    whether permission should additionally be granted on grounds 2 to 5.




(b) The requirements to be met when granting permission

38. The time has come when it  needs  to  be  clearly  stated  that  it  is
    unacceptable to produce a decision on an application for permission  to
    appeal which is so unclear that it gives rise to the need for  judicial
    interpretation, of the kind we have had to  undertake  in  the  present
    case.  A decision on a permission application must be capable of  being
    understood by the Tribunal's administrative staff (for the  reasons  we
    have given above); by the parties; and by  the  tribunal  or  court  to
    which the appeal lies.

39. What the Court of Appeal  said  at  paragraph  80  of  Rodriguez  must,
    henceforth, be followed.  If a judge intends to grant  permission  only
    on limited grounds, he or she must make that fact absolutely clear.

40. Particularly given the delay and expense that have been  occasioned  in
    the present proceedings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  failure  to
    produce a clear decision, the Upper Tribunal considers  that  the  time
    has also come to build upon Rodriguez, as follows.

41. Henceforth, it is not to be regarded as merely good practice to do what
    is set out in paragraph 80 of Rodriguez; we regard it as essential  for
    a judge who is granting permission only on limited grounds to  say  so,
    in terms.  The place to do so is in the section of  the  document  that
    contains the decision.

42. There is one point of detail  in  paragraph  80  with  which  we  would
    respectfully disagree. We do not consider that  it  is  appropriate  to
    state "Permission is granted, limited as hereafter set out", unless the
    limitation occurs specifically in the section of the completed document
    which contains the  decision,  as  opposed  to  the  reasons  for  that
    decision; that is to say, in the first and not the second section  (see
    paragraph 27 above).

43. Thus, permission granted on limited grounds should state "Permission is
    granted, limited  to  grounds  1  and  4"  (as  the  case  may  be)  or
    "Permission is granted on grounds 1, 2 and 3 but is refused on  grounds
    4 and 5" (as the case may be).

44. The "reasons for decision" section is to be  construed  as  just  that;
    i.e. the reasons for the  decision  which  has  just  been  made.   The
    reasons for decision must not include any words that  are  intended  to
    form part of the decision.  The reasons section is the place where  the
    reasons for refusing permission,  either  generally  or  on  particular
    grounds, should be stated, pursuant to the duty imposed on the judge by
    rule 34(4)(a) of the 2014 Rules or, in the case of the Upper  Tribunal,
    rule 22(1) of the 2008 Rules.

45. The reasons section  is  also  the  place  where,  if  and  insofar  as
    permission is being granted, the reasons  for  doing  so  are  "clearly
    identified"  (see  paragraph  37  of  the  Guidance  Note).    Although
    paragraph 37 is not reflected in the Procedure Rules of the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, it is plainly necessary in pursuance of
    the overriding objective to explain to the parties (albeit briefly) why
    permission has been granted.

46. Henceforth, it is likely to be only in very  exceptional  circumstances
    that the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded  to  entertain  a  submission
    that a decision which, on its face, grants permission to appeal without
    express limitation is to be construed as anything other than a grant of
    permission on all of  the  grounds  accompanying  the  application  for
    permission.  That is highly likely to be so, regardless of what may  be
    said in the reasons for decision section of the document.

47. Where the judge who has granted permission generally  is  of  the  view
    that certain of the grounds are such that  they  would  not  themselves
    have given rise to a grant of permission, the judge should  say  so  in
    the reasons for decision section.  Some suitable formulations might  be
    along the following lines:-

      a) "Although I grant permission on all grounds, ground 3 is not, in my
         view, of sufficient arguable merit as to have justified a grant  on
         that ground alone.  The appellant may wish to bear this in mind  in
         preparing his/her case in the Upper Tribunal";

      b) "Permission is granted on all grounds but, in my view, ground 1  is
         the strongest and is the reason I have granted permission".







                               Signed                     Date

                                 2 November 2018




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber




