

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Abunar (Para 339C: "Country of return") [2018[ UKUT 00387 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|17 August 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between


               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             WAJDI SAEED ABUNAR

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    In person.

It appears that paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules does  not  correctly
transpose the relevant provisions of the Qualification Directive.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal; the respondent, whom we  shall
    call "the  claimant",  appeared  before  us  unrepresented  and  street
    homeless.

 2. The claimant claimed to have been born in Syria.   He  lived  for  many
    years in Egypt.  He claimed to have left Egypt with a well-founded fear
    of persecution there.  He gave oral evidence before Judge Murray.   She
    distinguished carefully between  the  evidence  she  believed  and  the
    evidence she did not believe.  On the material before her she concluded
    that the claimant was a national of  Syria  who  had,  or  had  had  an
    Egyptian residence permit; he had lived in Egypt since the age of  six,
    but he did not leave Egypt fearing  persecution  in  that  country  and
    would not be in danger on return to Egypt.  The  Secretary  of  State's
    position, as set out in the letter of refusal,  was  that  he  did  not
    believe that the claimant was of Syrian nationality;  but  even  if  he
    were, he could  be  returned  to  Egypt.   Judge  Murray  concluded  as
    follows:

          "52. I do not find that the appellant's asylum claims can  succeed
          for a Convention reason but as I find he is Syrian  and  based  on
          the situation in Syria at the moment  I  am  going  to  grant  him
          humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom."

    She therefore allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of
    grounds.  It was asserted that the judge had adopted a flawed  approach
    in assessing credibility and in setting the standard of  proof.   Judge
    Phillips,  before  whom  the  application  for  permission   came   for
    consideration, refused permission on those grounds.  Ground 2, however,
    was as follows:

           "Even if it was open to the FTJ to find the appellant is  Syrian,
          the evidence from the appellant himself  was  that  he  apparently
          resided in Egypt lawfully on a  residence  permit  in  his  Syrian
          Passport.  The FTJ makes no findings why  the  appellant  couldn't
          return to Egypt in a similar fashion given she has found he  could
          safely return there.

           The FTJ makes no/inadequate findings if she accepts the appellant
          is no longer in touch with his family."

 4. Judge Phillips' response to that was as follows:

          "The second ground is however arguable.  Given the  findings  made
          there is no analysis of why the  Appellant  could  not  return  to
          Egypt.  It is concerning that the Judge finds  (at  paragraph  42)
          that if "the appellant is  from  Syria  then  I  shall  grant  him
          humanitarian protection" with no reference to a  potential  return
          to Egypt in such circumstances.  Indeed, the next paragraph  finds
          that the Appellant could  return  to  Egypt  but  only  if  he  is
          Egyptian.  These conclusions and the  resultant  allowing  of  the
          appeal on humanitarian protection grounds do not address paragraph
          339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  paragraph  15(c)   of   the
          Qualification Directive neither of which restrict  return  to  the
          country of nationality."

    He therefore granted permission on that ground only.

 5. There are no removal directions in this case, but  the  decision  under
    appeal states that the claimant "can be removed to Egypt".

 6. Mrs O'Brien began by applying for an adjournment on the basis that  the
    claimant was clearly vulnerable and ought to have a further opportunity
    to seek further representation.  We sought her substantive  submissions
    before considering that application, because we suspected that we might
    be able to deal with the matter more efficaciously by not  granting  an
    adjournment.  Mrs O'Brien  accepted  that  the  claimant  is  a  Syrian
    national and that the circumstances in Syria  are  such  as  to  engage
    article 15(c) of the Refugee Qualification Directive.  The substance of
    the determination, and the judge's findings of fact,  lead  clearly  to
    that conclusion.  The issue of whether under  those  circumstances  the
    Secretary of State can refuse humanitarian  protection  on  the  ground
    that the claimant could be removed to Egypt is a  matter  of  potential
    difficulty.  As Judge Phillips noted, neither article 15(c) itself, nor
    paragraph 339C of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395
    (as amended), make reference to the circumstances as  circumstances  in
    the country of the claimant's nationality.  That, however, is far  from
    being the end of the matter.

 7. Article 15(c) sets out only the circumstances in which there is, within
    the meaning of the Directive, "serious  harm".   The  conditions  of  a
    grant  of  subsidiary  protection  (called  in   the   United   Kingdom
    "humanitarian protection"), are set out in article 18,  which  provides
    that:

            "Member States shall grant subsidiary protection  status  to  a
            third country national  or  a  stateless  person  eligible  for
            subsidiary protection in accordance with chapters II and V."

    Article 15 is part of chapter V but within article 2 are the  following
    definitions:

            "For the purposes of this Directive:

            ...

             (e) 'Person eligible for subsidiary protection' means a third-
            country national or a stateless person who does not qualify  as
            a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have  been
            shown for believing that the person concerned, if  returned  to
            his or her country of origin, or in the  case  of  a  stateless
            person, to his or her country  of  former  habitual  residence,
            would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined  in
            Article 15, and to whom article 17(1) and (2) do not apply, and
            is unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail  himself
            or herself of the protection of that country. (emphasis added).

            ...

            (k) 'Country of Origin'  means  the  country  or  countries  of
            nationality or,  for  stateless  persons,  of  former  habitual
            residence."

 8. The transposition of the relevant provisions into United Kingdom law is
    by  paragraphs  339C  onwards  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   But   the
    comparable provisions of paragraph 339C are as follows:

            "A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United
            Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

             i)   They are in the United Kingdom or have arrived at  a  port
                of entry in the United Kingdom;

        ii)  They do not qualify as a refugee ...;

            iii)  Substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
                 person concerned, if returned  to  the  country  of  return
                 would face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm  and  is
                 unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to   avail
                 themselves of the protection of that country; and

             iv)   They are not excluded  from  the  grant  of  humanitarian
                 protection."   (Emphasis added).

 9. It is therefore right to say, as Judge Phillips did say, that paragraph
    339C does not refer to the country of nationality.  However, the phrase
    used in the Directive is "country of origin", but the  phrase  used  in
    paragraph 339C is "country of return".   The  latter  phrase  does  not
    appear to be defined in the Immigration Rules, and it must therefore be
    assumed that it applies to a country of proposed return, whether or not
    that country is the claimant's country of origin.  It appears to follow
    that  paragraph  339C  does  not  correctly  transpose   the   relevant
    provisions of the Directive.

10. Mrs O'Brien did not ask us to apply the Immigration Rules  rather  than
    the Directive.  There is no doubt that the wording of the determination
    is  unfortunate:  the  judge  had  no  power  to  grant  the   claimant
    humanitarian protection.  It is, however, clear from her findings  that
    the claimant was, on the basis of those findings, entitled to  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection.  We  therefore  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.  With great assistance from Mrs O'Brien, we  were  able
    to satisfy ourselves during the course of the day that the claimant had
    access to housing and other assistance in the light of  his  successful
    claim.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 19 October 2018.

