
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Oksuzoglu (EEA appeal - "new matter") [2018] UKUT 00385 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                               ANNA OKSUZOGLU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Farhat, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1) By virtue of schedule 2(1) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016
      ('the 2016 Regs') a "new matter" in section 85(6) of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 includes not only a ground  of  appeal
      of a kind listed in section 84 but also an EEA ground of appeal.

   2) The effect of the transitory and transitional provisions at  schedules
      5 and 6 of the 2016 Regs is as follows:

         a) All decisions made on or  after  1  February  2017  are  to  be
            treated as having been made under the 2016 Regs,  whatever  the
            date of the application;
         b) Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regs applies (through  the  medium  of
            the transitory provisions) to all decisions made on or after 25
            November 2016 whatever the date of the application;
         c) In all other respects the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
            apply if (i) the application was made before 25  November  2016
            and (ii) the decision was made before 1 February 2017.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine.  She is  married  to  a  British
    citizen ('the sponsor').

 2. On 9 September 2016, the appellant applied for a residence card on  the
    sole basis that she was a family member of a British  citizen  who  has
    exercised his Treaty rights by  genuinely  living  in  Cyprus,  an  EEA
    state.

 3. On 26 April 2017, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application
    because he was not satisfied that the parties' residence in Cyprus  was
    genuine.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  solely
    contending that the sponsor was a  British  citizen  who  had  properly
    exercised his Treaty rights and as  such  the  respondent  should  have
    exercised his discretion in his favour.  FTT Judge Mill  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in a decision dated 22 May 2018.

 5. The FTT considered detailed documentary and oral evidence from both the
    appellant and the sponsor and  made  the  following  factual  findings,
    inter alia:

          i) the sponsor was working in Cyprus between  February  and  June
             2016;

         ii) the couple resided together in Cyprus  between  December  2015
             and June 2016 before returning to live in the UK;

        iii) the sponsor did not acquire permanent residence in Cyprus;

         iv) the period of residence was not genuine for  the  purposes  of
             regulation 9(3) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs').

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying
    upon two grounds of appeal: (i) the FTT erred in law  in  applying  the
    2016 Regs when the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ('the 2006 Regs') applied; (ii) alternatively the  FTT  failed  to
    consider that the sponsor was in  fact  a  Cypriot  and  therefore  EEA
    citizen.

 7. On 17  August  2018,  the  FTT  (Judge  Grant-Hutchinson)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal observing both grounds to be arguable.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Farhat relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal
    that he had drafted for the purposes of the permission application.   I
    refer to his oral submissions in more detail below.

 9. Ms Everett submitted that the FTT decision was adequately reasoned  and
    contains no error of law.

10. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision which I
    now provide with reasons.

Discussion

Ground 2 - Cypriot citizenship

11. As I observed at the hearing, the claim that the appellant is  entitled
    to a residence card based upon the fact that her spouse  is  a  Cypriot
    citizen, who has exercised Treaty rights in the UK, is prima facie more
    straightforward than the claim that her spouse, who is also  a  British
    citizen, exercised his right to freedom of movement  in  Cyprus  before
    returning to reside in the UK  and  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card on the basis of the principles established in  R  v  IAT
    and Surinder Singh (C-370/90) [1992] ECR I-04265.  If the appellant was
    entitled to be treated as the spouse of an EEA citizen working  in  the
    UK, then there was no need to consider the route  relied  upon  in  her
    application i.e. the approach set out in Surinder Singh.  Given this, I
    address ground 2 first.

12. Mr Farhat was compelled to accept  that  reliance  upon  the  sponsor's
    Cypriot citizenship before the FTT was a "new matter" if section 85  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended ('the 2002
    Act') applied to EEA appeals.  As set out above, the application for  a
    residence card made no reference to the sponsor's Cypriot  citizenship,
    and as such the respondent's decision only addressed the Surinder Singh
    route.  The grounds of appeal to the FTT also made no reference to  the
    sponsor's Cypriot citizenship.  This was raised for the first time in a
    document submitted at the FTT hearing described as a 'brief note'.

13. However, Mr Farhat submitted that section 85(5) of the 2002 Act did not
    apply to EEA appeals.  No authority was cited for this assertion in the
    grounds of appeal and no reference was made to the 2016  Regs  in  this
    regard.  I invited Mr Farhat to address Schedule 2 of  the  2016  Regs,
    which states as follows:


         "1.  The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act have
         effect in relation to an appeal  under  these  Regulations  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal as if it were an appeal against a  decision  of
         the Secretary of State under section 82(1) of the 2002  Act  (right
         of appeal to the Tribunal)-


             section 84 (grounds of appeal), as though the sole permitted
             grounds of appeal were that the decision breaches the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry
             to or residence in the United Kingdom ("an EU ground of
             appeal");


             section 85 (matters to be considered), as though-
             (a) the references to a statement under  section  120  of  the
             2002 Act include, but are not limited to,  a  statement  under
             that section as applied by paragraph 2; and
             (b) a "matter"  in  subsection  (2)  and  a  "new  matter"  in
             subsection (6) include a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in
             section 84 of the 2002 Act and an EU ground of appeal;..."

14. It is abundantly clear from this  provision  that  a  "new  matter"  in
    section 85(6) of the 2002 Act includes not only a ground of appeal of a
    kind listed in section 84 but also an EU ground of appeal.   Mr  Farhat
    submitted that the grounds of appeal based  upon  domestic  legislation
    should be distinguished from EU grounds of appeal.  He did not  explain
    why section 85(6) did not apply to EU grounds of appeal given the clear
    wording of schedule 2(1) of the 2016 Regs.

15. The claim that the appellant  should  benefit  from  being  the  family
    member of a Cypriot citizen exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  relied
    upon a factual matrix that had not been previously  considered  by  the
    respondent - see [31] of - see Mahmud (s.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new  matters')
    [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC).  This is a factually and legally distinct matter
    from that previously raised by the appellant.  It was therefore a  "new
    matter" and the FTT  only  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  it  if  the
    respondent consented to it - see section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.   There
    was no such consent, either express or implied.  I note that the record
    of proceedings makes no reference to the claim based upon the sponsor's
    Cypriot citizenship.  This is consistent with the FTT  decision  itself
    which focuses upon regulation 9 of the 2016 Regs.  Mr Farhat  explained
    that he placed reliance on his 'brief note' during the  course  of  his
    oral submissions and these argued the Cypriot  citizenship-based  claim
    in the alternative.  Mere reference to written submissions  during  the
    course of oral submissions in response to the respondent's  submissions
    can on no analysis give rise to any form of consent on the part of  the
    respondent.

16. It follows that there was no error of law involved in the FTT's failure
    to address the alternative  claim  based  upon  the  sponsor's  Cypriot
    citizenship because the FTT had no jurisdiction to  consider  the  "new
    matter" relied upon.

Ground 1 - 2016 or 2006 Regulations?

17. Mr Farhat contended that the FTT erred in law in applying the 2016 Regs
    when the 2006 Regs applied, given the timing of the application.




18. Regulation 1 of the 2016 Regs deals with commencement as follows:

         "Citation and commencement
         1.-(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Immigration (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2016.
         (2) These Regulations come into force-
         (a)for the purposes of this regulation, regulation 44 and Schedule
         5 (transitory provisions), on 25th November 2016;
         (b)for all other purposes, on 1st February 2017."



19. Schedule 5 provides for transitory provisions relating to regulation  9
    as follows:




         "Substitution of regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations

         1.  For regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations substitute-




             "Regulation 9 (family members of British citizens)

             9.-(1) If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
             Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")
             of a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA
             national.

             (2) The conditions are that-

             (a)BC-

             (i)is residing in an EEA  State  as  a  worker,  self-employed
             person, self-sufficient person or a  student,  or  so  resided
             immediately before returning to the United Kingdom; or

             (ii)has acquired the right of permanent residence  in  an  EEA
         State;

             (b)F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

             (c)F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

             (3) Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
             or was genuine include-

             (a)whether the centre of BC's  life  transferred  to  the  EEA
         State;

             (b)the length of F and BC's joint residence in the EEA State;

             (c)the nature and quality of the F and BC's  accommodation  in
             the EEA State,  and  whether  it  is  or  was  BC's  principal
             residence;

             (d)the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA State;

             (e)whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC was in
         the EEA State.

             (4) This regulation does not apply-

             (a)where the purpose of the residence in the EEA State was  as
             a means for circumventing any immigration laws applying to non-
             EEA nationals to which F would otherwise be subject  (such  as
             any applicable requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom); or

             (b)to a person who is only eligible to be treated as a  family
             member as a result of regulation 7(3) (extended family members
             treated as family members).

             (5) Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to be treated as
             holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the
             purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.

             (6) In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is only to be treated as
             having acquired the right of permanent residence in the EEA
             State if such residence would have led to the acquisition of
             that right under regulation 15, had it taken place in the
             United Kingdom.

             (7) For the purposes of determining whether, when treating the
             BC as an EEA national under these Regulations in accordance
             with paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified person-

             (a)any requirement to have  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
             cover in the United Kingdom still applies, save that  it  does
             not require the cover to extend to BC;

             (b)in assessing whether BC can continue to  be  treated  as  a
             worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not required  to
             satisfy condition A;

             (c)in assessing whether BC can be treated as  a  jobseeker  as
             defined in regulation 6(1), BC  is  not  required  to  satisfy
             conditions A  and,  where  it  would  otherwise  be  relevant,
             condition C."

         Outstanding applications

         2.  Between the coming into force of the provisions covered by
         regulation 1(2)(a) and the coming into force of the remaining
         provisions covered by regulation 1(2)(b) an application under the
         2006 Regulations for-

             (a)an EEA family permit;

             (b)a registration certificate;

             (c)a residence card;

             (d)a document certifying permanent residence;

             (e)a permanent residence card; or

             (f)a derivative residence card;

         made but not determined before 25th November 2016 is to be treated
         as having been made under the 2006 Regulations, as amended by
         paragraph 1 of this Schedule."

20. Mr Farhat submitted that schedule 5, para 2 of the 2016  Regs  supports
    his submission that as the application  was  made  but  not  determined
    before 25 November 2016, it should be treated as having been made under
    the 2006 Regulations.  This argument is misconceived.




21. First, the submission overlooks the  fact  that  these  provisions  are
    transitory, and only address outstanding applications  for  the  period
    between  25  November  2016  and  1  February  2017.   The  appellant's
    application was not decided during this period but on  26  April  2017.
    The transitory provisions are therefore  not  relevant  and  Mr  Farhat
    erroneously placed reliance on these.




22. Second and in any event,  even  if  I  am  wrong  about  this  and  the
    transitory provisions applied, no meaningful assistance can be  derived
    from them.  This is because if the 2006 Regs applied, they applied  "as
    amended by paragraph 1  of  this  Schedule".   Mr  Farhat's  submission
    therefore ignores the important final phrase in  schedule  5,  para  2.
    Even if the application is to be treated as having been made under  the
    2006 Regs, it is  those  Regs  "as  amended  by  paragraph  1  of  this
    Schedule."  Schedule 5 therefore clearly requires  the  application  of
    the amended regulation 9 for the purposes of  the  relevant  transitory
    period.  That amended regulation 9 in the 2006  Regs  is  the  same  as
    regulation 9 of the 2016 Regs.   That this is so  is  unsurprising  and
    consistent with the origins of regulation 9.  Regulation  9  finds  its
    genesis not from the relevant Directive but in Surinder Singh,  a  case
    which involved the return to the UK with her third country spouse of  a
    British national who had  exercised  her  right  of  free  movement  by
    working and living in Germany, with her husband, for a period of almost
    three years.  In other words, in  order  to  make  the  right  of  free
    movement effective, such ancillary rights are required to be implied on
    return to the  national's  country  of  origin,  whereby  the  national
    retained the right to be  accompanied  by  his  or  her  spouse.    The
    relevant principles established by Surinder Singh as applied in O and B
    v Minister  von  Immigratie  [2014]  3  WLR  799  have  therefore  been
    transposed into regulation 9.


23. Third, Mr Farhat entirely ignored the importance  of  the  transitional
    provisions at schedule 6 of the 2016 Regs, which state as follows:


         "Outstanding applications

         4.-(1) An application for-

         (a)an EEA family permit;

         (b)a registration certificate;

         (c)a residence card;

         (d)a document certifying permanent residence;

         (e)a permanent residence card;

         (f)a derivative residence card; or

         (g)permission  to  be  temporarily  admitted  in  order   to   make
         submissions in person;




         made but not determined before 1st February 2017 is to be treated
         as having been made under these Regulations.




         (2) But regulation 21 and the words in parentheses in paragraph (b)
         of the definition of an EEA decision in regulation 2(1) are of no
         application to such an application made before 1st February 2017."




24. In this case, the application for a residence card  was  made  but  not
    determined before 1 February 2017 and as such fell  to  be  treated  as
    having been made under the 2016 Regs.

25. The FTT was required to carry  out  a  qualitative  assessment  of  the
    evidence by reference to regulation 9 of the 2016 Regs.  Mr Farhat  did
    not criticise the findings of fact in support of the  FTT's  conclusion
    that the couple's residence in Cyprus was not  genuinely  meant  to  be
    permanent at [13] to [14] of the decision  and  focused  his  attention
    upon the alleged error in applying the 2016 Regs.  For  the  reasons  I
    have provided there was no error of law in applying the 2016  Regs  and
    ground 1 has therefore not been made out.

Final points

26. Mr Farhat submitted a copy of the sponsor's recently  obtained  Cypriot
    passport issued on 30 July 2018.  This together with the evidence  that
    the sponsor has been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK  should  be
    sufficient to enable the appellant  to  make  a  straightforward  fresh
    application for a residence card.  It is difficult to see why this  was
    not  done  initially.   If  there  were   difficulties   in   obtaining
    documentation, that no longer seems to be the case.

Decision

27. The decision of the FTT to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

28. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                                                    Dated
M. Plimmer                                            10 October 2018

Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

