

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AXB (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 00397 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                 |                            |
|On Thursday 3 October 2019                   |                            |

                                   Before
                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                 DR HUGO STOREY, JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     AXB
              [A protected party, by his litigation friend, NB]
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico and Ms A Nicolaou, Counsel instructed
                    by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Dr C Staker, Counsel instructed by Government Legal
Department

    1. In a case where an individual asserts  that  his  removal  from  the
       Returning State would violate his Article 3 ECHR rights  because  of
       the consequences to his health, the obligation on the authorities of
       a Returning State dealing with a health case  is  primarily  one  of
       examining the fears of an applicant as to what will occur  following
       return  and  assessing  the  evidence.   In  order  to  fulfil   its
       obligations, a Returning State must provide "appropriate procedures"
       to allow that examination and assessment to be carried out.  In  the
       UK, that is met in the first place by an examination of the case  by
       the Secretary of State and then by an examination on appeal  by  the
       Tribunal and an assessment of the evidence before it.


    2. There is no free-standing procedural obligation on a Returning State
       to make enquiries of the Receiving  State  concerning  treatment  in
       that  State  or  obtain  assurances  in   that   regard.    Properly
       understood, what is referred to at  [185]  to  [187]  of  the  Grand
       Chamber's  judgment  in  Paposhvili  concerns   the   discharge   of
       respective burdens of proof.


    3. The burden is on the individual appellant to establish that,  if  he
       is removed, there is a real risk of a breach of Article  3  ECHR  to
       the standard and threshold which apply.  If the  appellant  provides
       evidence which is capable of proving his case to the standard  which
       applies, the Secretary of State will be precluded from removing  the
       appellant unless she is able  to  provide  evidence  countering  the
       appellant's  evidence  or  dispelling  doubts  arising   from   that
       evidence.  Depending on the particular circumstances  of  the  case,
       such evidence might include general evidence, specific evidence from
       the Receiving State following enquiries made or assurances from  the
       Receiving State concerning the treatment of the appellant  following
       return.

    4. Where an individual asserts  that  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
       committing suicide, following return to  the  Receiving  State,  the
       threshold for establishing Article 3  harm  is  the  high  threshold
       described in N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR  453,  unless  the  risk
       involves  hostile  actions  of  the  Receiving  State  towards   the
       individual: RA (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1210; Y and Z v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
The appeal is on protection grounds.  Accordingly, it  is  appropriate  that
the Appellant's identity be protected.   Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS
    BACKGROUND


    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge  O'Keeffe  promulgated  on  23  April  2019  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal on protection grounds against  the
       Secretary of State's decision dated 22 December  2017  refusing  his
       protection and human rights claims but allowing the appeal on  human
       rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  The Appellant's claims  were  made
       in the context of a decision to deport him to Jamaica.


    2. Broadly, the Appellant claims that he will  be  at  risk  from  gang
       members in Jamaica.  He also claims to be entitled  to  humanitarian
       protection due to the level of violence in that country coupled with
       his own circumstances. The Appellant suffered a stroke in  2011  and
       was left wheelchair bound.   He  also  suffers  from  mental  health
       issues (although does not himself appear to recognise that  he  does
       and refuses any treatment to deal  with  his  problems).   He  lacks
       capacity  to  provide  instructions  in  his   appeal;   hence   the
       appointment of a litigation friend.  He did not give  oral  evidence
       before Judge O'Keeffe although he has been interviewed in connection
       with his claims (by the Respondent and, to some limited  extent,  by
       experts assessing his health issues).

    3. The Judge did not accept the credibility of the  Appellant's  asylum
       claim.  She rejected it on that account.   She  accepted  the  broad
       thrust of the medical and other  expert  evidence  produced  on  the
       Appellant's behalf  but  did  not  accept  that  this  disclosed  an
       entitlement to humanitarian protection or enabled the  Appellant  to
       succeed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.  However, she accepted  that  the
       Appellant's  circumstances  considered  cumulatively  established  a
       breach of Article 8, ECHR - in other words, deportation  to  Jamaica
       would be  a  disproportionate  response.   The  Respondent  has  not
       appealed those findings and has granted the Appellant thirty months'
       leave to remain.  However, the Respondent does not dispute that  the
       Appellant  remains  entitled  to  appeal  against   a   hypothetical
       deportation on protection and Article 3 grounds more  generally  as,
       if he were to succeed on those other grounds, he may be entitled  to
       a more preferential status.  He  is  entitled  to  have  his  appeal
       considered in relation to those issues in any event, whether or  not
       success would lead to any different status.

    4. Permission to appeal to this  Tribunal  was  refused  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Saffer on 16 May 2019 but  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Storey on 5 July 2019.  His reasoning is as follows:


           "It is arguable that the judge's adverse credibility findings in
           respect of the issue of whether the  appellant,  a  national  of
           Jamaica, qualified as a refugee  failed  to  take  into  account
           relevant matters as set out in ground 1.
           I do not consider ground 2 (which concerns the judge's rejection
           of humanitarian protection status)  raises  any  issue  distinct
           from the judge's consideration of the issue of refugee status.
           However, ground 2 [should  be  4],  which  concerns  Article  3,
           raises the issue of whether the judge's assessment  of  risk  on
           return in light of the appellant's mental health and  disability
           stood in  conflict  with  Strasbourg  Article  3  jurisprudence,
           Paposhvili (app 41738/10) in particular.  It has arguable merit.
            It is the principal contention of this ground  that  Paposhvili
           laid down a procedural  obligation  whereby  when  an  applicant
           adduces evidence "capable of" demonstrating an Article 3 breach,
           "it is for the  authorities  of  the  returning  State,  in  the
           context of domestic procedures, to dispel any doubts  raised  by
           it": (paras 186-7) and the burden of proof is on the authorities
           "to verify on a case by case basis whether  the  care  generally
           available in the receiving State is sufficient  and  appropriate
           in practice for the treatment of the applicant's illness" so  as
           to avoid a breach of Article 3 (para 189); and that "if  serious
           doubts persist regarding the impact of removal  on  the  persons
           concerned...the  returning  State  must  obtain  individual  and
           sufficient assurances from the receiving State as a precondition
           for removal, that appropriate treatment will  be  available  and
           accessible to the persons concerned so that  they  do  not  find
           themselves in a situation contrary to  Article  3"  (para  191).
           There is nothing to indicate that the judge understood  that  in
           the context of the Article 3 claim there was such  a  procedural
           obligation  whose  applicability  to  this  case  needed  to  be
           considered and this arguably  vitiated  the  judge's  Article  3
           assessment.
           It appears that apart from the concession by the respondent in R
           (MM (Malawi)) [2018] EWCA Civ 1365, UK courts and tribunals have
           not addressed the UK's procedural obligation under Article 3  as
           identified in Paposhvili.  For this reason, it is possible  that
           this case will be put before a panel."


    5. It is as a result of the issue raised in the Appellant's ground four
       that the appeal comes before the Tribunal sitting as a  Presidential
       panel, in order to provide some guidance on  this  issue.   However,
       the Appellant pursued all grounds and we therefore need to determine
       whether there is an error of law in relation  to  any  of  the  four
       grounds, which we now turn to do in the order they are pleaded.


    6. We were greatly assisted  in  our  task  by  the  detailed  skeleton
       arguments and oral submissions of both Counsel.   We  were  provided
       with a consolidated  bundle  of  documents  to  which  we  refer  as
       necessary below as [AB/xx] by reference to the internal tab and page
       reference.  We  also  have  a  Respondent's  bundle  including  some
       additional evidence to which we refer as necessary as [RB/xx]

      GROUND ONE: PROTECTION CLAIM - CREDIBILITY ISSUES


    7. In order to understand the  Judge's  credibility  findings  and  the
       criticisms made of them, it is necessary  to  set  out  briefly  the
       chronology of the Appellant's case and the outline of the  substance
       of his case and his protection claim.


    8. The Appellant arrived in the UK in December 2000, then aged  twenty-
       seven years.  Following a short period of leave  as  a  student,  he
       overstayed.  He thereafter used the identity of  other  persons  who
       are British nationals, using documents  which  he  had  obtained  in
       those identities.  His  convictions  in  the  UK  arise  from  those
       offences.  Having travelled to Jamaica in  2006  for  his  brother's
       funeral, the Appellant was  caught  in  possession  of  cocaine  and
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment in Jamaica.  Since he  used  a
       British identity in order to enter Jamaica, the Jamaican authorities
       thereafter deported him to the UK,  believing  him  to  be  British.
       His deception was then uncovered, and the  Appellant  was  convicted
       and sentenced in 2010 to concurrent  and  consecutive  sentences  of
       between three and eighteen months.   As  a  result,  the  Respondent
       initiated deportation action.

    9. The Appellant first  claimed  asylum  in  September  2010.   He  was
       interviewed in November 2010.  At that time, he said that he  feared
       members of the "One Order"  gang  who  had  killed  his  brother  in
       Jamaica in 2006.  He said that, in order  to  avenge  his  brother's
       death, another of his brothers  had  formed  a  gang  and  had  been
       imprisoned in Jamaica.   The  Appellant  claimed  that  one  of  his
       friends was killed by "One Order" gang members in 2009.   On 19  May
       2011, the Appellant withdrew his claim for asylum  and  requested  a
       facilitated return to Jamaica.

   10. The Appellant made a second claim for asylum in April 2013 which was
       withdrawn on 8 July 2013 (according to  Home  Office  records).   He
       claimed for a third time in August 2017  and  made  a  statement  in
       September 2017 to clarify his case. By this stage, the Appellant was
       also claiming to be at risk as  a  result  of  having  acted  as  an
       informer for the police in the UK against a drug dealer  ("KB")  and
       had been taken into witness protection.   He  claimed  that  he  had
       stabbed a friend of KB. He said that, as a result of this  incident,
       he would also be at risk from  friends  of  KB.   This  incident  is
       referred to in the skeleton arguments as the "KB/[B] claim"  and  we
       adopt that label for ease of reference.

   11. The Appellant claims that the feud against his family has  continued
       with his nephew being  shot  in  2017  and  his  half-brother  being
       murdered in 2016.

   12. Having recited the substance  of  the  Respondent's  decision  under
       appeal, the Appellant's case and the relevant legal tests, the Judge
       considered the evidence and reached her findings  in  a  section  at
       [30] to [88] of the Decision.  We note at this stage that since  the
       Appellant was not able to give oral evidence and no other  witnesses
       provided statements (apart from his lawyer) and the substance of the
       medical and expert evidence  was  not  the  subject  of  conflicting
       evidence, the hearing proceeded by way of legal submissions only.

   13. Ground one challenges various of the Judge's findings concerning the
       Appellant's protection  claim  made  by  reference  to  the  Refugee
       Convention.  We consider the grounds as pleaded.   However,  in  his
       oral submissions, Mr Chirico  identified  certain  issues  which  he
       accepted did not give rise to a freestanding error. Nonetheless,  he
       said that those were still relevant to the materiality of the errors
       which he said were disclosed by the other grounds.


    Ground 1(a)


   14. The Judge did not  accept  as  credible  the  "KB/[B]  claim".   Her
       consideration of this part of the claim appears at [38] to  [43]  of
       the Decision.  She there refers to the Appellant's failure to  raise
       this claim earlier (he did not mention it until 2017).  In  addition
       to being interviewed when he claimed asylum in 2010,  the  Appellant
       had written a letter in November 2010 where, once again, he did  not
       mention this incident.  In addition, he gave conflicting accounts as
       to the date of the incident.  A note on the Home Office  file  dated
       2001 indicated that an incident had occurred  in  the  UK  in  2000.
       However, the Appellant was said to be a victim of an attack and  not
       the assailant and he and  his  ex-wife  were  housed  by  the  local
       authority not the police.  That contradicted his account.   Although
       the Appellant's ex-wife ("C") had reported  to  the  Appellant's  UK
       lawyer, Ms Goodarzi that they had been put into  witness  protection
       following an attack, [C] had not made a statement  herself  and  her
       evidence was untested.  As a result, the Judge gave it less weight.


   15. The Appellant's complaint in relation to the Judge's finding is that
       she treated her finding as to credibility of the "KB/[B]  claim"  as
       determinative and  had  allowed  it  to  influence  her  credibility
       findings as to the entirety of the claim.


   16. The Judge's findings as to credibility are  summarised  at  [55]  to
       [59] of the Decision.  We set those out in full  so  that  both  the
       context and content are clear:


            "55. The appellant's credibility has to be considered in  light
           of  the  factors  set  out  in  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
           Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004.    The
           appellant used a false British passport to travel to Jamaica  in
           2006 and to return to the UK in 2007. The appellant's  offending
           includes offences of deception  and  possessing  false  identity
           documents.  The appellant attempted to obtain a driving  licence
           using the false passport.  The appellant has  had  no  leave  to
           remain in the UK since 2001.  The use of the false  identity  is
           clearly designed to enable the appellant not only to  remain  in
           the UK but to travel out of and back to the UK.
            56.  The appellant failed to report to the respondent whilst on
           temporary admission.  He was circulated as  an  absconder  until
           encountered on 26th July 2017.  I share  the  respondent's  view
           that this was with a view to delaying any decision in his  case.
           I find that the appellant's  credibility  is  damaged  by  these
           factors and I take that into account in my overall assessment of
           the evidence.
            57.  I take into  account  that  both  the  appellant's  expert
           witnesses consider his claim to be plausible.   The  appellant's
           claim does have some inconsistencies.   The  appellant  did  not
           mention when interviewed in 2010 that his  problems  started  as
           result of the incident in 2000 when he fell foul of  KB.   There
           is evidence that the appellant was a police witness in 2000  but
           no evidence that  he  was  in  police  protection  or  given  an
           alternative  identity.   The  Judge's  sentencing  remarks  when
           sentencing the appellant on 19th February  2010,  indicate  that
           the appellant used a false name when giving his statement.
            58.  The appellant's claim that he is at risk in Jamaica  as  a
           result of a feud is not supported by the fact that he  was  able
           to travel  back  there  without  difficulty  for  his  brother's
           funeral in 2006.  It is not credible that  the  appellant  would
           have been coerced into carrying drugs by gunmen as part  of  the
           feud against him.  The appellant's expert considers this part of
           the appellant's account to be vague but plausible.  Applying the
           lower standard of proof, there is evidence that the  appellant's
           half-brother was murdered  in  2016.   There  is  no  background
           evidence however to  link  this  to  a  feud  which  places  the
           appellant at risk.  The expert evidence demonstrates sadly  that
           violent crime is not uncommon in Jamaica.
            59.  There is no background evidence to support the appellant's
           claim that his best friend and nephew have been  targeted  as  a
           result of the feud.  Whilst the  experts  consider  this  to  be
           plausible, I was not referred to any parts of their report which
           suggest they have made enquiries of the  police  in  Jamaica  to
           verify these crimes.  The appellant said in  interview  that  he
           had last heard that he was at risk in 2009.  I have to  consider
           the position as at the date  of  the  hearing  before  me.   The
           appellant's credibility has been damaged for the reasons set out
           above.  Applying the lower standard of proof and considering the
           evidence  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
           demonstrated that he has a well-founded fear of  persecution  on
           return  to  Jamaica.   I  find  that  the  appellant   has   not
           demonstrated that he is a refugee."


   17. The Appellant does not suggest that it was not open to the Judge  on
       the evidence to reject the "KB/[B]  claim"  as  not  credible.   The
       Judge has provided clear and cogent reasons  for  so  doing.   There
       were evident inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account  regarding
       the claim. It cannot sensibly be suggested that the  Judge  was  not
       entitled to take into account in her  overall  credibility  findings
       that this aspect of the claim was not credible.  The Appellant  does
       not go that far. What is said is that, just because one aspect of  a
       claim is not credible, this does not mean that the core of the claim
       cannot be independently believed.


   18. As Dr Staker pointed out, the Judge's  credibility  findings  as  to
       this incident  are  merely  part  of  her  summary  of  reasons  for
       rejecting the claim as a whole, as is apparent, in particular  based
       on what is said at the end of [59] of  the  Decision.   As  we  have
       pointed out above, the Judge had already considered the substance of
       and evidence relating to this aspect of the  claim  separately  from
       the  remainder,  earlier  in  the  Decision.   Her  findings  as  to
       credibility of this part of the account are relevant to her  overall
       finding  of  adverse  credibility.  She  has  not  treated  them  as
       determinative of the whole.   There  is  no  error  in  the  Judge's
       approach.


    Ground 1(b)


   19. This ground challenges the Judge's findings for failure to take into
       account  relevant  considerations,  the  taking  into   account   of
       irrelevant considerations and a failure to give adequate reasons for
       finding the Appellant's claim not to  be  credible.   As  such,  the
       ground is formed of a number of  components  which  we  consider  in
       turn.


    Inconsistency as to the claim of being forced to traffic drugs


   20. It is said that the Judge has fallen into error in the finding  made
       at [58] of the Decision.  It is asserted that it was not part of the
       Appellant's case that he was forced to traffic  drugs  by  the  "One
       Order" gang.  The Appellant's case is said to be  that  he  did  not
       know the identity of the gunmen who forced him to do so.  The  Judge
       is therefore said to have fallen into error by misunderstanding  the
       Appellant's case. The Judge's finding at [58]  stems  from  what  is
       said at [45] of the Decision which is also criticised  as  being  an
       error. There the Judge said this:


           "The appellant was not  subjected  to  any  violence  whilst  in
           Jamaica but claims that he was forced by gunmen to  carry  drugs
           back to the UK.  If, as the appellant claims, he is at  risk  of
           death from this gang, it seems a rather strange ploy  that  they
           should choose to force him to carry drugs rather than  kill  him
           when they had the opportunity."


   21. Our attention was drawn to two items of evidence which are  said  to
       be relevant to this part of the claim.  First,  at  [RB/OO1]  is  an
       undated letter, apparently written by the Appellant to  clarify  his
       case.  Although undated, the letter appears to have been sent by fax
       on 17 November 2017. He says this  about  being  forced  to  traffic
       drugs:


            "5.  I was at my friend [C] rip barber shop when I  was  picked
           up by men arm with guns and was taken to the  Country  near  the
           Montego bay Airport where I  was  given  drugs  by  forced  with
           instruction with warning to take to the UK,  the  gunmen  didn't
           reveal them self to [me].
            6.   It's all revenge !!!"


       Mr Chirico observed that this did not say  that  the  Appellant  had
       been coerced by the "One Order" gang to traffic  drugs.   We  accept
       that it does not say so in terms, although we note what is  said  at
       [6] of the letter and that what  is  there  said  also  follows  the
       Appellant's record of his brother being killed in 2006 by that gang.
        The Appellant claims that the feud started with  the  rape  of  his
       brother's "baby mother". The inference from what is  there  said  is
       that the Appellant believed  the  gunmen  to  be  targeting  him  as
       revenge for what had occurred even  though  they  did  not  identify
       themselves.


   22. Second, the Respondent relies on a letter written by the  Appellant,
       undated but stamped as received by the  Respondent  on  17  November
       2010 (annexed to the Respondent's skeleton argument for the  hearing
       before us).  In that letter,  the  Appellant  says  this  about  the
       incident:


           "When I arrived in Jamaica the same gun man that kill my brother
           'order' me to carry drugs to the  UK,  but  at  the  airport  in
           Jamaica I gave the  drugs  to  the  police  and  tell  them  the
           situation and the police said that I have to do a short sentence
           so that the gun [man] would think that it was busted and  I  was
           sentenced to 15 months in prison in Jamaica [in]  2006  which  I
           done 9 months and was sent back to the UK in 2007."


   23. Mr Chirico accepted that this passage tended  in  the  direction  of
       suggesting that the "One Order" gang was involved  in  the  incident
       but said that it was not sufficiently clear  to  draw  from  it  the
       inconsistency on  which  the  Judge  relied.   We  disagree.   Taken
       together we consider that this is  ample  evidence  to  justify  the
       Judge's conclusion and comment at [45] of the Decision.  It  follows
       that there is no error in the Judge's taking into  account  of  this
       reason for rejecting the Appellant's claim in this regard.


      Expert's ability to make enquiries of the police

   24. At [57], [58] and [59] of the Decision, the Judge records the  views
       of the country experts that elements of the  Appellant's  claim  are
       plausible.  However, at [57] and [58] of  the  Decision,  the  Judge
       points to inconsistencies in the  evidence  and  other  reasons  for
       rejecting the claim nonetheless.  At [59] of the Decision, she  goes
       on to record that the experts had not made enquiries of the  police.
       It is that latter reason which is challenged by the Appellant as not
       being open to the Judge on the evidence  or  not  being  a  relevant
       reason reducing the weight which  could  be  placed  on  the  expert
       reports.


   25. The Appellant's  case  in  this  regard  is  based  on  the  witness
       statement  of  Ms  Goodarzi  who,  it  will  be  recalled,  is   the
       Appellant's legal representative.  She has signed  three  statements
       in this appeal, and it is that dated 8 March 2019  which  is  relied
       upon in this regard.  She records at [9] to [11] of  that  statement
       her efforts to  obtain  information  from  the  Jamaican  police  by
       telephone without success.  She says that she was told by Mr  Sobers
       who is one of the country experts that, in order to make  a  written
       enquiry which might enable the information to be  obtained,  certain
       documents would be required such as the Appellant's fingerprints and
       the biodata page of his passport.  She says that as she  was  unable
       to provide all those documents, she did not make the request.  We do
       not need to consider at this stage why Ms  Goodarzi  was  unable  to
       obtain the documents as what we are assessing is whether  the  Judge
       erred in law by taking  this  reason  against  the  experts  without
       making reference to Ms Goodarzi's evidence as  to  the  difficulties
       which exist.

   26. The Judge was clearly aware of Ms Goodarzi's evidence.   She  refers
       to it in relation to other aspects of the  case  ([41],  [48]).   We
       accept however that she does not refer to Ms Goodarzi's evidence  on
       this point.


   27. However, we do not accept that this amounts to a material error  for
       the following reasons.  First, although the evidence  of  Mr  Sobers
       and Dr de Noronho, the two country experts, was not the  subject  of
       cross-examination or any competing evidence, and was therefore taken
       as read, it remains the case that this evidence is based only on the
       Appellant's own account when considered against  general  background
       evidence.  That is relevant to the weight which  the  Judge  had  to
       give to that evidence.  It is not disputed that there was  no  other
       corroborating evidence from any  other  source  and  the  Judge  was
       entitled to take that into account.

   28. Second,  neither  expert  has  met  with  the  Appellant.   That  is
       unsurprising given that the experts were instructed only  after  the
       third asylum claim and when the Appellant had already  suffered  his
       health issues following his stroke.  However, as such,  the  experts
       were confined to expressing the claims  as  being  "plausible"  when
       considered against the general background evidence.  They  were  not
       able to test the Appellant's own evidence or  form  a  view  on  the
       credibility of his account.

   29. Third, in this context, the Judge makes certain criticisms of Dr  de
       Noronho's report and conclusions as to plausibility  at  [50],  [53]
       and [54] of the Decision.  In particular, she draws attention to  Dr
       de Noronho's  conclusion  as  to  plausibility  notwithstanding  his
       failure to take some aspects of the Appellant's  case  into  account
       when forming that view. Those criticisms were, in our view, entirely
       sound.

   30. Fourth, and  finally,  the  position  of  country  experts  is  very
       different to that of a trainee solicitor practising in the  UK.   We
       do not criticise Ms Goodarzi for seeking to undertake enquiries  for
       herself.   Her  commitment  to  the  preparation  of  this  case  is
       admirable. However, she has no contacts with  police  in  a  foreign
       country.  A person acting as an expert in relation to  that  country
       with wide contacts there might be  expected  to  have  access  which
       would not be available to  an  individual  particularly  one  making
       enquiries on  behalf  of  a  person  with  criminal  connections  by
       telephone or, if she had been able to, in writing.

   31. We note in that regard Mr Sobers' general experience which  includes
       "significant ties...professionally and personally" in Jamaica  where
       he visits annually.  We recognise, given  his  profile,  that  those
       ties may not be directly with the Jamaican police, but it  is  clear
       from what is recorded in Ms Goodarzi's statement  that  he  is  well
       aware of how  the  police  operate  and  must  therefore  have  some
       contacts who  are  capable  of  making  enquiries.   It  is  perhaps
       surprising in that context that he did not at least  offer  to  make
       enquiries for Ms Goodarzi but, for whatever reason, he  did  not  do
       so.  Again, we do not criticise him for not doing  so.   It  may  be
       that he was concerned about disclosure of the  Appellant's  identity
       and claim.  However, the  Judge  was  entitled,  notwithstanding  Ms
       Goodarzi's evidence, to take this into account when considering  the
       weight to be given to the evidence.


   32. Dr de Noronha's experience is perhaps less extensive and of a  lower
       profile.  However, he expressly  mentions  a  communication  with  a
       police officer at [27] of  his  report  which  he  describes  as  an
       "interview".  It would appear therefore that he has some connections
       which he could have used to make enquiries had he directed his  mind
       to do so.

   33. We cannot be sure that the Judge addressed her mind to the  evidence
       about the difficulties which might exist in making enquiries of  the
       Jamaican police about the Appellant's case (or more accurately  have
       left this out of account as a reason for  discounting  the  experts'
       views as to plausibility). Even if she  did  not,  though,  for  the
       reasons which we give, we do not consider this error to be  material
       taken with the credibility findings as a whole.

    Evidence of the Appellant's ex-wife given to Dr Lisa Wootton


   34. Dr Wootton is a consultant forensic psychiatrist who has provided no
       less than six reports dealing with aspects of the Appellant's mental
       health which are within her expertise.  She has however only  spoken
       to the Appellant on a limited number of occasions due to his lack of
       cooperation.  As such, much of her evidence is based on  documentary
       evidence and testimony from others.  It is in this context that this
       ground falls to be addressed.


   35. In her report dated 30 November 2018  at  ([AB/F/135]),  Dr  Wootton
       records a telephone conversation with the Appellant's ex-wife,  [C],
       who lives in Antigua.  She begins by saying that the Appellant's ex-
       wife was not given any forewarning of the call.  She does  not  give
       the date of the call nor does she provide any verbatim note  of  it.
       Her account of the conversation is as follows:


            "7(b)      [C] told me: She is from the same community as [AXB]
           and has known him since he was in his 20s.  When they first met,
           he was calm.  "He used to be a nice person." They  were  married
           in around 1998 for about three years.  They  have  two  children
           together aged [..] and [..]. They remain in regular  contact  by
           phone. He calls her to ask about the children.  She  last  spoke
           to  him  a  few  weeks  ago.   Things   changed   during   their
           relationship. "They started to kill his brothers and he  had  to
           run away I don't know if it is  that  caused  the  problem  with
           him." She mentioned about one of his brothers  being  put  in  a
           barrel in Jamaica.  After that he would get easily  angry.   She
           was  vague  about  dates.   She  thinks  he  has  mental  health
           problems.  Sometimes she does not like to talk to him "sometimes
           he will talk good to you and the next  time  I  don't  like  his
           reasoning".  "He talks some things which really aren't relevant.
            It doesn't really make no sense."  When  I  asked  if  he  says
           things that are strange or paranoid she said "sometimes when  he
           talks you do wonder". She has noticed he has memory problems "he
           don't remember things" he calls her to  ask  when  the  children
           were born etc.  A few years ago they killed one of his  brothers
           and this might have made things worse. "He has  been  through  a
           lot."  She said she was not able to comment in much more  detail
           because she only speaks to him on the phone and she  was  unsure
           of the dates.  However, she said that she knows his  family  and
           their problems in Jamaica were real."


   36. Before moving to the specific criticism made of the Judge's  failure
       to deal with this evidence,  we  make  three  general  observations.
       First, unsurprisingly given her role in this appeal,  we  read  that
       passage as being evidence of Dr  Wootton  trying  to  ascertain  the
       nature and extent of the Appellant's mental health  problems  rather
       than  probing  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the   Appellant's
       protection claim. Second,  the  evidence  is  in  any  event  double
       hearsay and as such, even if the Judge had referred  to  it,  it  is
       difficult to see how it could be  given  any  real  weight.   Third,
       stemming from that and as is evident from the  content,  it  records
       conversations by telephone between the  Appellant  and  his  ex-wife
       which his ex-wife herself admits make no sense at  times  and  where
       she also admits that he has memory lapses and in circumstances where
       the Appellant's ex-wife herself was "vague about dates".


   37. Of greater importance to the question whether the failure  to  refer
       to this evidence amounts to an error of law is  its  materiality  to
       the issues which the Judge had to decide.  It is trite  law  that  a
       Judge is not obliged to refer to every piece of evidence but only to
       that which has relevance to the issues.


   38. The Judge had before her witness  statements  from  Ms  Goodarzi  to
       which we have already referred.  Two of those statements (both dated
       18 March 2019) report her  own  conversations  with  [C].    In  the
       first, ([AB/C/8-10]), [C] tells Ms  Goodarzi  about  what  she  says
       happened in the UK in 2000 and about the murder of  the  Appellant's
       brother in Jamaica which she said occurred in 2006/2007.   She  also
       says that the Appellant's nephew was shot in 2017 "but no one  knows
       his whereabouts".  In the second, ([AB/I/1-4]), Ms Goodarzi  records
       that [C] had changed her mind about providing  a  witness  statement
       herself.   However,  [C]  is  said  to  have  confirmed   that   the
       Appellant's half-brother ("W" or "O") was killed by gangs in Jamaica
       in  2016.  She  also  deals  with  a  video  recording  showing  the
       Appellant's half-brother's dead body.


   39. The Judge deals with that evidence at [41]  (as  to  the  events  in
       2000) and [48] (as to the killing of the Appellant's  half-brother).
       The Judge also records at [48] that she watched the video  evidence.
       In relation to both, the Judge gives less weight to the evidence  of
       [C] because it could not be tested in cross-examination and was  not
       first-hand.  The Judge was clearly entitled to assess  the  evidence
       in that way.  The same would be true of what [C] said to Dr Wootton.
        If anything, that evidence would be likely to bear less  weight  in
       light of the context of the conversation and that Dr Wootton,  as  a
       mental health expert, was  not  concerned  with  the  facts  of  the
       protection claim.


   40. More crucially, though, and in spite of asking Mr Chirico about  the
       materiality of this evidence on several occasions, we are still at a
       loss to see what is the relevance of what [C] is  reported  to  have
       said to Dr Wootton particularly since the Judge  expressly  confirms
       at [48] of the Decision that she accepts that the Appellant's  half-
       brother was murdered in  2016.  The  Judge  accepts  also  that  the
       Appellant's brother was killed as she accepts that he  returned  for
       his brother's funeral in 2006.


   41. The highest that Mr  Chirico  could  put  the  Appellant's  case  in
       relation to what Dr Wootton records is  that  [C]  said  that  "they
       started killing his brothers" (our emphasis).  He said that this  is
       confirmation that one gang was involved in  the  killings.  However,
       that is less detailed than [C]'s  evidence  to  Ms  Goodarzi.   Even
       there, [C] says that the Appellant's brother and  half-brother  were
       killed by gangs but does not say which gang nor that it was the same
       gang. [C] also confirms that his family in  Jamaica  has  "problems"
       which are "real".  The use of the word "they" therefore  has  to  be
       taken in context.  What [C] is said to have told Dr Wootton does not
       add to what is said in Ms Goodarzi's  statement  that  [C]  reported
       there to be "gang issues".  As we have already noted, the Judge  was
       not prepared to give Ms Goodarzi's  report  of  [C]'s  evidence  any
       weight and was entitled not to do so.  What [C] is said to have told
       Dr Wootton does not add to that  evidence  and  the  Judge  was  not
       therefore obliged to deal with it.  Any failure  would  not  in  any
       event be material.


    The Appellant's visit to Jamaica in 2006


   42. Mr Chirico accepted that the Judge was entitled to take into account
       that the Appellant did not suffer harm when he went to  Jamaica  for
       his brother's funeral in 2006 ([58]).  He said though that if  other
       errors were made out, this may go to the materiality of any error as
       another Judge could find in the Appellant's  favour  notwithstanding
       this point.  The Appellant was at liberty in Jamaica for  one  month
       before being arrested on drugs charges (which we have already  noted
       the Judge did not accept had any link to the gang).

    Failure to mention death threats in 2010


   43. Mr Chirico accepted that the Appellant had not mentioned  the  death
       threats made to him when he was interviewed  and  had  raised  these
       only after that interview by way of the letter received by the  Home
       Office on 17 November 2010 (as attached to the Respondent's skeleton
       argument and recorded by the Judge as part of the evidence  at  [36]
       of the Decision).  The Appellant's grounds plead this as an omission
       and assert that the Judge should have taken into  account  that  the
       information was volunteered less than a  week  after  interview  and
       before any decision was taken by the Respondent.  Mr  Chirico  again
       accepted that the Judge was entitled to take into account that these
       threats were not mentioned in interview; he again asserted that this
       error was not freestanding but went to materiality.


   44. In our view, not only was the Judge entitled to  take  into  account
       the Appellant's failure to mention this earlier, but that "omission"
       is also very difficult for the Appellant to explain away in the  way
       pleaded in the grounds.

   45. Dr Staker  took  us  to  the  asylum  interview  ([AB/L/1-17]).   At
       question [36], the Appellant was asked "[t]hese  events  took  place
       eight years after you left, why would you fear going back  now?"  to
       which the Appellant replied "[b]ecause the crime is  continuing.  It
       is a revenge killing. My best friend was killed last  year.  He  was
       not involved in crime and they killed him".  In follow  up  to  that
       answer, at question [37], the Appellant was asked how he  knew  that
       his friend was killed by a gang to which he replied "[b]ecause  they
       say he (my friend) is the  one  who  is  informing  me  of  what  is
       happening out there".  He was then asked why he  would  be  affected
       since he had lived in the UK  since  1999  and  said  that  this  is
       because his family is in the heart of this and has had to leave  the
       community.  At question [45], the Appellant was asked  how  he  knew
       that "One Order" was "after [him]" if he did not retain contact with
       anyone in Jamaica to which he replied "[m]y sister always  tells  me
       what is going on".  As Dr Staker pointed out, the obvious answer  to
       all and any of those questions was that the Appellant  had  received
       threats, but he did not assert that this was the case.


   46. For that reason, we do  not  accept  that  there  is  any  error  in
       relation to the Judge's reliance  on  the  failure  to  mention  the
       threats earlier as an inconsistency.


    Appellant's failure to report and reasons therefor


   47. At [56] of the Decision, the Judge noted the Appellant's failure  to
       report  whilst  on  temporary  admission.   He  was  treated  as  an
       absconder until he was encountered  on  26  July  2017.   The  Judge
       accepted the Respondent's view that the reason was likely to  be  in
       order to delay any decision in his case.


   48. As is pointed out in the grounds, the Appellant suffered a stroke in
       June 2011.  It is said  that  this  might  explain  his  failure  to
       report.  However, there was no evidence before the Judge  that  this
       was the reason.  The Appellant did not ask to vary reporting because
       of his medical condition.  There is no medical  evidence  supporting
       an inability to report. There is no evidence  from  him  or  on  his
       behalf which gives his  condition  as  a  reason.  Furthermore,  the
       failure covers a lengthy period of some six years after he  suffered
       the stroke.  The  Judge  was  well  aware  that  the  Appellant  had
       suffered a stroke and of his medical complications.   She  was  also
       well aware of the Appellant's lack of capacity to litigate. She  was
       not however bound to consider or give weight to reasons  which  were
       not put forward by the Appellant or on his  behalf  to  explain  his
       failure to report.


    Summary in Relation to Ground One


   49. We have set out above our  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
       grounds challenging the Judge's findings regarding credibility.   Mr
       Chirico indicated that the main focus in relation to ground 1(b) was
       the reference to the  experts  failing  to  make  enquiries  of  the
       police, the evidence of what [C] said to Dr Wootton and the  failure
       to take into account the Appellant's medical condition when  looking
       at the reasons for failing to report.  We have explained why  we  do
       not accept that those grounds disclose any material errors  of  law.
       We have also explained why we do  not  accept  that  there  are  any
       errors of law in the other components of ground 1(b) nor in relation
       to ground 1(a).  Such  minor  failures  by  the  Judge  as  we  have
       identified above do not make any material difference to the  Judge's
       overall conclusion as to credibility. For the avoidance of doubt, we
       do not consider that any of these issues falls  to  be  regarded  as
       material; nor that they do so when viewed cumulatively.


   50. We feel bound to mention also that the Judge did not  only  rely  on
       the findings to which we have  drawn  attention  in  the  course  of
       considering the grounds.  Relevant  also  to  credibility  were  the
       commission of offences of deception ([55]) and the inconsistency  in
       the Appellant's  account  about  events  post-dating  his  brother's
       death, in particular the death of his best friend and  the  shooting
       of his nephew ([47]).  The latter issue in particular  goes  to  the
       question of present risk.  Whilst Mr Chirico is right to  point  out
       that the Judge did not find on an alternative basis that,  if  there
       were any historic risk, it was not shown still to exist,  the  Judge
       did make the point at [59] of the Decision that  the  Appellant  had
       failed to make out a case as  to  any  present  risk  which  further
       undermined the claim as made in 2017.


    GROUND TWO: HUMANITARIAN PROTECTION


   51. Before we turn to deal with this ground, we consider it  appropriate
       to record  that  the  Judge  did  not  deal  with  the  Respondent's
       exclusion of the Appellant from  humanitarian  protection,  applying
       paragraph 339C and 339D of the Immigration Rules to this  aspect  of
       the claim, on the basis that he had committed a serious crime  ([61]
       to [67] of the Respondent's decision dated 22 December 2017:[AB/E/1-
       21]).   There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  Respondent  had
       withdrawn that part of the decision. The  issue  is  raised  in  the
       Appellant's skeleton argument before Judge O'Keeffe (at [34] of that
       skeleton). Indeed, the Judge recorded the Respondent's conclusion at
       [12] of the Decision.   The Judge did not  however  deal  with  this
       issue when coming to look at humanitarian protection.  The Appellant
       has  (for  obvious  reasons)  not  challenged  this  failure.    The
       Respondent has not sought to uphold the Decision on  the  additional
       basis  that  the  Appellant  would  be  excluded  from  humanitarian
       protection.  Mr Staker confirmed to us that the Respondent  did  not
       seek to rely on it. We accept therefore that  it  is  not  something
       which we should consider when looking at whether there is  an  error
       of law.


   52. The Appellant's ground two  is,  in  essence,  that  the  Judge  has
       misunderstood the humanitarian protection aspect of the  Appellant's
       case.  The Judge dealt with humanitarian protection at [60] to  [63]
       of the Decision before moving on to deal with the  Article  3  claim
       (which is the subject of grounds three and  four).   She  understood
       the claim to be based on the generalised risk  of  violence  in  the
       form of robbery or crime due to  the  high  incidence  of  crime  in
       Jamaica.  That was to be coupled with the general  vulnerability  of
       deportees from the  UK  and  based  on  the  Appellant's  individual
       circumstances, particularly due to his disability and mental  health
       conditions. Her reasons for rejecting this aspect of the  claim  are
       as follows:


            "60. For the same reasons I find that  the  appellant  has  not
           demonstrated that he is entitled to humanitarian  protection  or
           is at risk of treatment contrary to  Articles  2  or  3  on  the
           grounds of a feud involving  his  family  in  Jamaica.   It  was
           argued in the alternative that the  appellant  was  entitled  to
           humanitarian protection because of the generalised risk  to  him
           in the form of robbery or  crime.   I  accept  that  the  expert
           evidence of Mr Sobers supports a conclusion that  deportees  are
           marked out and are vulnerable.  That however does not mean  that
           the appellant would face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm
           simply because he was deported from the UK and because he  is  a
           wheelchair user.
            61.  The expert evidence reveals  that  whilst  facilities  for
           disabled people are very far from first class in  Jamaica,  they
           do exist.  The expert evidence demonstrates that  all  Jamaicans
           have access to free health care in the public system; there  are
           three major hospitals  and  a  network  of  free  clinics.   The
           National   Health   Fund   provides   subsidized    prescription
           medications to any Jamaican who joins the programme.  Mr  Sobers
           also indicated that the appellant  would  be  entitled  to  some
           state benefits in the form of PATH although this was subject  to
           eligibility criteria and a Tax Registration Number.
            62.  Dr de Noronha provided information  about  the  Open  Arms
           Drop In Centre in East Kingston which has a  contract  with  the
           British High Commission to house destitute  deportees  from  the
           UK.  Dr de Noronha said that although the  shelter  was  usually
           full, the appellant should be able to secure a bed as  he  would
           be deported from the UK.  I accept that the description  of  the
           accommodation means that it is far from ideal for  a  wheelchair
           user, Dr de Noronha did say however that it accommodated  people
           with various physical disabilities.
            63.  He said that the appellant would not be able to leave  the
           centre without a car or van.  The evidence before me is that the
           appellant cannot leave  the  current  accommodation  in  the  UK
           without assistance.  The occupational health report  of  Abigail
           Wren indicates that the appellant had the  ability  to  transfer
           independently from his wheelchair to a bed or other chair.   The
           appellant can also undertake personal  care,  toileting,  eating
           and drinking.  On the evidence before me considered as a  whole,
           I find that it has not been demonstrated that the  appellant  is
           entitled to humanitarian protection."


   53. Mr Chirico confirmed that it was not being said on  the  Appellant's
       behalf that all deportees from the UK to  Jamaica  are  at  risk  of
       generalised violence on that account.   It  is  not  suggested  that
       Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive applies.  The claim  in
       this regard  is  squarely  based  on  Article  15(b).  There  is  no
       criticism made of what is said at [60] of the Decision.   The  tenor
       of the Appellant's ground two is that, when considering the issue of
       risk of violence and crime, the Judge has failed to appreciate  that
       the risk is said  to  arise  "very  specifically  at  the  point  of
       return".  Based on Mr Sobers' expert report, it  is  said  that  the
       Appellant would, as a deportee,  be  taken  to  the  Central  Police
       Station in Kingston immediately upon  his  return.    When  released
       from there and with nowhere to go, he would be at risk of crime  and
       violence in that general area which, Mr Sobers says, is particularly
       high.


   54. We begin by looking at Mr Sobers' evidence in this regard as follows
       ([AB/G/22]):


            "82) Persons deported to Jamaica  are  taken  from  the  Norman
           Manley International airport to the Central  Police  Station  in
           Kingston where they are interviewed by the police. At the end of
           the interview, the deportee is typically expected to make his or
           her own way from there.   The  police  have  reported  that,  at
           times, many such deportees can still be found outside the police
           station in the early hours of the morning as they  have  nowhere
           to go and do not know where to go.
            83)  A recent news report (March 2017)  of  the  arrival  of  a
           group of deported persons noted the following:
                 ...family members waited to see  relatives,  some  of  whom
                 left the island as children, while others, who had no  ties
                 to the island, were met  by  hustlers  waiting  to  provide
                 phone calls and accommodation.  Others who  had  no  family
                 members or friends to meet them were perplexed about  their
                 next move.  Some were assisted by a woman who gave her name
                 as 'Tasha'.  She would not disclose how much  she  is  paid
                 for a call on her cellphone...
            84)  The area around Central Police  Station  is  impoverished,
           dangerous and the site of gang activity, gun violence, and drug-
           related crime.  Deported persons are immediately  confronted  by
           these hazards.  If the deported person has  no  family  support,
           they must secure  their  own  food  and  lodging  with  no  real
           material assistance."


   55. The passage in Mr Sobers' report which  immediately  precedes  those
       paragraphs deals with general risks to deportees  because  they  are
       blamed by the local population for the  public  safety  problems  in
       Jamaica.  The passage  which  follows  deals  with  availability  of
       shelter from State and other public organisations.  As  such,  these
       paragraphs of Mr Sobers' report deal with both the general  risk  to
       deportees based on the level of crime around the police station  and
       the availability of support for someone who has no family to assist.




   56. We also make the following observations about the  passage  we  have
       cited. First, the assumption that the Appellant would  be  taken  to
       the Central Police Station in Kingston is unsourced.   The  evidence
       that deportees with nowhere to go hang around the police station  is
       founded on a newspaper report from 2004.  Following a  question  put
       to Mr Chirico, he confirmed to us orally and on instruction that the
       news report of March 2017 does refer elsewhere  to  deportees  being
       taken to a police station, but it  is  not  clear  from  the  report
       whether that is the Kingston Central Police Station.   We  were  not
       shown the report itself. In any event, Mr Sobers' purpose in  citing
       it appears to be that those without family support  would  not  know
       where to go.


   57. Second, and in any event, what Mr Sobers does  not  mention  is  any
       direct report of violence to a  deportee  taken  to  Central  Police
       Station in Kingston immediately following deportation.  We  have  to
       say that, speaking for ourselves, it would  not  have  been  evident
       that the passage cited was intended  to  demonstrate  a  generalised
       risk of violence  at  the  "pinch-point"  of  return  based  on  the
       location of the police station to  which  the  Appellant  would  (or
       might) be taken.


   58. We accept  that  the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  before  Judge
       O'Keeffe did refer under this  heading  to  a  risk  of  "kidnap  or
       robbery as a returnee from the UK"  (as  well  as  risk  of  revenge
       killing which is already dealt with  under  the  Refugee  Convention
       heading). We also accept that in one sentence of Mr  Sobers'  report
       at [33(b)] reference  is  made  to  the  risk  of  "finding  himself
       stranded in his wheelchair outside of  Central  Police  Station,  an
       area that is "impoverished, dangerous and the site of gang activity,
       gun violence and drug-related crime".   That  is  however  only  one
       sentence in a paragraph which otherwise flags the risk as being  one
       of generalised risk based on being a returnee  and  because  of  the
       Appellant's physical and mental vulnerability.


   59. We accept that the Judge does not refer expressly to  this  asserted
       risk or the passage in Mr Sobers' evidence which we have cited.   We
       also observe that at least some of what is said by the Judge at [60]
       to [63] crosses over  into  the  area  covered  by  Article  3  ECHR
       relating to the Appellant's health.  That may well  be  due  to  the
       overlap in the evidence to which we have referred.  This has led  to
       the criticism in ground two of the Judge's reasoning  on  the  basis
       that the evidence referred to does not deal with the risk  which  is
       said to be of violence and harm.


   60. However, the Judge's reasoning has to  be  considered  as  a  whole.
       What the Judge is dealing with in this section is  the  availability
       of State support to deal with the Appellant's health  conditions  in
       much the same way as does Mr Sobers  when  considering  whether  the
       Appellant will be at risk  of  generalised  violence  based  on  his
       disability and having nowhere  to  go  to  avoid  that  risk.   That
       applies  to  the  Appellant's  position  after   return   but   also
       encompasses what is said to be the immediate difficulty of accessing
       accommodation on deportation.  That is the point made at [62] of the
       Decision (which refers to the links between the Open Arms Centre and
       the British High Commission). The Open  Arms  Centre  is  a  shelter
       described in more detail by Dr de Noronha at [49]  to  [55]  of  his
       report ([AB/G/60]).


   61. Whilst we accept that there is no express reference  to  what  would
       happen to the Appellant immediately on return, when the findings are
       read as a whole, the Judge has dealt with the case which was put  to
       her.  Even if she has not done  so,  given  the  limitation  of  the
       evidence about the circumstances at the "pinch-point" of  return  to
       which we have already referred, we would  have  concluded  that  any
       error was immaterial.  There  is  simply  insufficient  evidence  on
       which to base the case on which the Appellant now seeks to focus.

   62. There is a further difficulty about the way in which the Appellant's
       representatives have sought to advance the  humanitarian  protection
       argument.  They have sought to base that argument to  a  significant
       degree on the lack of  appropriate  treatment  for  the  Appellant's
       health  problems  but  in  the  context  of  Article  15(b)  of  the
       Qualification Directive (as incorporated by paragraph  339C  of  the
       Immigration Rules).  In that context, the CJEU has made  very  clear
       that the wording of Article 15(b) is different from Article  3  ECHR
       and that the sole purpose of Article 15(b) is to protect  applicants
       against  denial  of  appropriate  treatment  that  is  intentionally
       inflicted by the authorities of the applicant's country  of  origin.
       Thus, in MP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2018] 1 WLR 5585 (Case C-353/16), the Court held that "the  serious
       harm referred to in article 15(b) of Directive 2004/83 cannot simply
       be the result of general shortcomings in the health  system  of  the
       country of origin.  The risk of deterioration in  the  health  of  a
       third-country national who is suffering from a serious illness, as a
       result of there being no appropriate treatment  in  his  country  of
       origin, is not sufficient, unless  that  third-country  national  is
       intentionally deprived of health care, to warrant that person  being
       granted subsidiary protection".  Mr Chirico confirmed  that  it  was
       not part of the Appellant's case that the Jamaican authorities would
       intentionally deprive the Appellant of  appropriate  treatment.   It
       follows that the alleged lack of appropriate treatment accessible or
       available to the Appellant in Jamaica does not advance his claim for
       humanitarian protection.

   63. Finally, we also reiterate the point we  made  about  the  exclusion
       from humanitarian protection. However, in light of the foregoing, we
       do not need to go into that point. In conclusion, therefore,  we  do
       not consider that ground two discloses  any  error  of  law  in  the
       Decision, such as to necessitate the setting aside of the  Decision.



    GROUNDS THREE AND FOUR: HEALTH, SUICIDE AND SUPPORT ISSUES:  ARTICLE  3
    ECHR


   64. The Appellant's ground three asserts that Judge  O'Keeffe  erred  in
       law when dealing with the substance of the Article 3 ECHR claim.  It
       is said that the Judge failed to engage with  the  medical  evidence
       and failed to apply the correct threshold,  particularly  since  the
       Appellant's case was not a pure health case but involved also access
       difficulties  arising  from  his   physical   disability   and   the
       discrimination faced by disabled persons in Jamaica.


   65. Ground four concerns  what  are  said  to  be  the  UK's  procedural
       obligations under Article 3 ECHR.  The Appellant asserts that  those
       procedural obligations are not addressed in  the  domestic  case-law
       concerning Article 3 ECHR and that the Judge should  therefore  have
       applied the test encompassed in  the  Grand  Chamber's  decision  in
       Paposhvili  v  Belgium  (41738/10  -  judgment  11  December   2016)
       ("Paposhvili").


   66. Before we turn to address those grounds in the context of this case,
       and given the need to provide some guidance on, in  particular,  the
       procedural obligation issue, we deal with the competing  submissions
       on these issues generally.  Before we turn to those submissions,  we
       set out the relevant case-law on which those submissions depend.


    Substantive  and  Procedural  Obligations  in   Health   Cases   Before
    Paposhvili

   67. We are bound  to  apply  domestic  and  binding  case-law  preceding
       Paposhvili   (following  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in   AM
       (Zimbabwe) and another v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       [2018] 1 WLR 2933 - "AM (Zimbabwe)").  That case-law mainly concerns
       the substantive obligation.  However, the procedural obligation  for
       which the Appellant contends  is,  for  reasons  we  later  explain,
       inextricably bound up with the substantive obligation.  We therefore
       also deal with the case-law considering the  substantive  obligation
       which applies to a State party to the  ECHR  which  is  returning  a
       foreign national ("the Returning State") to his home  country  ("the
       Receiving State").

   68. Until the Grand Chamber's decision in Paposhvili in  December  2016,
       the obligation of the Returning  State  in  health  cases  had  been
       narrowly confined.  The obligation of  the  Returning  State  is  in
       principle the same as applies in a protection case where the foreign
       national claims that he would be at  risk  of  torture,  inhuman  or
       degrading treatment in the Receiving State (stemming from Soering  v
       United Kingdom 11 EHRR 439 - "Soering").  In that  case,  the  ECtHR
       explained that the obligation arises not from  the  treatment  which
       will occur in the Receiving State but from the act of returning  the
       person to face that treatment ([96] of  the  judgment).   Article  3
       ECHR is of course an absolute right and therefore a Returning  State
       cannot derogate from its obligation because of any misconduct on the
       part of the applicant (see Saadi v Italy (2009) 49 EHRR 30).  As the
       Court made clear at [94] of the judgment in  Soering,  however,  the
       burden lies with the applicant to "substantiate  his  fear  that  he
       will be exposed  to  treatment  or  punishment  falling  under  that
       Article."


   69. In  health  cases,  the  ECtHR  adopted  a  narrower  focus  to  the
       obligation of the Returning State, perhaps recognising that, in such
       cases, the treatment to which an applicant would be exposed did  not
       arise directly from any act of the Receiving State but  rather  from
       the  applicant's  medical  condition  and  the  potential  lack   of
       available treatment in the Receiving State.  So it was that in  D  v
       United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423 ("D"),  the  ECtHR  found  in  D's
       favour on the Article 3 issue because of the advanced stage  of  his
       illness coupled with the "acute mental and physical suffering" which
       would await him during the final days of his life in St Kitts  where
       he would have no support.   As the Court  put  it  at  [53]  of  the
       judgment:


           "Although it cannot be said  that  the  conditions  which  would
           confront him in the receiving country are themselves a breach of
           the standards of Article 3 (art. 3), his  removal  would  expose
           him to a real risk of dying under most distressing circumstances
           and would thus amount to inhuman treatment."


   70. The  case-law  surrounding  Article  3  ECHR  in  health  cases  was
       considered again in N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39 ("N").  The
       applicant was a Ugandan woman who was diagnosed  HIV  positive.   If
       her antiretroviral treatment  was  withdrawn,  her  life  expectancy
       would be less than one year.   Treatment  of  a  similar  nature  in
       Uganda was costly and not easily  accessible.   In  spite  of  these
       factors, the ECtHR found no violation of Article 3 ECHR by  the  UK.
       The Court summarised the case-law in health cases thus:


            "42. In summary, the Court  observes  that  since  D  v  United
           Kingdom it has consistently applied the following principles.
           Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot  in  principle  claim
           any entitlement to remain in  the  territory  of  a  contracting
           state in order to continue to benefit from  medical,  social  or
           other forms of assistance and services provided by the expelling
           state.  The fact that the applicant's  circumstances,  including
           his life expectancy, would be significantly reduced if  he  were
           to be removed from the contracting state is  not  sufficient  in
           itself to give rise to a breach  of  Art.  3.  The  decision  to
           remove an alien who  is  suffering  from  a  serious  mental  or
           physical illness to a  country  where  the  facilities  for  the
           treatment of that illness are inferior to those available in the
           contracting state may raise an issue under Art. 3, but only in a
           very exceptional case, where the  humanitarian  grounds  against
           the removal are compelling.  In the D case the very  exceptional
           circumstances were that the applicant  was  critically  ill  and
           appeared to be close to  death,  could  not  be  guaranteed  any
           nursing or medical care in his country  of  origin  and  had  no
           family there willing or able to care for him or provide him with
           even a basic level of food, shelter or social support.
            43.  The Court does not exclude that there may  be  other  very
           exceptional cases  where  the  humanitarian  considerations  are
           equally  compelling.   However,  it  considers  that  it  should
           maintain the high threshold  set  in  D  v  United  Kingdom  and
           applied in its subsequent case law, which it regards as  correct
           in principle, given that in such cases the alleged  future  harm
           would emanate not from the  intentional  acts  or  omissions  of
           public authorities or  non-state  bodies,  but  instead  from  a
           naturally occurring illness and the lack of sufficient resources
           to deal with it in the receiving country.
            44.  Although many of the rights it contains have  implications
           of a social or economic nature, the  Convention  is  essentially
           directed at  the  protection  of  civil  and  political  rights.
           Furthermore, inherent in the whole of the Convention is a search
           for a fair balance between the demands of the  general  interest
           of the community and the requirements of the protection  of  the
           individual's fundamental rights.  Advances in  medical  science,
           together with social and economic differences between countries,
           entail that the level of treatment available in the  contracting
           state and the country of origin may vary considerably.  While it
           is necessary, given the fundamental importance of Art. 3 in  the
           Convention  system,  for  the  Court  to  retain  a  degree   of
           flexibility to prevent expulsion in very exceptional cases, Art.
           3 does not place an  obligation  on  the  contracting  state  to
           alleviate such disparities through the  provision  of  free  and
           unlimited health care to all aliens  without  a  right  to  stay
           within its jurisdiction.  A finding to the contrary would  place
           too great a burden on the contracting states.
            45.  Finally, the Court observes  that,  although  the  present
           application, in common with most of those referred to above,  is
           concerned with the expulsion of a person with an HIV  and  AIDS-
           related condition, the same principles must apply in relation to
           the  expulsion  of  any  person  afflicted  with  any   serious,
           naturally occurring physical or mental illness which  may  cause
           suffering,  pain  and  reduced  life  expectancy   and   require
           specialised medical  treatment  which  may  not  be  so  readily
           available in the applicant's country of origin or which  may  be
           available only at substantial cost."


      The Case of Paposhvili

   71. As the Grand Chamber observed in Paposhvili, the application of  the
       principles derived from D and N had  led  to  numerous  applications
       before  the  ECtHR  having  been  declared  inadmissible  as   being
       manifestly ill-founded.   That, together with the extreme  facts  of
       Mr Paposhvili's case, perhaps explains  the  reason  for  the  Grand
       Chamber's reconsideration of those principles. Before we set out the
       Grand Chamber's reformulation of those principles, therefore, it  is
       necessary to say something  about  the  factual  background  to  the
       Paposhvili case.


   72. Mr Paposhvili was a national of Georgia who  had  lived  in  Belgium
       with his family since 1998. He had committed a  number  of  criminal
       offences and had no legal basis of stay  in  Belgium.   The  Belgian
       authorities refused to regularise his stay on exceptional grounds on
       several occasions.    The  Aliens  Office  refused  to  examine  the
       substance of Mr Paposhvili's applications, citing various procedural
       reasons and his criminal offending.   His  wife  and  children  were
       however eventually granted indefinite leave to remain.  The  Belgian
       authorities also issued a deportation decision against Mr Paposhvili
       in 2007 but that was never enforced.   He was  however  informed  of
       his liability to removal and detention for  that  purpose  when  his
       applications  to  remain  were  refused.   His  removal  was  stayed
       following the issuing of a Rule  39  indication  by  the  Strasbourg
       court.


   73. Mr Paposhvili suffered from very serious illnesses.  In 2006, he was
       diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.  In 2008, he was  said
       to have a life expectancy of three to  five  years.    In  2014,  Mr
       Paposhvili's condition having deteriorated further, he started on  a
       new course of treatment as part of a study and in preparation for  a
       donor stem cell transplant.  He was unable to  have  the  transplant
       due to his lack of a residence permit.  A GP report indicated  that,
       absent such treatment, Mr Paposhvili's life expectancy would be very
       short indeed - a matter of a few months.


   74. In  addition,  Mr  Paposhvili  also  developed  chronic  obstructive
       pulmonary  disease,  resulting  from  tuberculosis.    He   received
       treatment also for that disease.  He also suffered from hepatitis  C
       and liver fibrosis.  His hepatitis C condition was said to be stable
       by 2015.  Mr Paposhvili suffered a stroke in March  2015,  resulting
       in permanent paralysis of his arm.  The effects of the  stroke  were
       managed with an anti-epilepsy drug.  Mr  Paposhvili  died  from  his
       illnesses in Belgium on  7  June  2016  (after  the  first  instance
       judgment but before the Grand Chamber proceedings).  His family were
       permitted to continue the proceedings.


   75. The evidence provided to the ECtHR by the Georgian  authorities  was
       to the effect  that  the  Georgian  health-care  system  could  have
       provided "appropriate treatment" for all of the illnesses from which
       Mr Paposhvili suffered.


   76. The general principles applied by the Grand Chamber are set  out  at
       [172] to [193] of the judgment.  We set out  the  relevant  part  of
       that passage as those principles are central both to  the  threshold
       which applies in Article 3 health cases and the procedural duty  for
       which the Appellant contends.  We have emphasised those parts of the
       judgment which are of importance to the issues we  are  considering.
       Having recited the background to the applicability of Article 3 ECHR
       in health cases and the principles in D and  N,  the  Grand  Chamber
       said this (with our emphasis as to the most relevant  parts  of  the
       judgment):


           "181.  The Court concludes from this recapitulation of the case-
           law that the application of Article 3 of the Convention only  in
           cases where the person facing expulsion is close to death, which
           has been its practice since the judgment in N.  v.  the  United
           Kingdom, has deprived aliens who are seriously  ill,  but  whose
           condition is less critical, of the benefit of that provision. As
           a corollary to this, the case-law subsequent to N. v. the United
           Kingdom has not provided more detailed guidance  regarding  the
           "very exceptional  cases"  referred  to  in N.  v.  the  United
           Kingdom, other than the case contemplated in D. v.  the  United
           Kingdom.
           182.  In the light of the foregoing, and reiterating that it is
           essential that the Convention is interpreted and  applied  in  a
           manner which renders its rights practical and effective and  not
           theoretical and illusory... the Court is of the  view  that  the
           approach adopted hitherto should be clarified.
           183.  The Court considers  that  the  "other  very  exceptional
           cases" within the meaning of the judgment in N. v.  the  United
           Kingdom ( 43) which may raise an issue under Article 3  should
           be understood to refer to situations involving the removal of  a
           seriously ill person in  which  substantial  grounds  have  been
           shown for believing that he or she,  although  not  at  imminent
           risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence
           of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack of
           access to such treatment, of being exposed to a  serious,  rapid
           and irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting
           in intense suffering or  to  a  significant  reduction  in  life
           expectancy.  The  Court  points  out   that   these   situations
           correspond to a high threshold for the application of Article  3
           of the Convention in cases  concerning  the  removal  of  aliens
           suffering from serious illness.
           184.  As to whether the above conditions  are  satisfied  in  a
           given situation, the Court observes that in cases involving  the
           expulsion of aliens, the  Court  does  not  itself  examine  the
           applications for international protection or verify  how  States
           control the entry, residence and expulsion of aliens. By  virtue
           of Article 1 of the Convention the  primary  responsibility  for
           implementing and enforcing the guaranteed rights and freedoms is
           laid on the national  authorities,  who  are  thus  required  to
           examine the applicants' fears and to assess the risks they would
           face if removed to the receiving country, from the standpoint of
           Article 3. ...
           185.  Accordingly, in cases  of  this  kind,  the  authorities'
           obligation under Article 3  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the
           persons concerned is  fulfilled  primarily  through  appropriate
           procedures  allowing  such  examination  to   be   carried   out
           (see, mutatis mutandis, El-Masri v. the former Yugoslav Republic
           of Macedonia [GC], no. 39630/09,  182, ECHR 2012; Tarakhel,
           cited above,  104; and F.G. v. Sweden, cited above,  117).
           186.  In the  context  of  these  procedures,  it  is  for  the
           applicants to adduce  evidence  capable  of  demonstrating  that
           there are substantial grounds for believing that, if the measure
           complained of were to be implemented, they would be exposed to a
           real risk of being subjected to treatment  contrary  to  Article
           3 (see Saadi, cited above,  129, and F.G. v.  Sweden,  cited
           above,  120). In this connection it should be observed that  a
           certain degree of speculation  is  inherent  in  the  preventive
           purpose of Article 3 and that it is not a  matter  of  requiring
           the persons concerned to provide clear proof of their claim that
           they  would  be  exposed  to  proscribed  treatment   (see,   in
           particular, Trabelsi v. Belgium, no. 140/10,  130, ECHR 2014
           (extracts)).
           187.  Where such evidence is adduced, it is for the authorities
           of the returning State, in the context of  domestic  procedures,
           to dispel any doubts raised by it (see Saadi,  cited  above,  
           129, and F.G. v. Sweden, cited above,  120). The risk alleged
           must be subjected to close scrutiny (see Saadi, cited above, 
           128; Sufi and Elmi v. the  United  Kingdom,  nos. 8319/07 and
           11449/07,  214, 28 June 2011; Hirsi Jamaa and Others, cited
           above,  116; and Tarakhel, cited above,  104) in the course of
           which the authorities in the returning State must  consider  the
           foreseeable consequences of removal for the individual concerned
           in the receiving State, in the light of  the  general  situation
           there    and    the    individual's    personal    circumstances
           (see Vilvarajah and Others, cited above,  108; El-Masri, cited
           above,  213; and Tarakhel, cited above,  105). The assessment
           of the risk  as  defined  above  (see  paragraphs  183-84)  must
           therefore  take  into  consideration  general  sources  such  as
           reports of the World Health Organisation or  of  reputable  non-
           governmental  organisations   and   the   medical   certificates
           concerning the person in question.
           188.  As the Court has observed above (see paragraph 173), what
           is in issue here  is  the  negative  obligation  not  to  expose
           persons to a risk of ill-treatment proscribed by Article  3.  It
           follows that the impact of removal on the person concerned  must
           be assessed by comparing his or her state  of  health  prior  to
           removal and how it would evolve after transfer to the  receiving
           State.
           189.  As regards the factors to be taken into consideration, the
           authorities in the returning State must verify on a case-by-case
           basis whether the care  generally  available  in  the  receiving
           State  is  sufficient  and  appropriate  in  practice  for   the
           treatment of the applicant's illness so as to prevent him or her
           being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 (see  paragraph
           183 above). The benchmark is not the level of care  existing  in
           the returning State;  it  is  not  a  question  of  ascertaining
           whether the care in the receiving State would be  equivalent  or
           inferior to that provided  by  the  health-care  system  in  the
           returning State. Nor is it possible to derive from Article  3  a
           right to receive specific treatment in the receiving State which
           is not available to the rest of the population.
           190.  The authorities must also consider the extent to which the
           individual in question will actually have access  to  this  care
           and these facilities in the receiving State. The Court  observes
           in  that  regard  that  it   has   previously   questioned   the
           accessibility of care (see Aswat, cited above,  55, and Tatar,
           cited above,  47-49) and referred to the need to consider  the
           cost of medication and treatment, the existence of a social  and
           family network, and the distance to be  travelled  in  order  to
           have access to the required care (see Karagoz v. France (dec.),
           no. 47531/99, 15 November 2001; N. v. the United Kingdom, cited
           above,  34-41, and the references cited therein; and E.O.  v.
           Italy (dec.), cited above).
           191.  Where, after the relevant information has been  examined,
           serious doubts persist regarding the impact of  removal  on  the
           persons concerned - on account of the general situation  in  the
           receiving  country  and/or  their  individual  situation  -  the
           returning State must obtain individual and sufficient assurances
           from the receiving State, as a precondition  for  removal,  that
           appropriate treatment will be available and  accessible  to  the
           persons concerned so that they  do  not  find  themselves  in  a
           situation contrary to Article 3 (on the  subject  of  individual
           assurances, see Tarakhel, cited above,  120).
           192.  The Court emphasises that, in cases concerning the removal
           of seriously ill persons, the event which triggers  the  inhuman
           and degrading treatment, and which engages the responsibility of
           the returning State under Article 3, is not the lack of  medical
           infrastructure in the receiving State. Likewise,  the  issue  is
           not one of any obligation for the returning State  to  alleviate
           the disparities between its health-care system and the level  of
           treatment existing in the receiving State through the  provision
           of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a  right
           to stay within its  jurisdiction.  The  responsibility  that  is
           engaged under the Convention in cases of this type  is  that  of
           the returning State, on account of an act -  in  this  instance,
           expulsion - which would result in an individual being exposed to
           a risk of treatment prohibited by Article 3.
           193.  Lastly, the fact that the third country  concerned  is  a
           Contracting Party to the Convention is not decisive.  While  the
           Court agrees with the Government that the  possibility  for  the
           applicant to initiate proceedings on his return to Georgia  was,
           in principle, the  most  natural  remedy  under  the  Convention
           system, it observes that the authorities in the returning  State
           are not exempted on that account from their duty  of  prevention
           under  Article  3  of   the   Convention   (see,   among   other
           authorities, M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above,  357-
           59, and Tarakhel, cited above,  104-05)."

       Substantive  and  Procedural  Obligations  in  Health   Cases   After
Paposhvili

   77. The judgment in Paposhvili was considered  at  some  length  by  the
       Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe).  The Court of  Appeal  there  held
       that, although the Grand Chamber's judgment marked a relaxation  "to
       a very modest extent" of the test for a breach of Article 3 ECHR  in
       a health case, domestic courts and tribunals  remain  bound  by  the
       previous case-law as set out in particular in the  judgment  of  the
       House of Lords in N's case ([2005] UKHL 31) so far as the applicable
       threshold is concerned ([30]). In essence,  the  Grand  Chamber  had
       shown itself willing to expand  upon  the  category  of  exceptional
       cases which formed the basis of the judgment in N. Unless and  until
       the  Supreme  Court  considers  the  Grand  Chamber's  judgment   in
       Paposhvili (which it is due to do in December 2019), we remain bound
       by the previous case-law which is as set out at [176]  to  [178]  of
       the judgment in Paposhvili; in other words the principles set out in
       D and N continue to apply as they  did  also  when  the  appeal  was
       before Judge O'Keeffe.


   78. We note in particular what is said by the Court of Appeal at [38] of
       the judgment in AM (Zimbabwe) as to what is meant by  [183]  of  the
       judgment in Paposhvili concerning the threshold.  Sales  LJ  (as  he
       then was) explained the test as follows:


           "...This means cases where the applicant faces a  real  risk  of
           rapidly experiencing intense suffering (i.e  to  the  article  3
           standard) in the receiving state because of  their  illness  and
           the non-availability there of treatment which  is  available  to
           them in the removing state or faces a real risk of death  within
           a short time in the receiving state for  the  same  reason.   In
           other words, the boundary  of  article  3  protection  has  been
           shifted from being defined by imminence of death in the removing
           state (even with the treatment available there) to being defined
           by the imminence (i.e  likely  "rapid"  experience)  of  intense
           suffering or death in the receiving state, which may only  occur
           because of the non-availability in that state of  the  treatment
           which  had previously been available in the removing state."


   79. We can deal very shortly with a point made by Mr Chirico  concerning
       the way in which Sales LJ explained the test in the  final  sentence
       of this passage.  He submitted that, as a matter of construction  of
       the judgment in Paposhvili the  test  is  whether  an  applicant  is
       exposed to a real risk of an imminent decline  in  health  or  to  a
       significant reduction in life expectancy rather than the significant
       reduction in life expectancy having to be  caused  by  the  imminent
       decline in health.  Although that  argument  was  described  as  not
       "fanciful or even unarguable" by Hickinbottom LJ in MM (Malawi)  and
       another v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
       2482 ("MM (Malawi)"), we do not consider it necessary to  deal  with
       it for the following reasons.  First, and most significantly, we are
       bound to apply N and not Paposhvili so  it  is  immaterial  what  is
       meant by that analysis.  Second, it will be for the Supreme Court to
       interpret what is there meant.  Third, and as an aside, we  are  far
       from clear that the interpretation which  the  Appellant  places  on
       that final sentence is correct when read in the context of the first
       sentence.   Fourth, and in any event, as noted by Hickinbottom LJ at
       [57] and [58] of the judgment in MM (Malawi),  it  was  conceded  by
       Counsel making the argument in that case that the reduction in  life
       expectancy would still have to be "substantial".


   80. The Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) also said this about the manner
       in which an Article 3 breach would be established  by  reference  to
       what was said by the Grand Chamber at [186 - 187] in Paposhvili:


            "16. It is common ground that where a foreign national seeks to
           rely upon article 3 as an answer to an attempt  by  a  state  to
           remove him to another country, the overall legal  burden  is  on
           him to show that article 3 would be infringed  in  his  case  by
           showing that there are substantial grounds for believing that he
           would face a real risk of being subject to torture or to inhuman
           or degrading treatment in that other country: see, eg, Soering v
           United Kingdom (1989) 11 EHRR 439, para 91, which  is  reflected
           in the formulations in Paposhvili [2017] Imm AR 867,  paras  173
           and 183, set out below.  In Paposhvili, at  paras  186-187,  set
           out below, the Grand Chamber of the ECtHR has given guidance how
           he  may  achieve  that,  by  raising  a  prima  facie  case   of
           infringement of article 3 which then casts an evidential  burden
           onto the defending state which is seeking to expel him."


   81. The Court of Appeal went on to consider how that test was applied in
       practice by the Grand Chamber in Paposhvili itself as follows:


             "25.  At  paras  194-206  the  Grand  Chamber  applied   those
           principles to the particular case.  It found that the  applicant
           had  raised  a  case  regarding  difficulties  in  relation   to
           treatment of his illness if he were returned  to  Georgia  which
           was "not without some credibility"  (para.  [197]),  i.e.  which
           prima facie raised an issue under Article 3. It found  that  the
           relevant  decision-making  authorities  had  not  examined  that
           issue: paras. [198]-[201]. The fact  that  an  assessment  could
           have been carried out immediately before the removal measure was
           enforced was not an adequate response to the applicant's case on
           the particular facts (para. [202]; it is also germane here  that
           the Fifth Section in  its  judgment  at  paras.  [94]-[109]  had
           already ruled that the possibility of an urgent  application  to
           stay removal at the final stage did not constitute  an  adequate
           alternative remedy  for  the  purposes  of  Article  35  of  the
           Convention because,  as  had  already  been  determined  in  the
           judgment in MSS v Belgium and Greece (2011)  53  EHRR  2,  the
           procedure  at  that  stage  could  not  be  relied  upon  to  be
           sufficiently rigorous in its examination of the complaint  under
           Article 3). At para. [205] the Grand Chamber said:
                  "In conclusion, the Court considers that in the absence of
                 any assessment by the  domestic  authorities  of  the  risk
                 facing the  applicant  in  the  light  of  the  information
                 concerning  his  state  of  health  and  the  existence  of
                 appropriate treatment in Georgia, the information available
                 to those authorities was insufficient for them to  conclude
                 that the applicant, if returned to Georgia, would not  have
                 run a real and  concrete  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
                 Article 3 of the Convention (see paragraph 183 ...)".
          26. On this basis, the Grand Chamber found that there had been a
              violation of
           Article 3. It also dealt with claims under Article 2 and Article
           8, but it is not necessary to discuss those claims here. The
           Grand Chamber's formal disposal of the claim based on Article 3
           was in these terms:
                 "For these reasons, the Court, unanimously,
                 Holds that there would have been a violation of Article  3
                 of the Convention if the  applicant  had  been  removed  to
                 Georgia without the Belgian authorities having assessed, in
                 accordance with that provision, the risk faced  by  him  in
                 the light of the information concerning his state of health
                 and the existence of appropriate treatment in Georgia."
          27.  I   have   dealt   with   the   Grand   Chamber's   judgment
              in Paposhvili at some length because the context of the case
              and what exactly was decided in it are  of  significance  for
              interpreting the guidance given at  para.  [183].  The  Grand
              Chamber did not itself rule  that  on  the  medical  evidence
              adduced by the applicant and his contentions about the  state
              and availability of medical assistance in Georgia, had  those
              been properly examined by the Belgian authorities,  it  would
              in fact have been a violation of Article 3 to remove  him  to
              Georgia. Its ruling was to the effect that Belgium would have
              violated a procedural aspect of Article 3 if it  had  removed
              him without examination of the issue which the applicant  had
              raised relying on Article 3 and his medical condition."
   82. The Court of  Appeal  had  cause  to  look  again  at  the  test  in
       Paposhvili and what was said in AM (Zimbabwe)  in  the  case  of  MM
       (Malawi).  In relation to the way  in  which  the  burden  of  proof
       applies, the Court said this:


           "38.  In my view, the UT did not arguably err in its approach to
           its task. Indeed,  this  paragraph  is  phrased  in  appropriate
           terms.  As Sales LJ explained in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  at  [16]  ...,
           whilst the legal burden of proof is on an applicant to show that
           article 3 would be infringed if he were removed from the  UK  to
           the proposed receiving country, where he shows  that  there  are
           substantial grounds for believing that he would face a real risk
           of being subjected to treatment proscribed by  article  3,  then
           the burden moves to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  dispel  that
           risk..."


   83. Following the conclusion  of  the  hearing  before  us,  Mr  Chirico
       directed our attention to a recent case of  the  ECtHR  -  Savran  v
       Denmark (57467/15) - judgment 1 October 2019 ("Savran").  As appears
       from the judgment itself, this is the first case in which the  ECtHR
       has  applied  Paposhvili.   We  therefore  gave  both  parties   the
       opportunity to provide short written submissions as to the judgment.


   84. In Savran, the ECtHR found a violation of Article 3 ECHR.  It did so
       though by  a  narrow  majority  (4:3).   The  minority  judgment  is
       particularly critical of what it saw as a dilution of the principles
       articulated by the Grand Chamber  in  Paposhvili.   Their  criticism
       relates to the substantive threshold as set  out  at  [183]  of  the
       judgment in Paposhvili.  They did not consider that threshold to  be
       met in the Savran case and criticised the majority  for  failing  to
       consider that threshold.  In relation to the procedural  obligation,
       the minority judgment restated that the burden of proof lay with the
       applicant ([15]).


   85. The facts of Savran can be shortly stated.  The applicant, a Turkish
       national, suffered from serious  mental  health  problems.   He  had
       lived in Denmark since he was a child.  His entire family  save  for
       one aunt lived in Denmark.  He received medication and  therapy  for
       his condition in Denmark.  The crux of the majority's finding  of  a
       violation was that the applicant might not have  a  regular  contact
       person for supervision following return to Turkey to ensure that  he
       complied with his treatment  and  was  able  to  rehabilitate  in  a
       suitable environment (the applicant had been convicted and  detained
       for a serious assault; he  remained  detained  in  a  mental  health
       establishment).

   86. In the majority judgment, the  ECtHR  concluded  at  [59]  that  the
       Danish courts had not given  consideration  to  the  need  for  that
       supervision when reviewing the medical evidence.  The majority  also
       relied on the lack of family and  social  support  in  Turkey  which
       increased the need for follow-up and control.  The  Court  therefore
       found that the Danish authorities  should  have  assured  themselves
       that a contact person would be available.


   87.  The  majority  judgment  has  some  relevance  to  the   procedural
       obligation for  which  the  Appellant  argues.   The  reasoning  put
       forward by the majority for  finding  the  violation  proven  is  as
       follows:


           "64.  Therefore, a follow-up and control scheme is essential for
           the applicant's psychological outpatient  therapy  and  for  the
           prevention of a degeneration of his  immune  system.   For  that
           purpose he would need, at least, assistance in  the  form  of  a
           regular  and  personal  contact  person.   Accordingly,  in  the
           Court's  view,  the  Danish  authorities  should  have   assured
           themselves that upon return to Turkey, a  regular  and  personal
           contact person  would  be  available,  offered  by  the  Turkish
           authorities, suitable to the applicant's needs.
           65.   Accordingly, although the threshold for the application of
           Article 3 of the Convention is  high  in  cases  concerning  the
           removal of aliens suffering  from  serious  illness,  the  Court
           shares the concern expressed by  the  City  Court,  that  it  is
           unclear  whether  the  applicant  has  a  real  possibility   of
           receiving  relevant   psychiatric   treatment,   including   the
           necessary follow-up and control  in  connection  with  intensive
           outpatient therapy, if returned  to  Turkey  (see  paragraph  27
           above).
           66.   In the  Court's  view,  this  uncertainty  raises  serious
           doubts as to the impact of removal on the applicant.  When  such
           serious doubts persist, the returning State must  either  dispel
           such doubts or obtain individual and sufficient assurances  from
           the  receiving  State,  as  a  precondition  for  removal,  that
           appropriate treatment will be available and  accessible  to  the
           persons concerned so that they  do  not  find  themselves  in  a
           situation contrary to Article 3 (see Paposhvili, cited above, 
           187 and 191).
           67.   It follows that if the applicant were  to  be  removed  to
           Turkey without  the  Danish  authorities  having  obtained  such
           individual and sufficient assurances, there would be a violation
           of Article 3 of the Convention."

   88. In her submissions dealing with Savran, the Respondent referred  for
       the first time to the House of Lords' judgment in Secretary of State
       for the Home Department v Nasseri [2009] UKHL ("Nasseri") in support
       of a submission that the Tribunal is bound by domestic precedent  to
       find that there is no freestanding procedural obligation.   At [15],
       Lord Hoffmann (with whom the other Law Lords agreed) said:


           "There is accordingly, as Laws LJ said in this case in the Court
           of Appeal ([2008] 3 WLR 1386, para 18) no "freestanding duty  to
           investigate." It is true that in Jabari v Turkey [2001] INLR
           136, para 39 the ECHR said that when an individual  claims  that
           his deportation will infringe his rights  under  article  3,  "a
           rigorous scrutiny must necessarily be conducted"  of  his  claim
           and a similar statement was made (with a  reference  to Jabari)
           in Kandomabadi v The Netherlands (29 June 2004) (Application Nos
           6276/03 and 6122/04). But the  impersonal  passive  construction
           used by the ECHR was in my opinion intended  to  mean  that  the
           ECHR will conduct a rigorous scrutiny  of  the  claim  and  that
           unless a Member State has done so, it runs  the  risk  of  being
           held in breach: see the previous authorities of Chahal v United
           Kingdom (1996)    23    EHRR    413 at    paragraph    96
           and Vilvarajah v United Kingdom (1991) 14 EHRR 248 at paragraph
           108. It did not mean that even though there is actually no  real
           risk of treatment contrary to article 3 in the receiving  state,
           a Member State will be in breach because it did  not  adequately
           investigate the matter."
           (our emphasis)


   89. Mr Chirico sought a right of reply on this point  and  we  permitted
       him to provide short written submissions.   In those submissions, he
       clarified a point which had troubled us during the  hearing;  namely
       whether the Appellant is arguing for a freestanding procedural  duty
       or merely a duty  which  arises  in  relation  to  the  proof  of  a
       substantive breach.  Mr Chirico made clear that the Appellant  "does
       not submit that there is a (wholly) free-standing Art. 3  procedural
       right or duty, existing independently  of  any  substantive  Art.  3
       claim. A's case is that the procedural obligation is triggered  when
       an applicant, upon whom the initial evidential burden lies,  adduces
       evidence "capable of demonstrating"  a  real  risk  of  exposure  to
       treatment in which would attain such severity  as  to  amount  to  a
       breach of Art. 3."


   90. As Mr Chirico also pointed out, the House of Lords  in  Nasseri  did
       not have to consider whether the Respondent was under any obligation
       to investigate the position  for  the  appellant  in  Greece  as  it
       accepted that the appellant had not provided evidence sufficient  to
       show that he was at real risk of refoulement as he had asserted.


    Substantive Obligations: Article 3 ECHR Non-Health Cases


   91. Whilst recognising that we (and Judge O'Keeffe) are bound  to  apply
       the principles in N for the time being, Mr Chirico argues that there
       are three  categories  of  case  where  the  "extreme  threshold  of
       seriousness" required by N does not apply.  He says that those are:

                 a. Cases where there is a real risk of self-harm or suicide
                    ( J v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]
                    EWCA Civ 629 - "J"; Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of
                    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362  -  "Y
                    and  Z";  Kochieva  v  Sweden  (2013)  57  EHRR  SE6   -
                    "Kochieva"; CK v Slovenia (2017) C-578/16 PPU) - "CK");
                 b. Cases where  the  removal  is  pursuant  to  the  Dublin
                    Regulations (MSS v Belgium and Greece (2011) 53 EHRR 2 -
                    "MSS"; Tarakhel  v  Switzerland  (2015)  60  EHRR  28  -
                    "Tarakhel"); and
                 c. Cases where the conditions to which a person will be non-
                    deliberately exposed and which are inhuman or  degrading
                    are predominantly due to the direct and indirect actions
                    of the parties to a conflict (Sufi and Elmi v UK  (2012)
                    52 EHRR 9) - "Sufi and Elmi").


       He also submits that the ECtHR's reliance on some of those cases  in
       Paposhvili informs its guidance on the procedural obligation.


   92. Dealing first with  the  difference  between  those  cases  and  the
       guidance in N,  we  accept  that,  at  least  in  the  cases  within
       categories (b) and (c), the Strasbourg Court has not applied a  test
       of "exceptional circumstances". The position is however different in
       suicide risk cases for reasons we explain below.

   93. Taking category (b) cases first, the  Dublin  Regulation  cases  are
       ones in which either a systemic failure of the system for  examining
       asylum cases was found ("MSS") or where there was  a  serious  doubt
       about whether the way in which the Receiving State would  deal  with
       the asylum seekers in question would amount to inhuman or  degrading
       treatment ("Tarakhel").   Those  cases  are  also  informed  by  the
       obligations of Member States under the  Dublin  Regulation  and  the
       hierarchy established as to the appropriate Member State responsible
       for considering an asylum claim.  That is a very  different  context
       to health cases.  It is therefore hardly surprising that the  Courts
       would not view such cases in the same way as other health cases  and
       would not apply the N guidance to them.

   94. As to category (c), in Sufi and  Elmi,  we  accept  that  the  Court
       rejected the UK Government's contention that the test in relation to
       humanitarian conditions was that of exceptional circumstances as  in
       N but that was due to the evidence in those  particular  cases  that
       the humanitarian crisis had been "predominantly due  to  the  direct
       and indirect actions of the parties to  the  conflict"  ([282]);  in
       other words that the case was akin  to  cases  involving  deliberate
       harm.

   95. That analysis is consistent with  the  ECtHR's  judgment  in  SHH  v
       United Kingdom (2013) 57 EHRR 18, on which  the  Respondent  relies.
       In that case, the  Court  had  to  consider  whether  removal  of  a
       disabled failed asylum seeker to Afghanistan would breach Article 3.
       The Court found that the applicant had  failed  to  adduce  evidence
       that disabled persons were at greater  risk  of  violence  than  the
       general population, although they  might  suffer  discrimination  or
       poor humanitarian conditions.  The Court distinguished the cases  of
       MSS and Sufi and Elmi, finding that MSS was based on the failure  of
       the Greek authorities to comply with their positive obligations  and
       the transfer by the Belgian authorities knowing of that failure.  In
       Sufi and Elmi it  was  relevant  that  the  humanitarian  crisis  in
       Somalia was seen in large part to be  due  to  the  actions  of  the
       parties to the conflict there.

   96. As regards category (a), the Appellant also says that the  threshold
       differs in cases involving a risk of suicide.   In J v Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  629,  the  Court  of
       Appeal set out six principles when assessing whether the removal  of
       a person who claims to be at risk of suicide would breach Article  3
       ([26] to [31] of the judgment).  The first is  the  requirement  for
       treatment which meets the "minimum level of severity".

   97. Secondly, and relying on  Soering,  a  causal  link  must  be  shown
       between the removal and the alleged  violation  of  the  applicant's
       Article 3  rights.    Furthermore,  the  finding  of  an  Article  3
       violation against a Returning State in a  removal  case  has  to  be
       shown to be caused by the act  of  removal  and  not  the  treatment
       within the Receiving State.  That is the point made also at [28]  of
       the judgment in relation to the  third  principle,  where  Dyson  LJ
       pointed out that the threshold is "even  higher  where  the  alleged
       inhuman treatment is not the direct or  indirect  responsibility  of
       the public authorities of the receiving state, but results from some
       naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.   This  is
       made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid".

   98. The Court of  Appeal  accepted  that  an  Article  3  claim  can  in
       principle  succeed  in  a  suicide  case  (the  fourth   principle).
       However, if the fear upon which the suicide risk  is  predicated  is
       not objectively well-founded, that will tend to weigh against  there
       being a real risk (fifth  principle)  and  the  sixth  principle  is
       whether the Returning State and Receiving State have  mechanisms  in
       place to protect against the risk of suicide.


   99. We accept that at [42] of its judgment in  J,  Dyson  LJ  said  that
       suicide cases were not "precisely analogous" to other health  cases.
       That observation, however, has to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the
       subsequent judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  RA  (Sri  Lanka)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  1210
       ("RA").  Mr Chirico did not draw our  attention  to  this  judgment,
       although it is referred to in Sedley LJ's judgment in Y and Z.

  100. At [49] and [50] of RA, the Court held (per Richards LJ):


           "..49.      There has been some debate in our domestic  case-law
           as to the extent to which cases of mental illness, in particular
           where it is said that removal  will  give  rise  to  a  risk  or
           increased risk of suicide, are analogous to  cases  of  physical
           illness for the purposes of the application of article 3: see  J
           v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
           629, para 42; R (Tozlukaya) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
           Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  379,  para  62;  AJ  (Liberia)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736,
           para 15; and CN (Burundi) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ  587,  paras  25-26.  Mr  Mackenzie
           contended that a material  difference  exists  between  the  two
           types of case, since in the suicide risk case the  very  act  of
           expulsion causes or may cause a deterioration in the applicant's
           condition whereas in the HIV/AIDS situation it is  the  loss  of
           assistance or services currently enjoyed that gives rise to  the
           issue under article 3.  Whilst there may be factual  differences
           between the two types of case, the passage I have quoted from  N
           v United Kingdom makes clear, as it seems to me, that  the  same
           principles are to be applied to them both.  Nor do I detect  any
           important difference  of  approach  in  the  domestic  cases  on
           suicide risk.  In the present case the senior immigration  judge
           relied both on the line of domestic authority beginning with J v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department and on  the  line  of
           Strasbourg authority beginning with D v United Kingdom.   In  my
           view that resulted in a perfectly  coherent  approach,  in  line
           with the statement of principles now to be found in N  v  United
           Kingdom.
      50.   In any event, I am satisfied that the senior  immigration  judge
           was entitled to conclude that the  appellant's  removal  to  Sri
           Lanka  would  not  have  such  adverse  consequences   for   the
           appellant's psychiatric condition as  to  reach  the  article  3
           threshold; on her findings of fact, this could not be said to be
           a very exceptional case where the humanitarian  grounds  against
           removal are compelling.  She was similarly entitled to  conclude
           that his removal would not be in breach of article 8."

  101. The Court of Appeal referred to the judgment in RA in Y and  Z.   It
       did so without any evident disapproval  but  distinguished  the  two
       cases on the basis that, in Y  and  Z,  the  "anticipated  self-harm
       would be the consequence of the acts  of  the  Sri  Lankan  security
       forces, not of a naturally occurring illness" and because  the  past
       torture of the appellants in that case by the Sri Lankan authorities
       was accepted as being genuine and as being causative  (at  least  in
       part) of the suicide risk which  was  accepted  to  arise  following
       removal.  We note also that, as recently as  2016,  and  whilst  not
       referring to RA,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Wasif  and  another  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  82,
       summarised at [44] of its  judgment,  the  relevant  authorities  in
       relation to risk of suicide following removal, saying that "[i]t  is
       clear from those authorities that such a claim will only succeed  if
       there are 'exceptional circumstances' comparable in impact to  those
       of the terminal patient in D v United Kingdom". Y and  Z  was  again
       distinguished on the basis of the responsibility borne  by  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities for the appellants' mental health problems  which
       were causative of the suicide risk.


  102. This approach is not confined to domestic cases.   In  the  case  of
       Balogun v United Kingdom (Application no 60286/09) [2012] ECHR  614,
       the ECtHR concluded as follows ([34]):


           "...The Court emphasises the high threshold for  article  3,  as
           described in N., cited above, and which applies with equal force
           in cases involving a risk of suicide  as  in  other  cases  (see
           Kharsa, cited above).  In the light of  the  precautions  to  be
           taken  by  the  Government  and  the   existence   of   adequate
           psychiatric care in Nigeria, should the  applicant  require  it,
           the Court is unable to find  that  the  applicant's  deportation
           would result in a real and imminent risk of treatment of such  a
           severity as to reach this threshold.  It therefore follows  that
           the applicant's complaint under Article  3  is  manifestly  ill-
           founded and thus inadmissible..."


  103. The other cases on which Mr Chirico relied do not in our view assist
       him.  In Kochieva, the ECtHR similarly referred to  N  when  setting
       out the threshold which applied to the health case  ([33])  and  did
       not indicate that any lesser threshold  applied  when  reaching  its
       conclusions thereafter on the  suicide  risk  element  (at  [34]  to
       [37]).  The health case under Article 3 ECHR was declared manifestly
       ill-founded. CK is a judgment of the CJEU concerning transfer  under
       the Dublin Regulation.  As such, it falls within  category  (b)  and
       our comments above apply.


    Substantive Obligations: Article 3 Health Cases - Conclusion


  104. The judgment in RA could not be clearer.  It is plainly  binding  on
       us.  Accordingly, where an individual asserts that he  would  be  at
       real risk of committing suicide, following return to  the  Receiving
       State, the threshold for establishing Article 3  harm  is  the  high
       threshold described in N v United Kingdom [2008]  ECHR  453,  unless
       the risk involves hostile actions of the Receiving State towards the
       individual: RA (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1210; Y and Z v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362.   On  Judge  O'Keeffe's
       findings, that does not arise here.


  105. There can be no question of Judge O'Keeffe having applied too severe
       a test to the evidence in relation to suicide risk or in relation to
       the Appellant's health issues. We reiterate that we remain bound  by
       the guidance in N in relation to health cases as was Judge O'Keeffe.







    Procedural Obligations: Submissions and Discussion


  106. Turning then to what the Appellant says is the procedural obligation
       on the authorities of a Returning State,  Mr  Chirico  accepts  that
       what is first required  of  a  Returning  State  when  expelling  an
       individual is an examination and assessment of  the  risk  faced  on
       return ([184]  and  [185]  of  Paposhvili).   He  accepts  that  the
       authorities of the Returning State include the Courts and  Tribunal.
       Although we accept that the ECtHR referred in that  context  to  the
       case of El-Masri v Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  (2013)  57
       EHRR 25 ("El-Masri"), we do not derive any assistance from that case
       which concerns a duty to carry out an effective  investigation  into
       the  applicant's  allegations  of  ill-treatment  including  against
       agents of the Returning State in the context of a  secret  rendition
       operation.

  107. We first consider the  Dublin  Regulation  cases.  In  the  case  of
       Tarakhel (on which reliance was  also  placed  in  Paposhvili),  the
       ECtHR's concern  was  that,  following  return,  the  asylum-seeking
       family being returned from Switzerland to Italy  (under  the  Dublin
       Regulation) would  not  be  kept  together  and  would  be  held  in
       conditions unsuitable for the minor children.  The Court  considered
       that the publicly available information raised "serious doubts as to
       the current capacities of the system".  For  that  reason,  "in  the
       absence of detailed and reliable information concerning the specific
       facility, the physical reception conditions and the preservation  of
       the family unit, the Court considers that the Swiss  authorities  do
       not possess sufficient assurances that, if returned  to  Italy,  the
       applicants would be taken charge of in a manner adapted to  the  age
       of the children"  ([121]).   The  Court  concluded  that  "were  the
       applicants to be returned to Italy  without  the  Swiss  authorities
       having  first  obtained  individual  guarantees  from  the   Italian
       authorities that the applicants would be taken charge of in a manner
       adapted to the age of the children and that the family would be kept
       together, there would be a violation of art. 3 of the Convention".


  108.  In  MSS,  another  Dublin  Regulation  case  where  the  ECtHR  was
       considering whether a return to Greece breached Article 3, the court
       concluded that the applicant "should not be  expected  to  bear  the
       entire burden of proof" (our emphasis) because the general situation
       for  asylum  seekers  in  Greece  was  well  known  to  the  Belgian
       authorities.  The Court rejected the Belgian  Government's  argument
       that it had sought sufficient assurances.  It did not consider those
       assurances to be sufficient.


  109. We do not consider that the approach of the CJEU in the  context  of
       the Dublin Regulation differs to any  significant  degree  from  the
       approach taken by the ECtHR. We were referred to the CJEU's judgment
       in CK.  That case concerned a take  charge  request  issued  by  the
       Slovenian  authorities  to  Croatia.   The  CJEU   held   that   "in
       circumstances in which the transfer  of  an  asylum  seeker  with  a
       particularly serious mental or physical illness would  result  in  a
       real and proven risk of a significant and permanent deterioration in
       his state of health, that  transfer  would  constitute  inhuman  and
       degrading treatment,  within  the  meaning  of  that  article"  (our
       emphasis). The Court went on to say the following about the  way  in
       which a breach would be established:


           "75.  ..where an asylum seeker  provides,  particularly  in  the
           context of an effective remedy guaranteed to him by  Article  27
           of the  Dublin  III  Regulation,  objective  evidence,  such  as
           medical certificates concerning his person, capable  of  showing
           the particular seriousness  of  his  state  of  health  and  the
           significant and irreversible consequences to which his  transfer
           might lead, the  authorities  of  the  Member  State  concerned,
           including its courts, cannot ignore that evidence.  They are, on
           the contrary, under an obligation to assess the risk  that  such
           consequences could occur when they decide to transfer the person
           concerned or, in the case  of  a  court,  the  legality  of  the
           decision to transfer, since the execution of that  decision  may
           lead to inhuman or degrading treatment of that person...
           76.   It is, therefore, for those authorities to  eliminate  any
           serious doubts concerning the impact  of  the  transfer  on  the
           state of health of the person concerned.   In  this  regard,  in
           particular in the case of a serious psychiatric illness,  it  is
           not sufficient to consider only the consequences  of  physically
           transporting the person  concerned  from  one  Member  State  to
           another, but all the significant and permanent consequences that
           might arise from the transfer must be taken into consideration."



  110. The approach of requiring  Member  States  to  assess  the  risk  of
       inhuman and degrading treatment in medical cases as there set out is
       no different  to  the  assessment  in  any  other  Article  3  case.
       Although the CJEU then went on to talk of suspending  removal  where
       necessary precautions could not be put in place to deal  with  risks
       during or after removal or if necessary applying  the  discretionary
       clauses to examine the asylum claim in the State seeking  to  return
       the asylum seeker, those comments have to be seen in context of  the
       Dublin Regulation itself which provides a hierarchy  of  obligations
       on individual  Member  States  to  consider  asylum  claims.  As  an
       arrangement between Member  States,  it  is  unsurprising  that  the
       approach of the CJEU would be to look to an exchange of  information
       between  States.   That  judgment  cannot  be  said  to  impose  any
       different approach or threshold to the assessment of risk of Article
       3 ill-treatment.


  111. The Appellant accepts that the "initial  evidential  burden"  is  on
       him.  He says however that he is not required to go  so  far  as  to
       demonstrate substantial grounds for believing that there is  a  real
       risk of ill-treatment etc meeting the high threshold as that is  the
       ultimate test for a breach and  there  would  be  no  need  for  any
       further enquiry.  Mr Chirico was inclined to accept what was said by
       Sales LJ in AM (Zimbabwe) that the initial burden is to establish "a
       prima case of infringement of  article  3".   He  did  not  seek  to
       support the argument rejected by the Upper Tribunal in HKK  (Article
       3: Burden/Standard of Proof) [2018] UKUT 381 (IAC) ("HKK")  that  an
       appellant need only establish a claim which is not clearly unfounded
       in order to meet his burden.

  112. That acceptance however begs the question of what  standard  applies
       to that burden.  Mr Chirico did not suggest that we should lay  down
       any hard and fast rule in this regard as he  said  that  this  is  a
       matter of assessment in an individual case whether the  evidence  is
       sufficient.  We accept that this may be  so.   However,  we  do  not
       accept, as Mr Chirico submitted, that what an appellant has to  show
       must be to a lower threshold than an Article 3 risk.  In  our  view,
       the words "capable of  proving"  suggest  that,  if  an  appellant's
       evidence is not challenged or countered, that  evidence  would  make
       out his case that  Article  3  would  be  breached  by  removal,  by
       reference to whatever threshold is applicable; that is  to  say  the
       "ordinary" one of real risk or the higher one  reserved  for  health
       cases.  It is in that  context  that  the  Returning  State  has  to
       provide evidence pointing the other way.  As the  Respondent  points
       out,  that  can  comprise  (a)  general   evidence;  (b)    specific
       enquiries  made by  the  Respondent  of  the  authorities  or  other
       organisations in the Receiving State; and (c) the obtaining  by  the
       Respondent of specific assurances from the Receiving State  relating
       to the Appellant.

  113. We accept that the  guidance  in  Paposhvili  involves  a  two-stage
       process involving investigations by  the  Returning  State  and  the
       seeking of assurances from the Receiving  State  (assuming  that  an
       appellant has discharged his obligation).  However, this distinction
       is readily explained by what the assessment of the  Article  3  risk
       involves.    In this context, the Appellant says  that  one  of  the
       ways in which the Grand Chamber  in  Paposhvili  departed  from  the
       guidance in N is in relation  to  the  acceptance  that  a  "certain
       degree of speculation is inherent in  the  preventative  purpose  of
       Article 3" ([186]), thereby adopting the same approach  involved  in
       cases alleging deliberate harm.  However,  we  do  not  discern  any
       changed approach from what is said at [50] of the  ECtHR's  judgment
       in N that, when assessing what will happen in the  Receiving  State,
       the effect of removal on a person's health "must involve  a  certain
       degree of speculation".  We do not read that as undermining the case
       of N (as the Appellant  asserts  is  the  position)  but  as  simply
       reflecting what is the reality that, when looking at the impact on a
       person's  health  and  the  imminence  of  impact,   the   assessing
       authorities will have to speculate to some extent.


  114.  We  also  accept  that  the   guidance   in   Paposhvili   requires
       consideration of the accessibility of care and  facilities  ([190]).
       However, that does no more than require the assessing authorities to
       consider  what  treatment  would  be  available  and   whether   the
       individual  appellant  would  be  able  to  access   it   (including
       considerations as to cost etc).   It  does  not  diminish  the  high
       threshold which applies to establishing that there  are  substantial
       grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk  of  a  breach  of
       Article 3 arising from the conditions in the  Receiving  State.  The
       burden of establishing the real risk remains with an appellant.

  115. The speculative nature of what  will  befall  an  appellant  in  the
       Receiving State  and  the  need  to  consider  access  to  care  and
       facilities  there  explains  the  two-stage  process  set   out   in
       Paposhvili.  If an appellant provides evidence which is unchallenged
       and assessed as being "capable of" proving that the  threshold  test
       is met, it is at that stage that the evidential burden shifts to the
       Returning State in the sense that the Returning State will  need  to
       do something to counter that  evidence,  if  it  is  to  succeed  in
       removing  the  person  concerned,  compatibly  with   that   State's
       obligations under the ECHR.  We accept that the evidence provided by
       the appellant does not have to amount to "clear proof" in  terms  of
       the standard which applies: that is due to the speculative nature of
       what has to be proved and is what justifies the application  of  the
       "real risk" test in cases of this kind.

  116. However, the burden on the appellant remains one of showing that the
       relevant threshold test is met.  As was  said  by  the  minority  of
       Judges in Savran, when determining whether the burden  is  met,  the
       Court or Tribunal has to have regard to what it  is  which  must  be
       established.  In Article 3 health cases, even after Paposhvili, that
       is to show that there is a real risk of "being exposed to a serious,
       rapid and irreversible  decline  in  his  or  her  state  of  health
       resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life
       expectancy".  This also accords with  Lord  Hoffmann's  judgment  in
       Nasseri.

  117. To that extent, we do not disagree with the  Appellant's  contention
       that there is what could be described  in  our  domestic  law  as  a
       shifting burden  of  proof  where  an  applicant  raises  sufficient
       evidence to meet  his  burden.   Where  we  part  company  with  the
       Appellant is in relation to whether  this  imposes  a  free-standing
       procedural obligation on the Returning State or  simply  impacts  on
       the substantive outcome.  In other words, if an  appellant  provides
       sufficient evidence to meet the  burden  on  him  to  the  requisite
       standard and the authorities  of  the  Returning  State  do  nothing
       whether by way of investigation or the obtaining of assurances, then
       the appellant will succeed in establishing his case.  The  Returning
       State will not be able to remove.  That is consistent with what  has
       been said by the ECtHR  in  the  Dublin  Regulation  cases  (see  in
       particular what is said at [122] of the judgment in  Tarakhel  which
       we cite at [107] above).

  118. As is said  by  the  Grand  Chamber  at  [185]  of  Paposhvili,  the
       obligation  of  the  authorities  is  primarily   one   to   provide
       appropriate procedures allowing an  examination  of  the  individual
       claim.   The Court does not identify  any  free-standing  procedural
       duty to investigate  or  obtain  assurances.   Indeed,  if  we  have
       correctly understood Mr Chirico's written submissions in response to
       the Respondent's submissions on Savran, it  is  not  contended  that
       such an obligation is free-standing or not wholly so.

  119. Mr Chirico suggested at one point during his oral  submissions  that
       there is no difference between a procedural duty and  the  discharge
       of the burden of proof.  We disagree.   A  free-standing  procedural
       duty would itself entail a violation of Article  3  if  not  carried
       out.  That is what  we  understand  to  have  been  decided  by  the
       Strasbourg courts in El-Masri and other similar cases.  However, the
       duty to investigate in that context is very  different.   It  arises
       because the actions complained of are those of the State;  in  other
       words, those cases are not foreign cases involving removal.

  120. In his skeleton argument,  Mr  Chirico  makes  the  submission  that
       Strasbourg does not always decide Article 3 cases based  on  whether
       removal would lead to a substantive  breach  but  based  on  whether
       there has been a procedural breach.  He relies by way of example  on
       Paposhvili itself.  However, as Mr Chirico there recognises that  is
       a very unusual case because,  by  the  time  of  the  Grand  Chamber
       judgment, Mr Paposhvili had died and therefore there would have been
       no purpose in looking forward  to  what  would  happen  if  he  were
       removed.  In order to determine that there had been  a  breach,  the
       Grand Chamber had to look backward  to  what  would  have  been  the
       position if he had been removed as intended in the past.  It  is  in
       that context that one needs to read the Grand  Chamber's  conclusion
       at [205]  that  "in  the  absence  of  assessment  by  the  domestic
       authorities of the risk  facing  the  applicant  ...the  information
       available to those authorities was insufficient for them to conclude
       that the applicant, if returned to Georgia, would  not  have  run  a
       real and concrete risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  of  the
       Convention" and at [206] that "if the applicant had been returned to
       Georgia without these factors being assessed, there would have  been
       a violation of Article 3."  We also observe  in  this  context  that
       what the Grand Chamber found  to  be  missing  was  not  a  duty  to
       investigate in terms of making enquiries or seeking assurances but a
       failure to assess the evidence. That is consistent with the duty  to
       provide a mechanism to assess the risk as set out at  [185]  of  the
       judgment (as we note at [106] above).  That mechanism is met in  the
       UK by a combination of the consideration  of  the  evidence  by  the
       Respondent and the scrutiny of the evidence by the Tribunal.


  121. That is also consistent with what is said in Nasseri  to  which  the
       Respondent makes reference in her submissions concerning the  Savran
       case in the passage which we have set out at [88] above.  We accept,
       as the Appellant points out in his submissions in reply,  that  this
       is said in a different  context  but  we  do  not  accept  that  the
       judgment in MSS helps either (see [108]  above).   The  point  there
       made (that Belgium ought to have known of the general  situation  in
       Greece and taken that into account when making take charge requests)
       is in the context of the Dublin Regulation which is  an  arrangement
       between Member States and not in the  context  of  a  removal  to  a
       country outside the EU with which the UK has no such arrangements.

  122. As the Tribunal observed in HKK (where the point was argued as being
       one of relative burdens of proof), what is said at [186]  and  [187]
       in Paposhvili is no more than a restatement of principles which have
       long applied in the protection context ([42]).  The burden is on  an
       asylum applicant to adduce evidence capable of  proving  that  there
       are substantial grounds for believing  that  removal  would  violate
       Article 3 ([1] of the headnote).  That  this  is  about  burdens  of
       proof rather than any free-standing duty to  investigate  or  obtain
       assurances is also consistent with what was said by the majority  in
       Savran.  The majority held that  the  Danish  Government  must  seek
       assurances from Turkey, in the absence of which, the applicant could
       not be removed to Turkey.  The violation would arise  not  from  the
       Danish Government's failure to obtain assurances but because removal
       in  the  absence  of  assurances  would  violate   the   substantive
       obligation not to remove where there would  be  a  real  risk  of  a
       violation of Article 3 ECHR.



    Article 3 Procedural Obligations: Conclusions

  123. In a case where an individual asserts  that  his  removal  from  the
       Returning State would violate his Article 3 ECHR rights  because  of
       the consequences to his health, the obligation on the authorities of
       a Returning State dealing with a health case  is  primarily  one  of
       examining the fears of an applicant as to what will occur  following
       return  and  assessing  the  evidence.   In  order  to  fulfil   its
       obligations, a Returning State must provide "appropriate procedures"
       to allow that examination and assessment to be carried out.  In  the
       UK, that is met in the first place by an examination of the case  by
       the Secretary of State and then by an examination on appeal  by  the
       Tribunal and an assessment of the evidence before it.


  124. There is no free-standing procedural obligation on a Returning State
       to make enquiries of the Receiving  State  concerning  treatment  in
       that  State  or  obtain  assurances  in   that   regard.    Properly
       understood, what is referred to at  [185]  to  [187]  of  the  Grand
       Chamber's  judgment  in  Paposhvili  concerns   the   discharge   of
       respective burdens of proof.


  125. The burden is on the individual appellant to establish that,  if  he
       is removed, there is a real risk of a breach of Article  3  ECHR  to
       the standard and threshold which apply.  If the  appellant  provides
       evidence which is capable of proving his case to the standard  which
       applies, the Secretary of State will be precluded from removing  the
       appellant unless she is able  to  provide  evidence  countering  the
       appellant's  evidence  or  dispelling  doubts  arising   from   that
       evidence.  Depending on the particular circumstances  of  the  case,
       such evidence might include general evidence, specific evidence from
       the Receiving State following enquiries made or assurances from  the
       Receiving State concerning the treatment of the appellant  following
       return.


    Grounds three and four


  126. We now turn to deal with the way in which Judge O'Keeffe dealt  with
       the medical evidence and Article 3 health issues (including risk  of
       suicide) in the Decision.


  127. We begin by observing that this is an unusual health  case.   Whilst
       it is clear from the evidence that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  a
       physical disability and also displays mental health problems to  the
       extent that he is not considered to be capable of  participating  in
       these proceedings, he takes no  medication  for  either  disability.
       Neither is he receiving any counselling or other treatment  for  his
       mental health problems.  The Appellant himself will not accept  that
       he has  mental  health  problems  and  has  therefore  been  largely
       uncooperative with the doctors who have been instructed  to  provide
       evidence.  He has engaged with those professionals on only a handful
       of occasions. Some of the reports are no more than desk  studies  of
       other written reports all  of  which  have  been  obtained  for  the
       purposes of this litigation rather  than  coming  from  any  medical
       professional who is treating the Appellant.   So  far  as  treatment
       following return is concerned therefore,  this  case  is  about  the
       level of support which the Appellant requires for his  physical  and
       mental disabilities rather than about treatment for his conditions.


  128. The Judge's consideration of the  medical  evidence  is  dealt  with
       under the heading of humanitarian  protection  as  well  as  in  the
       passage dealing with Article 3.  As such, the  passage  at  [60]  to
       [63] set out at [52] above forms part of her assessment of the  risk
       of inhuman and degrading treatment.   The Judge also summarised  the
       medical evidence at [30] to [34] of the Decision and can be  assumed
       to have taken into account what is there said  in  her  conclusions.
       Having set  out  the  relevant  threshold  (including  reference  to
       Paposhvili as well as N), the Judge examined  the  medical  evidence
       adduced by the Appellant at [67]  to  [74]  of  the  Decision.   Her
       conclusion appears at [75] of the Decision as follows:


           "On the evidence before me considered as a whole, I find that it
           has not been demonstrated that the  appellant's  health  or  the
           risk of suicide engages the high threshold of Article 3.  It has
           not been demonstrated that  conditions  for  this  appellant  in
           Jamaica are such that he faces  imminent  intense  suffering  or
           death because of the non-availability in  Jamaica  of  treatment
           available to him in the UK."


  129. The Appellant's ground three  challenges  the  Judge's  findings  on
       three bases. First, it is said that the Judge's finding at  [70]  of
       the Decision that the Appellant would find a place to  stay  at  the
       Open Arms Drop-in  Centre  in  Kingston  takes  no  account  of  the
       evidence of Dr de Noronha that the facilities they were "by no means
       wheelchair accessible" and that "[i]t is unlikely that  [AXB]  would
       be able to live with dignity" there.   Dr de Noronha deals with this
       issue at [49] to [55] of his report.  He says that the centre is not
       wheelchair accessible because it is down a dirt track and  therefore
       the Appellant would not be able to  leave  the  centre  on  his  own
       without transport.  There is a vehicle, but the  driver  only  works
       part-time.  Dr  de  Noronha  is  unaware  whether  that  vehicle  is
       wheelchair accessible.  He says that the layout  of  the  centre  is
       such that  "it  would  certainly  be  difficult  to  navigate  in  a
       wheelchair".  He also says  that  "[w]hile  there  are  people  with
       various physical disabilities living in Open Arms, [he] saw  no  one
       in a wheelchair". That leads to his conclusion  that  the  Appellant
       would not be  able  to  live  with  dignity  at  that  centre.   The
       remaining paragraphs concern the safety of the centre,  particularly
       for a "stigmatised deportee" and if  the  Appellant  were  targeted.
       However, the Judge had already rejected a claim based on generalised
       violence and the Appellant's individual protection claim.


  130. The Judge dealt with the  Appellant's  disability  at  [70]  of  the
       Decision as follows:


           "The appellant is now a wheelchair  user  as  a  result  of  his
           stroke.  He also suffers from  epilepsy.   The  expert  evidence
           before me shows that he does need assistance  with  day  to  day
           activities and an adapted living environment.  There is evidence
           of discrimination in Jamaica towards people  with  disabilities.
           I  have  already  referred  to  the   availability   of   hostel
           accommodation in Jamaica for those  with  disabilities.   Dr  de
           Noronho does say that he saw nobody in a wheelchair in the  Open
           Arms facility but gives no evidence as to  what  adaptions  have
           been made for those with physical disabilities who can and  have
           been  accommodated  there.   He  noted  the  external   physical
           constraints of the building but says nothing about any  internal
           adaptations."


  131. The reference to earlier consideration of hostel facilities is  that
       referred to at [62] and [63] (cited at [52]  above)  which  includes
       reference  to  the  accommodation  being  "far  from  ideal  for   a
       wheelchair user" and the need for a car or a van to be able to leave
       the centre.  However, the Judge also had regard to other evidence at
       [63] of the Decision which showed that the  Appellant  cannot  leave
       his current accommodation without assistance but that  he  can  move
       around independently from wheelchair to bed or a chair and  that  he
       can "undertake personal care, toileting, eating and drinking".


  132. It cannot sensibly be suggested that Dr de Noronha's assertion  that
       the centre is "by  no  means  wheelchair  accessible"  or  that  the
       Appellant could not live there with dignity has been  overlooked  by
       the Judge.  By a combination of what is said at [62] and  [63]  with
       what is said at [70] of the Decision, the  Judge  has  analysed  the
       available evidence and reached a conclusion which is open to her.


  133. We accept that the Judge has not considered what would happen to the
       Appellant after the six months accommodation  which  the  Open  Arms
       Centre is said to offer.   However,  even  the  Paposhvili  guidance
       makes clear that what the Tribunal has to consider is whether  there
       is an "imminent" risk of intense suffering or substantial  reduction
       in life expectancy.  Moreover, although described  as  "inadequate",
       Dr de Noronha does refer to a social  security  system  existing  in
       Jamaica.  This and the public health system are dealt with  in  more
       detail in Mr Sobers' report.  That evidence is therefore  considered
       by the Judge at [61] of the Decision.


  134. Turning then to the second criticism made  of  the  Decision  within
       ground three, it is submitted that the Judge has ignored the  expert
       evidence that "[i]t was highly likely  that  [the  Appellant]  would
       make desperate efforts to resist his removal which  were  likely  to
       include threats or acts of self-harm or a suicide attempt".   It  is
       said that the evidence shows that these risks would  increase  after
       removal due to additional stressors and risk  factors  and  loss  of
       protective factors.

  135. We do not discern any challenge to the test which was applied by the
       Judge when dealing with the suicide  risk.     The  Judge  expressly
       refers to the case of J at [71] of the Decision.   At  [75]  of  the
       Decision, she applies the test  of  whether  the  "risk  of  suicide
       engages the high threshold of Article 3." If anything, she may  have
       applied too low a test, having regard to the case-law  to  which  we
       refer at [96] to [103] above.

  136. The Judge dealt with the  suicide  risk  at  [71]  to  [74]  of  the
       Decision.  We note that what is said at [71] of the Decision mirrors
       the quotation in the grounds which we set out  at  [134]  above  and
       that this is a direct quotation from the report of Dr Wootton  dated
       4 March 2019. Dr Wootton says that the risk of suicide after removal
       "would remain elevated".  She says that it is  difficult  to  manage
       the Appellant's condition  because  "he  is  suspicious  of  others,
       refuses treatment and is non-compliant".  That too  is  recorded  at
       [71] of the Decision.


  137. At [72] of the Decision, the Judge considers the  factors  which  Dr
       Wootton says are relevant to the suicide risk.  As the  Judge  notes
       there,  many  of  those  factors  have  existed  for  much  of   the
       Appellant's life and are unrelated to his claim.  The Judge goes  on
       to say that "[d]espite these risk factors, I was not referred to any
       evidence to suggest that the appellant had attempted suicide in  the
       past".  The Judge had regard to the Appellant's refusal of food  and
       drink but also to Dr Wootton's observation that "there may  also  be
       an element of protest and trying to get his needs met".


  138. Read as a whole, it is apparent from what is said at [71]  and  [72]
       of the Decision that the Judge did  not  accept  that  the  evidence
       showed a real risk that the Appellant  would  commit  suicide.   Her
       views are consonant with the medical evidence read as  a  whole.  As
       the Appellant points out, at [74] of the Decision, the  Judge  found
       that the process of deportation would be "adequately  managed".   It
       is said that this finding is made  without  any  evidence.  However,
       that paragraph itself refers to the evidence which was to  be  found
       in a case record indicating that the Respondent  had  taken  medical
       advice in connection with the Appellant's removal.


  139. The Judge also had regard to  the  availability  of  medication  and
       treatment.  It is asserted that the Judge did not  consider  whether
       the mechanisms  were  effective  to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.
       However, the Judge did not accept that there was a  real  risk  that
       the Appellant would try to commit suicide (and nor  did  Dr  Wootton
       say that he would following removal).  The Judge's reference to  the
       lack of any  attempt  is  relevant.   The  Judge's  findings  as  to
       available treatment in Jamaica has to be read in the context of  the
       medical evidence taken as  a  whole  that  the  Appellant  does  not
       receive treatment for his mental health condition -  he  refuses  it
       because he does not consider himself to be mentally ill.


  140. The final criticism  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
       evidence concerning the alleged Article 3 breach in the round.   The
       allegation included not simply the risk to  the  Appellant's  health
       due to lack of treatment but also the cumulative effect of that  and
       the  discrimination  against  disabled  people  coupled   with   the
       difficulties for the Appellant of dealing with  an  environment  not
       adapted to his needs.  However, as we  have  already  observed,  the
       consideration of the evidence and findings in relation to healthcare
       in the Article 3 context has to be read with the Judge's findings in
       relation to humanitarian protection at [60] to [63] of the  Decision
       which includes reference to all those factors.   The  conclusion  at
       [75] of the Decision is reached on the  evidence  "considered  as  a
       whole".   Although the references  in  that  paragraph  are  to  the
       Appellant's health and risk of suicide, those incorporate  both  his
       mental and physical health as well as the conditions in Jamaica.


  141. For those reasons, ground three does not disclose any error of law.


  142. In light of our earlier conclusions about  what  is  said  to  be  a
       procedural duty to make enquiries or seek assurances,  we  can  deal
       with ground four very shortly.  There is no freestanding  procedural
       duty.  The evidence adduced by the Appellant has to be "capable  of"
       demonstrating a real risk of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 (to
       the threshold which applies in a health case).  If  the  Appellant's
       evidence does so, the Respondent will need to counter that  evidence
       with general background evidence; enquiries of the Receiving  State;
       or assurances from that State, as the case may be, if the Respondent
       is to secure the Appellant's removal compatibly with the ECHR.  Here
       the Judge concluded that the evidence did not show  any  such  risk.
       It  is  said  that  there  were  gaps  in  the  evidence  about  the
       availability of care for a person such as the Appellant at the  Open
       Arms Centre and concerning healthcare which the  Judge  should  have
       required the Respondent to plug.  However, we have already explained
       why the Judge did not find that such gaps existed.


  143. An additional factor identified as not being dealt with is the  risk
       that the Appellant would suffer a further stroke as a result of  the
       stress of removal.  However, the Judge dealt with the evidence about
       this at [66] to [69] of the Decision and concluded that "the medical
       evidence falls short of demonstrating that the  process  of  removal
       would increase the risk of stroke".  As  is  there  explained,  that
       asserted risk is undermined by the report of Dr Ahmed who points out
       that the Appellant has not been taking any medication to  prevent  a
       further stroke since he suffered his stroke in 2011  but  has  still
       not suffered any further stroke.  Dr Ahmed himself said that it  was
       difficult to answer the question whether forced removal  would  risk
       inducing further strokes.  As the Judge concluded, that  report  did
       not provide evidence that removal itself would cause that risk.

  144. It is asserted  in  the  grounds  that  "serious  doubts  must  have
       persisted regarding the impact of removal on [AXB]".   We  disagree.
       We can discern no such doubts  in  the  Judge's  reasoning  nor  any
       evidence  which  she  considered   needed   to   be   clarified   or
       investigated.  She had such evidence as she considered she  required
       to resolve the issues and did so.  Since we have concluded that  any
       duty to investigate or seek assurances is merely part of the  burden
       of proof and that the Judge concluded that the Appellant had not met
       his burden in this regard, the "procedural obligation" argument  did
       not arise, and the Judge had no need to  deal  with  it.   For  that
       reason, there is no error of law disclosed by ground four.

DECISION

We are satisfied that no material error of law is disclosed in the  Decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Keeffe  promulgated  on  23  April  2019  in
relation to her conclusion on Article 3 ECHR grounds.  We  therefore  uphold
the Decision in this regard.  There has been no challenge  to  the  Decision
allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR   grounds.    Accordingly,   the
Appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds only.


   Signed              [pic] Dated:  15 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
