

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Rana (s. 85A; Educational Loans Scheme) [2019] UKUT 00396 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decisions & Reasons sent out  |
|                                              |on                            |
|On 15 October 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                MD MASUD RANA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gilbert, instructed by JKR Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.

   1. There was nothing in s 85A of the 2002 Act preventing the Secretary of
      State from adducing evidence.

   2. The requirement to show that a  loan  was  "part  of  an  Academic  or
      Educational Loan Scheme" for the purposes  of  paragraph  1B(d)(7)  of
      Appendix C is not  met  merely  by  showing  that  the  loan  was  for
      educational purposes.   Such  a  scheme  will  have  some  element  of
      government or official involvement, will be of advantage  to  students
      in comparison with ordinary commercial loans, and  will  be  concerned
      with the loans as a group as well as individually.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal has a considerable history.  The appellant is a national of
    Bangladesh who came to the United Kingdom as a student and  applied  as
    long ago as 2014 for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision  which
    carried a  right  of  appeal,  and  the  appellant  appealed,  but  the
    Secretary of State then withdrew the decision.   The Secretary of State
    then made a further decision, again refusing  the  application.    That
    decision is dated 1 September 2015 and is the  decision  against  which
    the appeal is now brought.


 2. To continue the  procedural  history,  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was dismissed by Judge Miller in a determination sent  out  on
    27 September 2016.  Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier
    Tribunal and by the Upper Tribunal.  There were  then  judicial  review
    proceedings on a Cart basis.  The grounds upon which permission was  in
    the end granted in the High Court are wholly obscure and it is far from
    clear that any of them had been subsequently raised in the  proceedings
    thus reinstated.  I granted permission to appeal in the  light  of  the
    High Court's decision and the matter then came  before  Judge  Blundell
    and myself on 16 July 2019 when a number of matters  were  raised.   We
    determined on that date that Judge Miller's decision contained an error
    of law material to its  conclusion;  we  set  his  decision  aside  and
    directed matters to proceed before us to decide whether the appellant's
    appeal should be allowed or dismissed.


 3. The principal difficulty in this case for  the  appellant  is  that  in
    order to  succeed  in  his  application  he  needed  to  meet  all  the
    requirements  of  the  rules  in  force  at  the  time  he  made   that
    application.  The requirements of proof of funding  and  other  matters
    applicable to students are notoriously complex but for the purposes  of
    the present appeal only paragraph 1B(d)(7) of appendix C is  in  issue.
    That requires an applicant, as well as any other matters which apply to
    him, to demonstrate that if he relies on a loan "the loan  is  provided
    by the National Government, the  State  or  Regional  Government  or  a
    Government Sponsored Student Loan Company or as part of an Academic  or
    Educational Loan Scheme".


 4. The refusal by the Secretary of State  was,  as  it  turns  out,  on  a
    slightly  different  basis.   As  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    indicates, the Secretary of State was of the view that the  requirement
    was as follows:


           "(7) ... the loan is provided by the  National  Government,  the
           State or Regional Government or a Government  Sponsored  Student
           Loan Scheme or is part of a  Government  Sponsored  Academic  or
           Educational Loan Scheme."


    Mr Bramble has  emphasised  to  us  and  indeed  it  appears  that  his
    colleague who had appeared before Judge Miller also indicated that  the
    insertion of the  words  "Government  Sponsored"  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal were unjustified and were a mistake.  Judge Miller did not deal
    in his judgment with any aspect of that mistake or that wording; he had
    dismissed the appeal for other reasons.  Nevertheless, it is clear that
    that was a mistake by the Secretary of State, that of itself would,  we
    think, have given good grounds for the appellant to suppose that he had
    a viable appeal.   We, of course, apply the rules as they are, not what
    the Secretary of State, in the decision letter, thought they  were  and
    we therefore need  to  consider  whether  the  facility  of  which  the
    appellant produced evidence is one which falls within paragraph (7).


 5. Before we turn to consider that issue we should say a number  of  other
    things about the procedural history of this case and about the  history
    of the appellant himself.


 6. The first is this: s 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 as it applies for the purposes of this appeal, which is one  which
    is not governed by the amendments made by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,
    prohibits the appellant  in  a  points-based  appeal  from  relying  on
    evidence which was not available to  the  decision-maker.   Before  the
    judge, the Secretary of State produced evidence which was not available
    to the  decision-maker;  and  one  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  raised
    following Judge Miller's decision is  that  the  provisions  of  s  85A
    prevented the judge in general from  taking  account  of  post-decision
    evidence.  But we are satisfied  that  that  is  wrong  and  indeed  Mr
    Gilbert now does not pursue the point.  The prohibition  in  s  85A  is
    clearly a prohibition on the appellant alone.   That  may  seem  rather
    unfair, but of course it is moderated by two factors.  One is  that  it
    is for the appellant to  make  his  case  upon  the  material  that  he
    produces to the decision-maker and the  decision-maker's  provision  of
    other materials subsequently does not affect the  appellant's  duty  or
    the applicant's duty to produce everything on the  basis  of  which  he
    wishes the decision to be taken.  Secondly, if the Secretary  of  State
    does produce post-decision material, then in every case it will be  the
    obligation of any judge dealing with that material to  ensure  that  an
    appellant faced with  it  has  an  opportunity  to  deal  with  it,  by
    adjournment if necessary.  The material produced in  this  case,  which
    has been of importance both to the judge and to us, is  material  which
    related to a  process  of  obtaining  loans  for  educational  purposes
    operated by the Prime Bank in Bangladesh.


 7. The second procedural issue is this: considering  the  material  before
    him, Judge Miller took the view that in relation  to  the  letter  upon
    which the appellant relied, to establish that he  had  a  loan  of  any
    sort, the judge said that "other material including that  to  which  we
    have referred produced by the Secretary of State,  leads  me  to  doubt
    whether the letter was genuine".  That, as we indicated in our decision
    on the error of law was a view on which the judge was not  entitled  in
    the circumstances to reach.  But it is now accepted by all parties that
    on the basis of the material before us in remaking the decision, we are
    entitled to regard some evidence as more or less reliable than  others,
    and make our findings accordingly.


 8. Thirdly, in the time between our making  our  first  decision  and  the
    hearing today the appellant,  but  not  the  respondent,  has  produced
    further material that technically requires  permission  to  adduce  it,
    which we give under s 85A(4)(c).


 9. Finally, before settling in to the  question  of  interpretation  which
    lies at the heart of this case, we put on record two related matters of
    the greatest importance.  Shortly after the proposed start of  the  new
    course which the appellant proposed to pursue  at  BPP  University,  he
    became seriously ill; his symptoms at that stage had become so  serious
    that he needed medical advice, their development caused him to have  to
    fail to attend his course; as a result of that the  CAS  from  BPP  was
    withdrawn on a date which was not precisely identified  on  the  papers
    but we think some time in December or January 2015; after the  date  of
    the decision in this case.  The appellant's condition has continued  to
    worsen and to have a variety of diagnoses including both then and  more
    recently that of a brain tumour, which has other  apparently  unrelated
    symptoms as well.  Clearly the appellant deserves the greatest sympathy
    for that, which must have been at the front of his  mind,  rather  than
    anything to do with studies or running an appeal, in all the time  that
    it  has  affected  him.   It  is  perfectly   understandable   in   the
    circumstances that he was unable to attend the course, although it does
    mean that it is not easy for him to say that either at the time the CAS
    letter was  withdrawn  or  at  any  subsequent  time  he  is  genuinely
    intending to take part in a further course of education.


10. Having said that, we also add that as we have already said, the  course
    in question was a course at a wholly respectable institution  and  that
    the appellant's failure to be able to follow it appears to be a  result
    of what are wholly understandable factors. Nevertheless, the  appellant
    can only succeed in his appeal if he can show that on the date  of  the
    decision he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules in the  terms
    which we have already set out.


11. The appellant produced evidence of a loan.  The evidence  is  contained
    on pages 47 and 48 of the bundle produced for the First-tier  Tribunal.
    It indicates that  a  loan  is  being  released  and  "is  part  of  an
    Educational Loan Scheme"; those are the crucial parts of a letter  from
    the Prime Bank Limited in its Subidbazar branch in Sylhet.  The  amount
    of the loan is about to be Tk.1,200,000 (Twelve Lac) and the  agreement
    such as it appears to be for three months beginning on  8  April  2014.
    There is an interest rate of 16%; the account  holder's  profession  is
    given as Student.   The formal notice of the loan  indicates  that  the
    nature of the credit facility is what is described as "SOD  (FO)  Limit
    [for study purpose]".  The rate of interest is set  out  again,  it  is
    also made clear that the loan is to expire on 15  July  2014,  not  the
    same date as was given on the other letter which shows an  expiry  date
    of 8 July 2014.   It  is  renewable  provided  the  interest  is  paid.
    Security is also set out.   Those are  the  documents  upon  which  the
    appellant  relied  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  a  loan  within  the
    requirements of paragraph (7).  The loan, as we have said, is  made  by
    the Prime Bank Limited and the appellant's position is  that  that  the
    loan is "part of an Academic or Educational Loan Scheme" because it  is
    clear that there is no other part of paragraph (7)  within  which  this
    particular loan could fall.


12. The document produced by the Secretary of State to which  we  have  had
    reference derives from the  Secretary  of  State's  researches  on  the
    internet and is headed "Prime Bank Ltd Education Loan".  That sets  out
    a process by which a person may obtain from the Prime Bank a  loan  for
    the purposes of education.  No other document has been produced at  any
    stage by either party which might suggest any academic  or  educational
    loan scheme  to  which  the  loan  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  is
    attributable.  The document, although copyrighted in  2011  appears  to
    have been accessed on 24 August 2016 and so was presumably in force  at
    the time of the date of the decision.  It sets out the principle that:


            "In our bank we provide our optimum importance on  building  up
           an educated nation, hence we are providing  education  loans  at
           easy terms and rates to the potential students."


13. It then sets out the  circumstances  in  which  such  a  loan  will  be
    available.  Unfortunately for the  appellant  almost  nothing  that  is
    known about the loan on which he relied to meet the requirements of the
    Rules falls into the provisions of the Prime Bank Limited's educational
    loans.  For example, the first provision sets out the types of customer
    to which such a loan could be available.  There is no provision  for  a
    loan to be made available to an existing student.  The  only  provision
    which comes anywhere near what the appellant claims to be  or  to  have
    been is "Businessman" and Mr Gilbert was forced  to  adopt  that  as  a
    category under which the appellant made his application  on  the  basis
    that he was studying business studies in the United Kingdom.  But  even
    so, there is a  difficulty  under  a  heading  "Customer  Eligibility",
    because there the requirement for a businessman is  "minimum  one  year
    experience in the same line of business"  and  finally  "minimum  gross
    salary income" provides that for businessmen  there  should  be  35,000
    Bangladesh Tk. as the minimum gross salary.  Further in the  provisions
    is that the maximum loan amount will be Tk.  10.00  lac.   The  maximum
    loan period is five years and so far as the conditions of the loan  are
    concerned  the  requirement  is  two  personal  guarantees  and  it  is
    specifically said that there will a "competitive interest rate".  There
    are further documents required, particularly from businessmen which are
    set out, none of  which  as  we  apprehend  the  appellant  could  have
    produced.  The position before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  that
    that document demonstrated that whatever the loan being relied upon  by
    the appellant was, it was not a loan within the terms of the Prime Bank
    Limited's Educational Loan process.  The judge looking at the documents
    as a whole reached the view, which we have set out, that  the  document
    confirming the loan was not genuine.  We do not think that there is any
    basis to suppose that, and indeed we have seen more  recent  statements
    showing that the loan was passed through the specific overdraft account
    into the appellant's personal account on the day expected and that  the
    latter account was on that date debited with a number of administrative
    expenses including the administration fee of 0.5%  and  an  amount  for
    Stamp Duty.


14. Whether or not the loan is genuine and that the appellant was genuinely
    able to call upon the sum of Tk. 12.00 Lac for his studies is a  matter
    separate from whether the loan met the requirements of the Rules.   The
    only provisions before the First-tier Tribunal Judge relating  to  that
    issue are the matters to which we have referred: the statement  on  the
    confirmation loan acceptance that this loan is part of  an  Educational
    Loan  Scheme  and  the  documents  relating  to  Prime   Bank   Limited
    Educational Loan.  There is now also a letter from the  Prime  Bank  in
    the Subidbazar Branch at Sylhet dated 21 August 2019.  That again  sets
    out the terms of the loan and the account numbers; it indicates that at
    the time of the writing of  that  letter  the  loan  status  is  "fully
    adjusted and closed" in other words, as we understand it, from what was
    paid out has now been repaid.  Underneath the details is this sentence:


           "Though as  per  our  policy  we  have  a  maximum  ceiling  for
           educational loan is Tk. 10.00 lac, but we  sanctioned  the  said
           loan of Tk. 12.00 Lac under SOD FO (Secured Overdraft  Financial
           Obligation) facility for  a  purpose  of  study  abroad  as  per
           customer declaration."


15. We have already indicated that the terms of the loan  actually  offered
    to  the  appellant  do  not  seem  to  match  the  published  terms  of
    Educational Loans by Prime Bank.  That letter, in  our  judgment,  does
    nothing to help the appellant's case.  It does not  indicate  that  the
    loan was treated as an Educational Loan, being over  the  ceiling.   On
    the contrary it indicates that it was  over  the  ceiling  and  was  so
    treated under a different basis:  on  a  wholly  secured  basis.   That
    letter matches the evidence previously given about the  loan  that  was
    actually made.


16. Looking at the evidence, therefore, we find as a fact that at the  date
    of the decision the appellant had available to him Tk. 12.00 Lac in the
    form of a loan arranged and paid to  his  account  by  the  Prime  Bank
    Limited but not by reference to their process for Education Loans.


17. Is that loan capable for falling within the requirements  of  paragraph
    (7) of Appendix C, paragraph 1(d)?  Can it be said that it is  part  of
    an Academic or Educational Loan Scheme? Mr Gilbert's position  is  that
    that phrase is wholly vague and that all that is required is that it is
    for educational  purposes;  in  fact,  in  his  submissions  to  us  he
    specifically rejected any sui  genesis  process  of  interpretation  of
    those words and said instead that paragraph (7) as  a  whole  meant  no
    more than that "the loan is for  educational  purposes"  and  that  the
    reference "Government or Regional Government and  Government  Sponsored
    Student Loan Companies" were in other words mere surplusage.


18.  We  cannot  accept  that.   It  seems  to  us   that   the   following
    considerations need to be applied to the  interpretation  of  paragraph
    (7).  The first is that all the possibilities other than  the  last  do
    have some reference to government sponsoring, the National  Government,
    the State or Regional Government or a Government Sponsored Student Loan
    Company.  That suggests to us that  an  Academic  or  Educational  Loan
    Scheme has to have a flavour of some sort of government involvement  or
    at least official involvement of some sort.  Secondly, the last word of
    the paragraph, "scheme", is, in our judgment, of  importance.   To  our
    mind, an "Academic or Educational Loan Scheme" says something more than
    would be expressed by the words "an Academic or Educational  Loan".  An
    Academic or Educational Loan Scheme must, in our judgment, be a process
    which takes account, not merely of there being individual loans but  to
    an extent, the relationship between them: there will be a sum of money,
    actual or notional which will be available for these purposes and  will
    be distributed in such a way as  to  be  advantageous  to  students  in
    comparison with ordinary commercial loans, presumably by  low  interest
    rates  and  long  repayment  periods,  underwritten  by  government  or
    otherwise.  But the crucial part, so far as we are concerned, is that a
    scheme looks at more than one loan.


19. All that the appellant has been able to show is that Prime Bank Limited
    had a system of  arrangements  for  Educational  Loans  which  did  not
    incorporate his loan and that he has a loan from the Prime  Bank  which
    is said to be for educational purposes.  That, as it seems to us,  does
    not show that his loan is part  of  an  Academic  or  Educational  Loan
    Scheme.  It follows that on the true construction of the  actual  words
    of sub-paragraph (7) the decision of the Secretary  of  State  was  the
    correct one.  This appeal, therefore, falls  to  be  dismissed  and  we
    dismiss it.


20. We add two further matters.  The first is that if we had been minded to
    allow this appeal (that is to say if, contrary to what  we  have  said,
    the loan fell within the requirements of  paragraph  (7)),  this  would
    have been a case where although the appeal would have been allowed  for
    failure to comply with the immigration rules, it would have been  quite
    inappropriate to direct a grant of leave to the appellant.   First,  he
    is, as we understand it, in no position to say  that  he  is  ready  to
    commence studies.  He could not have student leave because  he  has  no
    current CAS.  Mr Gilbert suggested that he should be  granted  a  short
    period of leave in order to make enquiries, but it appears that in  the
    time available to the appellant (and even bearing in mind what we  have
    said about the difficulties that he  has  with  his  health),  no  such
    enquiries have been made so far and we would not have been  willing  to
    make a direction in those terms.


21. The second is that the appellant  was  advised  by  BPP  University  in
    January 2016 that the way forward for him  might  well  be  to  make  a
    proper application on the basis of his private life and his health, and
    if the health matters which we have made reference and  which  are  the
    subject of evidence before us are what they appear to be, we trust that
    those advising him will not cause any further delay in the  appropriate
    application being made.


22.  For  the  reasons  we  have  given,  having  set  aside  the   judge's
    determination  for  error  of  law,  we  substitute   a   determination
    dismissing this appeal.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 22 October 2019


