



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 18 July 2013                        |On 24 July 2013           |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         ROSELINE ONOSHOAGBE AKHALU

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal, instructed by Public Interest Lawyers


(1)  MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA
Civ 279 does not establish that a claimant is  disqualified  from  accessing
the protection of article 8 where an aspect of her claim is a difficulty  or
inability to access health  care  in  her  country  of  nationality  unless,
possibly, her private or family life has a bearing upon her  prognosis.  The
correct approach is not to leave out of account what  is,  by  any  view,  a
material consideration of central importance  to  the  individual  concerned
but to recognise that the countervailing public  interest  in  removal  will
outweigh the consequences for the  health  of  the  claimant  because  of  a
disparity of health care facilities in all but a very few rare cases.

(2)  The consequences of removal for the health of a claimant who would  not
be able to access equivalent health care in their country of nationality  as
was available in this country  are  plainly  relevant  to  the  question  of
proportionality. But, when weighed against the public interest  in  ensuring
that the limited resources of this country's health service are used to  the
best effect for the benefit of those  for  whom  they  are  intended,  those
consequences do not  weigh  heavily  in  the  claimant's  favour  but  speak
cogently in support of the public interests in removal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Roseline Onoshoagbe Akhalu, who was born on 25 September  1963,  is  a
      citizen of Nigeria. Although she  is  the  respondent  in  the  appeal
      before the Upper Tribunal, for ease of reference we shall refer to her
      as "the claimant" and to the Secretary of State as  "the  respondent".
      She lived alone in Nigeria after being widowed in 1999. She  was  able
      to come to the United Kingdom in 2004 having secured, in the  face  of
      fierce competition, a scholarship from the Ford Foundation  and  entry
      clearance as a student in order to undertake a degree course.


   2. The facts with which we are concerned in this appeal are well known to
      the parties and, as they are largely settled, it is not necessary  for
      us to recite them again in any great detail. For present  purposes  it
      is sufficient to set out the following summary.

   3. Soon after arriving in the United Kingdom  to  commence  her  studies,
      with entry clearance having been granted initially until October 2005,
      the appellant was diagnosed with end stage kidney failure. It  is  now
      accepted and no longer  in  dispute  that  she  was  unaware  of  this
      potentially fatal illness, or even that she was unwell at  all,  until
      after her arrival. The evidence establishes that to be unsurprising as
      the nature of that condition is such that a person in  the  claimant's
      position  would  most  likely  not  have  noticed  any  symptoms.  Her
      condition was diagnosed in a routine medical check.

   4. The claimant required dialysis in  order  to  remain  alive  and  this
      treatment  was  provided  at  a  hospital  in  Leeds.  Her  leave  was
      progressively extended and, despite having to undergo dialysis several
      times each week, she graduated  in  2008.  Although  granted  a  final
      extension of leave  as  a  visitor,  so  that  she  could  attend  her
      graduation  ceremony,  thereafter  the  respondent  has  refused   all
      subsequent applications for further leave to remain,  of  which  there
      have been a number, and there  has  been  since  then  a  complex  and
      continuous process  of  further  submissions,  refusals,  and  further
      appeals, both before the Tribunal and by way of judicial review.

   5. In July 2009 the claimant received a kidney transplant and  thereafter
      required carefully monitored medication to ensure that  the  level  of
      that medication in her body is maintained at an appropriate  level  so
      that the transplanted organ is not rejected. Quite  apart  from  that,
      monitoring is essential as too high a level of that medication in  the
      body can prove fatal. She will always remain particularly at  risk  of
      infection, because the effect of the medication  is  to  moderate  her
      immune system to prevent rejection, and so appropriate and safe living
      conditions are essential to her continued health.

   6. While the claimant remains in the United Kingdom her  life  expectancy
      and her quality of life will be normal. It is, now at least,  accepted
      by the respondent that she would not be able to  access  treatment  in
      Nigeria and so would die within weeks. That is not because appropriate
      treatment and living conditions  are  not  available  in  Nigeria  but
      because she would not be able to afford to pay for them.

   7. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  removal
      decision  that  accompanied  the  last  unsuccessful  application  for
      further leave to remain. The issue at that appeal was a simple one but
      it was also a stark one: Was the refusal  to  grant  leave,  with  the
      accepted consequence that the claimant would die soon  after  removal,
      such as to breach the claimant's right  to  respect  for  her  private
      life, as protected by article 8 of the ECHR, or was it a proportionate
      interference with that  right,  given  that  the  claimant  is  not  a
      national of this country and had been admitted for a temporary purpose
      which has now been concluded?

   8. At the heart of that issue is a particular question of  law:  On  what
      basis can a claimant succeed in such circumstances under article 8  of
      the ECHR when it is accepted, as it is here by all concerned, that she
      could not succeed under article 3. Central to the resolution  of  that
      question is a correct understanding of the jurisprudence  relating  to
      it. In particular, the respondent argues that the Court of  Appeal  in
      MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA
      Civ 279 has laid down a test to be applied in cases such as this  one,
      where the claimant seeks to rely upon her need for  medical  treatment
      and where that treatment may  not  be  available  in  her  country  of
      nationality, the effect of which is to disqualify the  appellant  from
      the protection  of  article  8  unless  the  private  or  family  life
      established here has a bearing upon her prognosis. That  approach,  it
      is said, reflects the well established  principle  that  an  appellant
      cannot succeed simply on the basis that she cannot obtain in  her  own
      country medical treatment that is available to her here.


   9. Mr Toal submits that is an incorrect interpretation of MM  (Zimbabwe).
      We examine those competing submissions below.

  10. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 21 November
      2012. Having considered a very large volume of  oral  and  documentary
      evidence put before him by Mr Toal, the judge found that  there  would
      be a breach of the appellant's rights under article 8 and  so  allowed
      the appeal.

  11. The question for the Upper Tribunal is a very different one from  that
      addressed by the First-tier Tribunal.  Our  task  is  to  examine  the
      challenge brought by the respondent to that decision of  Judge  Saffer
      and to decide whether that challenge has identified any error  of  law
      disclosed by the determination that requires his decision  to  be  set
      aside. Unless that is established there is no basis upon which we  may
      disturb his decision, even if that was not the only  outcome  possible
      on the facts.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  12. Judge Saffer heard oral evidence from a  consultant  nephrologist,  Dr
      James Tattersall, and from 6 lay witnesses. There  were  five  further
      witness statements and a large  number  of  letters  of  support  from
      people known to the claimant relied upon as well as a range of medical
      and other expert evidence about the  claimant's  condition,  treatment
      and prognosis as well as the  circumstances  in  which  she  would  be
      living on return to Nigeria and the effect of that upon her prognosis.

  13. This  was  a  large  body  of  evidence  and  it  is  clear  from  the
      determination that the judge had careful regard to all that was before
      him even though, as he was correct to point out, it was not  necessary
      for him to discuss all of that material in his determination.

  14. The judge summarised the respondent's case as it was argued before him
      as follows:

           "The  respondent  has  not  accepted  responsibility   for   her
           continued and indefinite treatment. It was conceded that she had
           established a private life here. Her removal would not undermine
           the organ transplant system. [The  respondent's  representative]
           conceded that she could not afford the treatment in Nigeria  and
           would therefore inevitably die. He submitted that  disparity  of
           care is not a reason to allow the appeal. There is physical  and
           emotional support available from family members in  Nigeria.  It
           was however proportionate to remove her  as  her  case  did  not
           reach the high threshold required in medical cases. There is  no
           absolute protection afforded by article 8."

  15. Pausing there, two points might be  made.  First,  Mr  Avery  did  not
      suggest that  to  be  an  inadequate  or  inaccurate  summary  of  the
      respondent's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  it  was  argued
      before the judge.


  16. Secondly, the concession made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the
      claimant would not be able to  afford  the  treatment  she  needed  in
      Nigeria and so would inevitably die was  of  particular  significance.
      That is because the respondent's reasons for refusing to grant further
      leave to remain had always been predicated upon a  refusal  to  accept
      that she would not be able to access the  treatment  she  would  need.
      Until then, the respondent's position had been that this claimant, who
      had worked in the public sector in Nigeria before coming to the United
      Kingdom to obtain, as she did,  a  degree,  would  be  eminently  well
      placed to secure good and well paid employment on return  which  would
      enable her to afford the cost of  essential  life-maintaining  medical
      treatment. The respondent maintained also that the claimant  would  be
      able to live with one of her three siblings in Nigeria,  two  of  whom
      lived in rural homes and  the  other  in  accommodation  in  an  urban
      environment.

  17.  It is plain from the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the
      concession was properly and correctly made by the Presenting  Officer.
      There was cogent evidence from a country expert that there was no real
      chance that this 48 year old claimant with a  history  of  her  health
      problems that would need to be managed  carefully  would  be  able  to
      obtain employment of a nature such as to generate in  income  the  sum
      calculated  by  a  leading  Nigerian  medical  professional  as  being
      required. And there was equally cogent evidence to establish that  the
      claimant could not live with any of her siblings. The medical evidence
      was that it would be wholly inappropriate for the claimant to live  in
      the rural homes as the risk of infection was  far  too  high  and  the
      sister in the urban area lived in a two  bedroom  apartment  with  her
      husband and six children, whom she would  wish  to  protect  from  the
      upsetting  experience  of  witnessing  the  inevitable  death  of  the
      claimant, which would be unavoidable  if  she  were  living  with  the
      family.

  18. That meant that a main thread of the reasoning upon which  refusal  to
      grant further leave had fallen away.

  19. In an admirably concise determination Judge Saffer  explained  clearly
      why he had concluded that the appeal should be allowed.  Before  doing
      so, he directed himself in terms of the case law to which he had  been
      referred by the parties and reminded himself that the burden  remained
      throughout upon the claimant to establish the  facts  upon  which  she
      sought to rely.  Having noted that the claimant was  lawfully  present
      in the United Kingdom when she was diagnosed with the illness he said,
      in a finding that has not been challenged:

           "... there is nothing to suggest she was aware  of  her  illness
           before she came here  or that she is a health tourist."


      He noted also that the claimant's leave was extended so that she could
      continue with her studies while being treated  for  her  illness.  The
      judge then recognised the extent to which she  had  engaged  with  her
      local community, saying:


           "She has involved herself in the community in a positive way for
           many years and has many friends, 6 of whom took the  trouble  to
           give evidence, a further 10 of  whom  came  to  support  her  in
           Court, and many more of whom wrote letters of support and signed
           a petition."


      The judge continued:


           "I find that she will die within 4  weeks  in  very  distressing
           circumstances if she is removed from the United Kingdom....:


      He accepted the claimant's evidence, supported by the expert evidence,
      that she could not expect to live with her relatives but rejected  two
      arguments advanced on the claimant's behalf. First, that if  she  were
      removed that would have a detrimental effect on the whole  process  of
      providing patients with transplanted organs, both  because  the  money
      invested in the  treatment  would  be  wasted  and  because  it  would
      demotivate both potential future donors and the medical  professionals
      involved who would see their work come  to  nothing.  The  judge  also
      rejected the submission that the  cost  of  the  claimant's  continued
      treatment in the United Kingdom, should  she  be  allowed  to  remain,
      which is established by the evidence to be in the region of �5,000 per
      annum following the transplant, the more expensive dialysis  treatment
      no longer being required, would be recovered in income tax paid by the
      claimant since her aspirations to secure work were no more than that.

  20. The key findings  are  found  between  paragraphs  30  to  32  of  the
      determination, which we reproduce in full, and which indicate that the
      judge followed  the  structured  approach  drawn  from  R  (Razgar)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC 368:


           "I am satisfied that removal would normally be lawful and  would
           be for the legitimate aim of maintaining the economic well being
           of the  country  and  retaining  the  integrity  of  immigration
           control by only allowing those to be here who  comply  with  the
           immigration rules. However the maintenance of the economic  well
           being of the country,  given  she  came  here  legally  and  was
           diagnosed while here lawfully and there was no evidence she knew
           she was ill before she came here, carries little weight in  this
           particular case.


           I am not satisfied it is proportionate to require the  appellant
           to leave given the following constellation of reasons.  She  has
           an extensive and productive private life here. The cost  of  her
           treatment is not  excessive.  She  came  here  legally  and  was
           diagnosed while here lawfully. There is no evidence she knew she
           was ill before she came here. She will die very quickly in  very
           distressing circumstances.


           Very few cases can succeed under article 8 where they fail under
           article 3. This is one of them."

  21. On that basis and for those reasons the judge allowed the appeal.

The grounds for appeal

  22. The main ground upon which the respondent asserts that the judge erred
      in law is  that  he  misunderstood  and  so  misapplied  the  guidance
      provided by the Court of Appeal in MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  279.  That  is  because,  the
      respondent argues, correctly understood,  MM  required  the  judge  to
      apply a test that:


           "...makes clear that medical care is only relevant to article  8
           where an individual's personal ties to  the  UK  have  a  direct
           bearing on their prognosis."


      The grounds, adopted by Mr.  Avery,  assert  that  in  this  case  the
      claimant's ties  to  the  United  Kingdom  are  not  relevant  to  her
      prognosis. Therefore, this is not the sort of case the Court of Appeal
      had in mind in MM so that it falls to be considered  under  article  3
      only which, as Mr. Toal accepts, would not assist the claimant, in the
      light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in GS and EO (Article 3  -
      health cases) India [2012] UKUT 397 (IAC).


  23. Secondly, the  respondent  submits  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
      sufficient regard to the reported decision of the Upper Tribunal in GS
      and EO, at paragraph 85:


           "It may be that although, in principle, the scope of  Art  8  is
           wider than that of Art 3, in practical terms that in a case like
           this where the claimant has no right to  remain  it  will  be  a
           "very rare case" indeed where such a claim could succeed (see KH
           (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 and  MM  (Zimbabwe)  v
           SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279).[1]  That reality may lay at the heart
           of the majority's view of the Strasbourg Court in N v  UK  when,
           having rejected the individual's claim under Art 3, stated  that
           no "separate issue" arose under Art 8  (compare  the  dissenting
           Judge's opinion at 1 to 6)."


  24. Finally, the grounds assert that in this  case  the  issue  is  not  a
      complete  absence  of  treatment  in  the  complainant's  country   of
      nationality but the question of her access to it. It is said that  the
      approach of the judge was speculative.


  25. Although permission to appeal was granted specifically on  what  might
      be termed the MM point, the grant  was  not  limited  to  that  ground
      alone.

  26. Having taken  us  through  those  grounds,  Mr  Avery  summed  up  the
      respondent's position by saying that the care of  a  foreign  national
      remains the responsibility of her state of nationality and  the  judge
      applied MM (Zimbabwe) out of context without  having  regard  to  "the
      wealth of cases about ill-health". For that reason  the  determination
      was said to be fundamentally unsound.

  27. In response Mr Toal submitted that the judge made no error of law.  MM
      (Zimbabwe) laid down no such test  requiring  a  nexus  or  connection
      between the private  life  relied  upon  and  the  prognosis  for  her
      illness. The Court of Appeal simply offered an example of a case  that
      might succeed where such features were present without setting that as
      a requirement for  such  a  claim  to  be  made  out.  The  judge,  he
      submitted, had regard to  all  that  was  before  him  and  reached  a
      conclusion that was plainly open to him so that he made  no  error  of
      law.

      The legal framework


  28. Before considering MM (Zimbabwe) in detail, it is helpful to  set  out
      the jurisprudential bedrock upon which it is founded.


  29. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.


           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except as is in accordance with  the  law
           and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the  interests  of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.

      By section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  Parliament  has  imposed  an
      obligation upon public officials to  give  effect  to  article  8  and
      provided that the obligation extends to the courts and Tribunals:

           Acts of public authorities
           (1) It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which
           is incompatible with a Convention right.
           ...
           (3) In this section "public authority" includes-
           (a)
           a court or tribunal, and
           .....

  30.  Reference  has  been  made  already  in  this  determination  to  the
      determinative effect of GS and EO excluding, in cases  such  as  this,
      any prospect of resort to article 3 of the ECHR  in  order  to  resist
      removal. GS and EO was concerned directly only with such  claims,  but
      the Tribunal did say this, at paragraph 85(8), about  the  possibility
      of a claim being made out under article 8, even though  it  could  not
      succeed under article 3:


           "...(b) However, in principle Art 8 can be relied on in cases of
           this sort. The removal of the individual would, on the  face  of
           it, engage Art 8(1) on the basis of an interference with his  or
           her private life as an aspect of that individual's 'physical and
           moral integrity' (see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR  10).   Unlike
           Art 3, however, Art 8 is not absolute and the legitimate aim  of
           the economic well-being of the  country  would  be  relevant  in
           determining whether a breach of Art 8 could be established given
           any financial implications that continued treatment  in  the  UK
           would entail (see also R (on the application of Razgar)  v  SSHD
           [2004] UKHL  27; [2004] 2 AC 368).


           (c)  It may be that although, in principle, the scope of  Art  8
           is wider than that of Art 3, in practical terms that in  a  case
           like this where the claimant has no right to remain it will be a
           "very rare case" indeed where such a claim could succeed (see KH
           (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 and  MM  (Zimbabwe)  v
           SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279).[1]  That reality may lay at the heart
           of the majority's view of the Strasbourg Court in N v  UK  when,
           having rejected the individual's claim under Art 3, stated  that
           no "separate issue" arose under Art 8  (compare  the  dissenting
           Judge's opinion at 1 to 6).


           (d) Again we note that in N v UK the minority disagreed with the
           failure to address Article 8.  We see some force in this. If  it
           be the case that the Article 3  threshold  is  an  exceptionally
           high one because of the absolute character  of the  prohibition
           and concerns that Contracting States could be swamped by  health
           tourism claims by people with no prior connection to  the  state
           in question seeking  to  enter  or  remain  to  gain  access  to
           expensive  medical  treatment,  an  Article  8   proportionality
           analysis  might  yield  a  different outcome  in  other  cases,
           possibly where the claimant had a lawful permission to reside in
           the host state before the disease was diagnosed."


  31.  In fact, this route to protection from removal, under article 8,  has
      long been seen to be open in such a  case.  In  Razgar,  Lord  Bingham
      observed that it was clear from  the  decision  in  Bensaid  v  United
      Kingdom (2001) 33 EHRR 205 that:


           "...reliance may in principle be placed on article 8  to  resist
           an expulsion decision, even where the main emphasis  is  not  on
           the severance of family and social ties which the applicant  has
           enjoyed in the expelling country but on the consequences for his
           mental health of removal to the receiving country. The threshold
           of successful reliance is high, but  if  the  facts  are  strong
           enough article 8 may in principle be invoked. It is  plain  that
           "private life" is  a  broad  term,  and  the  Court  has  wisely
           eschewed  any  attempt  to  define  it  comprehensively.  It  is
           relevant  for  present  purposes  that  the  Court  saw   mental
           stability  as  an  indispensable   precondition   to   effective
           enjoyment of the right to respect for private life. In Pretty  v
           United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR 1, paragraph 61,  the  Court  held
           the  expression  to  cover  "the  physical   and   psychological
           integrity of a person" and went on to observe that


                 "Article 8 also protects a right to  personal  development,
                 and the right to establish and develop  relationships  with
                 other human beings and the outside world."


      Lord Bingham continued:


           "Elusive though the concept is,  I  think  one  must  understand
           "private life" in article 8 as extending to those features which
           are integral to a  person's  identity  or  ability  to  function
           socially as a person."


      Therefore:


           "...the rights protected by article 8  can  be  engaged  by  the
           foreseeable consequences for health of removal from  the  United
           Kingdom pursuant to an immigration  decision,  even  where  such
           removal does not violate article 3, if the facts  relied  on  by
           the applicant are sufficiently strong. In so answering I make no
           reference to "welfare",  a  matter  to  which  no  argument  was
           directed. It would seem plain that, as with medical treatment so
           with welfare,  an  applicant  could  never  hope  to  resist  an
           expulsion decision without  showing  something  very  much  more
           extreme  than  relative  disadvantage  as  compared   with   the
           expelling state."

      That echoes what was said at paragraph 46 of Bensaid:

           "Not every act or  measure  which  adversely  affects  moral  or
           physical integrity will interfere with the right to  respect  to
           private life guaranteed by Article 8. However, the Court's case-
           law does not exclude that treatment which  does  not  reach  the
           severity of Article 3 treatment may nonetheless breach Article 8
           in its private-life aspect where there are sufficiently  adverse
           effects on physical and moral integrity (see Costello-Roberts v.
           the United Kingdom, judgment of 25 March 1993, Series A no. 247-
           C, pp. 60-61, � 36)."


  32. It might be observed that the claimant in Bensaid was unsuccessful  in
      his claim because the risks relied upon  were  found  to  be  "largely
      hypothetical". That cannot be said in respect of this claimant  as  it
      is conceded that her death would follow inevitably  and  rapidly  upon
      her return to Nigeria.


  33. Mr Toal referred us to JA (Ivory Coast) ES (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1353.  This  is  of
      interest for two reasons. First, in that decision the Court of  Appeal
      emphasized that in contrasting  claims  made  in  health  cases  under
      article 3 and article 8 it is not simply a matter of the threshold  of
      engagement being lower in bringing an article  8  claim,  because  the
      outcome is subject to a test of proportionality  unlike  the  absolute
      and unqualified nature of article 3 in the protection it provides  for
      in respect of that which it excludes as a permissible consequence. The
      two are entirely different. Per Sedley LJ at para 17:

           "There is no fixed relationship  between  Art.  3  and  Art.  8.
           Typically a finding of a violation of  the  former  may  make  a
           decision on the latter unnecessary; but the latter is not simply
           a more easily accessed version of the former.  Each  has  to  be
           approached and applied on its own terms..."

  34. The second point to be drawn from JA (Ivory Coast) is the  observation
      found in paragraph 16  of  the  same  judgement  which  considers  the
      proportionality balance to be carried out in respect of the article  8
      claim in health cases where the public interest arguments include  the
      cost of providing heath care  treatment,  accepting  that  the  United
      Kingdom "cannot afford to be the world's hospital".


           "Here the prescribed purposes  are,  or  include,  the  economic
           wellbeing of the country, which cannot afford to be the  world's
           hospital, and the prior right of a  settled  population  to  the
           benefit of its inevitably finite health resources. Against these
           may legitimately be weighed both the moral duty to  help  others
           in need and the fact that the United Kingdom has until  recently
           found it both morally compelling and  economically  possible  to
           extend such  help  to  the  appellants  and  others  like  them,
           alongside and not evidently to  the  detriment  of  the  settled
           population."


  35. The fact is that the appellant has been considered to  be  someone  in
      respect of whom the United Kingdom  should  be  providing  heath  care
      without charge, even after her period of leave to remain had  expired:
      see Regulations 4(1)(iii) and  (3)  of  the  National  Health  Service
      (Charges to Overseas  Visitors)  Regulations  1989  (SI  1989/306)  as
      amended.


  36. Which brings us  to  the  question  of  proportionality.  In  Huang  v
      Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2007]  UKHL  11,  at
      paragraph 20:

           "In an article 8  case  where  this  question  is  reached,  the
           ultimate question for the  appellate  immigration  authority  is
           whether  the  refusal  of  leave  to   enter   or   remain,   in
           circumstances where the life of the family cannot reasonably  be
           expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking  full  account  of  all
           considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the
           family life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to
           amount to a breach of the fundamental right protected by article
           8. If the answer to this question is affirmative, the refusal is
           unlawful and the authority must so decide. It is  not  necessary
           that the appellate immigration authority, directing itself along
           the lines indicated  in  this  opinion,  need  ask  in  addition
           whether the case meets a test of exceptionality."

      And in JN (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]
      EWCA Civ 802 Maurice Kay LJ said:

           "Although expressed by reference to family life, that  reasoning
           plainly applies equally to private life cases."

  37. With that in mind we return  to  MM  (Zimbabwe)  and  to  address  the
      respondent's  assertion,  resisted  by  Mr  Toal,  that  the  decision
      establishes a test requiring in cases such as this that aspects of the
      private life established in this country must have  a  direct  bearing
      upon the prognosis for the claimant's illness.


  38. In MM it was  recognised  that  the  Convention  did  not  impose  any
      obligation to provide medical treatment that could not be accessed  in
      the claimant's country of nationality.  Although  that  principle  had
      been established in respect of claims brought under article 3  of  the
      ECHR, even where the deportee's life would be significantly  shortened
      as a consequence, there  was  no  doubt  that  the  principle  applied
      equally to claims brought under article 8. Moses LJ said, referring to
      dicta from Razgar we have set out above:

           "Despite that clear-cut principle,  the  courts  in  the  United
           Kingdom have declined to say that Article 8 can never be engaged
           by  the  health  consequences  of  removal   from   the   United
           Kingdom......"if the  facts  relied  on  by  the  applicant  are
           sufficiently strong""


      And then recorded the analysis of Baroness Hale:


           "Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it is not easy  to
           think of a foreign health  care  case  which  would  fail  under
           Article 3 but succeed under Article 8. There clearly must  be  a
           strong case before the Article is even engaged and then  a  fair
           balance must be struck under  Article  8(2).  In  striking  that
           balance, only the most  compelling  humanitarian  considerations
           are likely  to  prevail  over  legitimate  aims  of  immigration
           control or public safety. The expelling  state  is  required  to
           assess the strength of the threat and strike that balance. It is
           not  required  to  compare  the  adequacy  of  the  health  care
           available in the two countries. The question is whether  removal
           to the foreign country will have a sufficiently  adverse  effect
           upon the applicant. Nor can the expelling state be  required  to
           assume a more favourable status in its own  territory  than  the
           applicant is currently entitled to. The applicant remains to  be
           treated as someone who is liable to expulsion,  not  as  someone
           who is entitled to remain."


  39. Recognising the scale of the challenge faced, therefore, by a claimant
      in this regard, Moses LJ noting that the courts had declined to "close
      the door on the possibility" of a claim succeeding under article 8  in
      such circumstances went on, at paragraph 23 of his  judgment,  to  say
      this:


           "The only cases I can foresee  where  the  absence  of  adequate
           medical treatment in the country to which  a  person  is  to  be
           deported will be relevant to  Article  8,  is  where  it  is  an
           additional factor to be  weighed  in  the  balance,  with  other
           factors which by themselves engage Article 8."


  40. Moses LJ went on to offer the example of a claim that  might  succeed,
      this being the passage that Mr Avery asks us to find lays down a  test
      as to the minimum characteristics of such a claim:

           "Suppose, in this  case,  the  appellant  had  established  firm
           family ties in this country, then the availability of continuing
           medical treatment here,  coupled  with  his  dependence  on  the
           family here for support, together establish 'private life' under
           Article 8.  That  conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison
           between medical facilities here and those in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a
           finding would not offend the principle expressed above that  the
           United Kingdom is under  no  Convention  obligation  to  provide
           medical treatment here when it is not available in  the  country
           to which the appellant is to be deported."

  41. That does not amount to a  requirement  of  the  kind  the  respondent
      asserts. Indeed, the ultimate conclusion in MM was that the  case  was
      not, properly considered, about  a  comparison  of  medical  treatment
      available in this country as  opposed  to  in  Zimbabwe  but  whether,
      absent a risk of offending, it was proportionate to deport  MM,  given
      the strength of the private life he had  established  here.  For  that
      reason, even though the claimant in MM faced deportation  for  serious
      violent criminal offences, the appeal was remitted for  an  assessment
      of proportionality to be carried out, correctly informed  by  relevant
      considerations.


  42.  In our judgement, MM (Zimbabwe) does not have the effect of requiring
      any  different  approach  to   be   taken   to   the   assessment   of
      proportionality, when that question is reached and the example offered
      of a claim that might succeed was no more than that.

  43. MM (Zimbabwe) does not establish that a claimant is disqualified  from
      accessing the protection of article 8 where an aspect of her claim  is
      a difficulty or inability to access health  care  in  her  country  of
      nationality unless, possibly, her private or family life has a bearing
      upon her prognosis. The correct  approach  is  not  to  leave  out  of
      account what is, by any view,  a  material  consideration  of  central
      importance to the individual  concerned  but  to  recognise  that  the
      countervailing  public  interest  in   removal   will   outweigh   the
      consequences for the health of the claimant because of a disparity  of
      health care facilities in all but a very few rare cases.

  44. When a judge arrives at the question of proportionality he is required
      to have regard to  all  of  the  circumstances  relied  upon  by  both
      parties. If he left out of account aspects of the  claimant's  private
      life established here because it could not be shown that  they  had  a
      direct bearing on her  prognosis,  the  balancing  exercise  would  be
      fundamentally flawed and legally deficient.

  45. The correct approach is for the judge to have regard to  every  aspect
      of the claimant's private life here, as well as the  consequences  for
      her health of removal, but to have in mind when striking  the  balance
      of proportionality that a comparison of levels  of  medical  treatment
      available is something that will not in itself have any real impact on
      the outcome of the exercise. The judge must recognise,  as  did  Judge
      Saffer, that it will be a rare case that succeeds  where  this  is  an
      important aspect of the claimant's case.

  46. Put another way, the consequences of  removal  for  the  health  of  a
      claimant who would not be able to access  equivalent  health  care  in
      their country of nationality as was available  in  this  country,  are
      plainly relevant to the question of proportionality. But when  weighed
      against the public interest in ensuring that the limited resources  of
      this country's health service are used to  the  best  effect  for  the
      benefit of those for whom they are intended, those consequences do not
      weigh heavily in the claimant's favour but speak cogently  in  support
      of the public interests in removal.

  47. Returning to the circumstances of this claimant we accept that it  was
      open to the judge to find that this was one falling within what he had
      correctly recognised to be a very small number  of  cases  that  could
      succeed. In  doing  so  he  was  not  limiting  his  assessment  to  a
      comparison of medical treatment available here  as  compared  with  in
      Nigeria. On the evidence before the judge, these were the factors that
      spoke in favour of the claimant's case:

   a. this was a claimant who had been lawfully present when she fell ill;
   b. she had been provided with medical treatment which she was  recognised
      to be entitled to receive, without charge, from the NHS;
   c. it had been decided to treat her condition by providing a transplanted
      kidney which would require  forever  thereafter  continued  access  to
      treatment of a different kind than she had  needed  before  that,  and
      that she live in a manner that could not be  achieved  should  she  be
      returned to Nigeria;
   d. that despite her illness and the demands  of  her  treatment  she  had
      played an active part in community life and  had  thus  established  a
      level of private life that  she  could  never  hope  to  replicate  in
      Nigeria;
   e. that the concession made before the judge meant that a major aspect of
      the reasoning leading to refusal of further leave had fallen away;
   f. that there was nothing in any way hypothetical  or  speculative  about
      the inevitable difficult, early and unpleasant death that would follow
      return to Nigeria;
   g. contrary to the  position  as  the  respondent  thought  it  was,  the
      evidence established clearly that the claimant would meet  that  early
      death alone, and not with the support of her family.

  48. As we observed earlier in this determination, it may well be that this
      was not the only outcome possible on  the  facts  in  this  particular
      case. But this judge directed himself correctly in  law,  made  clear,
      both before and after setting out his conclusion  that  he  recognised
      that very few appeals indeed could succeed in these circumstances, and
      plainly had regard to the competing arguments,  including  aspects  of
      the public interest and the economic wellbeing of this country, as  he
      struck a balance between the competing interests in play.


  49. It cannot be said that this was an appeal allowed simply because of  a
      disparity in the treatment available. That is to misrepresent what the
      judge has said. He plainly concluded that this was one  of  the  "very
      rare cases" contemplated by the Tribunal in GS  and  EO  (India)  that
      could succeed under article 8 where the claim relies in part upon  the
      need to continue with medical treatment being received here.


  50. Correctly understood, in our judgement, the judge did  not  allow  the
      appeal simply because the claimant could continue to  receive  medical
      treatment here that she would not have access to in Nigeria. His was a
      holistic  assessment,  drawing  on  the  truly  exceptional  level  of
      engagement with her local community that was disclosed by the evidence
      he alluded to and which he did not need to set out extensively in  his
      determination and a comparison of her ability  to  enjoy  any  private
      life at all in Nigeria, as well as the  foreseeable  consequences  for
      her health should she be removed to Nigeria.


  51. The Supreme Court, in B (a Child), Re [2013] UKSC 33  observed,  in  a
      case concerning a child although the point made is equally  applicable
      here,:

           "Into its review of a trial judge's  determination  of  a  child
           case an appellate court needs to factor the advantages which the
           judge had over  it  in  appraising  the  case.  In  Piglowska  v
           Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360 Lord Hoffmann said, at p 1372:

           "The appellate court must bear in mind the advantage  which  the
           first instance judge had in seeing the  parties  and  the  other
           witnesses. This is well understood on questions  of  credibility
           and findings of primary fact. But it goes further than that.  It
           applies also to the judge's evaluation of those facts. If I  may
           quote what I said in Biogen Inc v Medeva plc [1997] RPC 1, 45:

           The need for appellate caution in reversing  the  trial  judge's
           evaluation of the facts is based upon much  more  solid  grounds
           than professional courtesy. It is because specific  findings  of
           fact, even by the  most  meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
           incomplete statement of the impression which was made  upon  him
           by the primary  evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always
           surrounded by a penumbra of imprecision as to emphasis, relative
           weight, minor  qualification  and  nuance...of  which  time  and
           language do not permit exact expression, but which may  play  an
           important part in the judge's overall evaluation."

  52. And this was, ultimately, a fact based assessment  for  the  judge  to
      make. In Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1045 Carnwath LJ (as he then was) said this:


           "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy, but they are
           not made easier or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
           analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments  that  different
           tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may   reach
           different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed illustrated
           by Mr Fountain's decision after the second  hearing).  The  mere
           fact that one tribunal has reached what may  seem  an  unusually
           generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not  mean
           that it has made an error of law, so as  to  justify  an  appeal
           under the old system, or an order for reconsideration under  the
           new. Nor does it create  any  precedent,  so  as  to  limit  the
           Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more  restrictive
           approach on a similar case in the future. However, on the  facts
           of the particular case, the decision of the specialist  tribunal
           should be respected."


  53. Drawing all this together, we are satisfied that  the  judge  did  not
      make any error of law  and  that  his  conclusion,  even  if  properly
      characterised as one that might be thought to be a generous one,  does
      not disclose any legal error. The "constellation of reasons" which  go
      considerably wider than the examples of those set out by the judge  in
      paragraph 31 of his determination but  which  he  undoubtedly  had  in
      mind, were  plainly  such  as  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the
      circumstances here were, if not truly unique,  so  exceptional  as  to
      stand out significantly  from  the  ordinary  run  of  cases  where  a
      claimant complains of being disadvantaged by  a  comparative  lack  of
      medical care in his or her own country. That was not the basis if  the
      decision here.


  54. For all these reasons the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed
      and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.



                               Signed






                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                                   19 July 2013
