
[pic]

R (on the application  of  Shabani)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Legacy - residence - SOS's limited duty) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  0403
(IAC)


                                                      Heard at:  Field House
                                                            On:  15 May 2015




             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                  R (ON THE APPLICATION OF SHABAN SHABANI)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr H Southey QC and Mr B Lams, instructed by Oaks
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal
                  Department


                                  JUDGMENT

In giving effect to Chapter  53.1.2  of  her  Enforcement  Instructions  and
Guidance, the respondent is  not  required  to  refer  specifically  to  the
particular period of residence.  It is sufficient that  the  respondent  can
be seen to have been aware of the period  of  residence  when  applying  the
policy to the facts of the particular case.

JUDGE ALLEN:  The  applicant  seeks  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decision of 21 March 2011 refusing to accept that previous material and
    fresh  representations  amounted  to  a  fresh  claim.   At  the   oral
    permission hearing in a decision which  was  promulgated  on  21  March
    2014, it was accepted that the timeliness of the challenge was  not  in
    issue, as the applicant's case was  that  he  had  never  received  the
    decision letter prior to  14  March  2013.   There  is  in  addition  a
    supplementary letter of 27 January 2015 to which  reference  will  also
    have to be made.

2.   There is a helpful chronology in Mr Malik's  skeleton  argument  and  I
    shall set out the highlights from that.

3.   The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 May 2000  and  claimed
    asylum later that month.  His claim was refused in September 2001,  and
    a subsequent appeal was dismissed on 17  January  2002.   Following  an
    unsuccessful application for permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal his appeal rights were exhausted on 11  September  2003
    and on 28 October 2003 he  was  listed  as  an  absconder,  and  it  is
    recorded that he was issued with an IS159.

4.    Further  submissions  were  made  together  with  a  legacy   casework
    programme questionnaire completed  on  15  August  2007.   The  further
    submissions were acknowledged in a letter of 15 November 2007.  Further
    submissions were made on 24 August 2009 and a PAP letter was sent on 25
    November 2010.  The respondent replied  to  that  in  a  letter  of  29
    November 2010 and subsequently as set out above, rejected  the  further
    submissions and refused to treat them as a fresh  claim,  in  a  letter
    dated 21 March 2011.  Subsequently, on 18 March 2013, the Secretary  of
    State issued the applicant with an IS96 (as he remained  an  absconder)
    and he was asked to report on 25 March  2013  at  Beckett  House.   The
    claim was issued on 9 May 2013.

5.   The application was made  under  cover  of  a  brief  letter  from  the
    applicant to the Legacy Casework Team stating that he had never had any
    problems with the law, that  he  feared  returning  to  Kosovo  in  the
    current uncertain political climate in  Kosovo,  and  that  not  having
    status in the United Kingdom had caused him stress.  He wished to  have
    his situation clarified and to be granted status.  In the form  he  did
    not indicate that he had a current legal representative  but  gave  the
    address which was the one on the covering letter.  In a box on the form
    devoted to provision of details he said among other things that he  had
    a settled life in the United Kingdom and was skilled in  building  work
    and wished to remain in the United Kingdom  legally  to  contribute  to
    society and pay tax, that he was not on any benefits and had not wished
    to have any and had never been convicted of any criminal  matters.   He
    said that he had never had a proper appeal hearing due to problems with
    not being notified and requested being given leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   In her response to that letter the respondent said that the Border  and
    Immigration Agency had begun a programme to deal with legacy cases  and
    his case would have been allocated to one of their new case owners.  It
    was said that at this stage they were unable to give any indication  of
    when his case would be actioned.  It was appreciated  that  this  might
    leave him in some uncertainty, but it was thought that he  should  know
    that if he were to  write  in  seeking  further  clarification  of  the
    timescale this could lead to a delay  in  processing  the  other  cases
    ahead of him in the queue.  It  was  also  said  that  his  immigration
    status  and  any  entitlements  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  remain
    unchanged until such time as a decision was made on his case.

7.   In the decision letter the respondent  noted  in  summary  the  further
    submissions that had been made including the fact  that  the  applicant
    had been residing in the United Kingdom for over nine years and that he
    claimed that he had spent most of his formative  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had established a private life in the United Kingdom with a
    network of friends whom he considered to be his family.

8.   It was submitted that his case  had  been  considered  using  the  five
    stage Razgar test.  It was noted that  he  had  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for over ten years, it having earlier been noted that he
    claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 May 2000 and that he
    had claimed asylum on 24 May 2000.  It  was  said  that  he  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 276A-D of the Immigration Rules as he could not
    demonstrate either ten  years'  lawful  residence  or  fourteen  years'
    lawful and/or unlawful  residence.   It  was  considered  that  he  had
    deliberately sought to evade or circumvent immigration control by going
    to ground between 2003 and 15 August  2007  when  he  sent  his  legacy
    questionnaire.  Consideration had been given to all  the  circumstances
    of his particular  case  and  it  was  concluded  that  his  length  of
    residence  was  [not]  sufficiently  compelling  and  compassionate  to
    warrant him being granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was concluded that he had not established family  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  As regards his private life, it was accepted  that
    he might have established a private life in the United Kingdom with his
    friends but that this had been whilst he  had  no  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom, and the respondent was of the  view  that
    any interference could be justified in the circumstances of  his  case.
    It was considered that his presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    essential for him to enjoy his friendship ties  with  his  friends  and
    such relationships could be continued overseas.  It  was  not  accepted
    that he had spent his formative years in the United  Kingdom  since  he
    had arrived at the age of 22.

9.   It was said that in reaching the decision his rights had been  balanced
    against the wider rights and freedom of others and the  general  public
    interest and specifically the respondent had weighed up the  extent  of
    the possible interference with  his  private/family  life  against  the
    legitimate need to maintain an effective  national  immigration  policy
    and with regard to the latter, account had been taken of his failure to
    observe the immigration regulations.  It was  considered  that  in  the
    circumstances  of  his  particular  case   the   actions   taken   were
    proportionate to the social need being  fulfilled.   Having  considered
    all the circumstances of his particular case it had been concluded that
    his  length  of  residence  was  [not]  sufficiently   compelling   and
    compassionate to warrant him being granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and in addition it was considered that there were
    no compassionate circumstances in his case to warrant a grant of  leave
    outside the Rules.

10.  His case had been considered in light of the decision of the  House  of
    Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 but it was considered that he would
    not benefit from the  findings  in  that  case  given  his  immigration
    history including the period of absconding between 2003 and  2007.   It
    was noted that he had never been granted any form of leave to enter  or
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the  private  life  he  had
    established during  the  time  when  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully was not significant enough to warrant a grant of leave.   It
    was also considered that any interference with his private  life  would
    be legitimate, necessary and proportionate and in accordance  with  the
    law and in particular it was  not  considered  that  his  was  a  truly
    exceptional case or that removal would result in a flagrant  denial  of
    his right to respect for his private life.

11.  The respondent  then  went  on  under  the  heading  'consideration  of
    compassionate  circumstances'  to  consider   the   application   under
    paragraph 395C of the Immigration  Rules,  noting  the  relevant  eight
    factors set out under that (now repealed) provision.  Each of these was
    addressed in turn.  In particular, with regard to length  of  residence
    in the United Kingdom, it was noted that he had been  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom since 7 May 2000 but none of that had  been  with  valid
    leave to enter or remain.  It was noted that he had absconded after his
    appeal rights were exhausted on 11 September  2003,  thus  deliberately
    frustrating the UKBA's intention to remove him.  He had then failed  to
    maintain contact until 15  August  2007  when  he  submitted  a  legacy
    questionnaire.  It was considered that his length of residence was  not
    sufficiently compelling to justify allowing him to remain in the United
    Kingdom.

12.  Mr Southey QC's grounds focus on essentially two matters, the issue  of
    the length of residence, and the relevance of Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights to the matters raised in regard to length of
    residence.  There is also a further issue as  to  the  type  of  relief
    appropriate, which I will address separately.

13.  At the heart of the former  ground  is  an  argument  that  in  essence
    contends that the respondent failed to attach appropriate  significance
    to the period of time that  the  applicant  has  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom  in  assessing  the  paragraph  395C  considerations,  and   in
    particular with regard to the respondent's policy regarding  rule  395C
    set out at chapter 53 of  the  Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance
    (chapter 53).

14.  Mr Southey was at pains to emphasise that this was not  a  case  argued
    on the basis of legacy.  He accepted that in light  of  what  had  been
    concluded by the Court of Appeal in SH (Iran) [2014] EWCA Civ  1469  it
    could not be argued that legacy entitled people  to  special,  separate
    treatment.  Though this had been a legacy case, legacy issues were only
    relevant for two limited reasons.   The  first  was  that  it  was  why
    paragraph 395C had been applied, as it had been  in  all  legacy  cases
    including this case, and because it provided some evidence  as  to  how
    paragraph 395C had been applied.

15.  I have reproduced the relevant version of chapter 53  as  an  Annex  to
    this judgment.  The particularly relevant section  is  chapter  53.1.2,
    which is concerned with relevant factors in paragraph 395C, although Mr
    Malik also emphasised the wording of the introductory paragraph to  the
    chapter which states as follows:

         "It is the policy of the agency to remove those  persons  found  to
         have entered the United Kingdom unlawfully unless  it  would  be  a
         breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR or  there  are  compelling
         reasons, usually of a compassionate nature, for not doing so in  an
         individual case."


16.  Of particular  relevance  is  the  section  in  chapter  53.1.2  headed
    "residence accrued as a result  of  delay  by  UKBA"  and  of  especial
    relevance is the final bullet point under that section which states  as
    follows:

           . Any other case where  delay  by  UKBA  has  contributed  to  a
             significant period  of  residence.   Following  an  individual
             assessment of the prospect of  enforcing  removal,  and  where
             other relevant factors apply, 4 to 6 years may  be  considered
             significant, but a more usual example would  be  a  period  of
             residence of 6 to 8 years."

17.  In Hakemi [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin), Burton J noted  the  provisions  of
    chapter 53 and witness statements of Mr Forshaw, Assistant Director  of
    UKBA and an email from Mr McEvoy, Assistant Director of the  CAAU.   He
    said at paragraph 13:

         "Rule 395C simply  sets  out  factors  which  must  be  considered.
         Chapter 53 did not affect or fetter such considerations, or  change
         them.  It gave guidance  by  way  of  a  very  broad  spectrum  for
         residence.... of 4 to 8 years.  I  say  residence,  because  it  is
         quite apparent that the reference in chapter  53.1.2  in  the  last
         bullet point of (iv) to 'delay' is not to a  delay  for  which  the
         Defendant is responsible, e.g. by way of delaying in  dealing  with
         the initial consideration, refusal (if such it be) and appeal,  but
         to 'delay' by virtue of passage of time (see further  paragraph  36
         below)."


18.  In paragraph 36, Burton J said that "delay" was simply the same as  the
    passage of time.

19.  This point was picked up by Stephen Morris QC sitting as a Deputy  High
    Court Judge in Mohammed [2012] EWHC  3091  (Admin),  at  paragraph  37,
    agreeing that the period of years identified in the last  bullet  point
    referred simply to  the  passage  of  time  (and  thus  the  period  of
    residence in question) and not particularly to  a  period  of  culpable
    delay on the part of the UKBA.

20.  Some doubt was cast on this view by Ouseley J in Jaku [2014]  EWHC  605
    (Admin), at paragraph 59 where he said:

         "I did not read it [in the way interpreted by Burton J and  Stephen
         Morris QC] since it seems to me that the heading 'residence accrued
         as a result of delay by UKBA' and the sense of the passage are that
         they relate to periods of residence which have been contributed  to
         by delays in decision making.  The effect of periods  of  residence
         on the prospects of leave being granted is left  quite  open  under
         the heading 'personal history'. "


21.  However, at paragraph 60 he went on to say that he  understood  Counsel
    for the Secretary of State to accept that what was said in  Hakemi  and
    Mohammed on the point were correct interpretations of the policy and in
    that light he did not consider it appropriate  to  reject  the  earlier
    judgments.

22.  Subsequent to the hearing I received a communication from Mr Malik,  as
    a consequence of a request I made towards the close of the hearing,  to
    the effect that Ouseley J may  have  misunderstood  what  was  said  by
    Counsel in Jaku and the respondent intended to make  no  concession  in
    that regard in that case and in any event made  no  concession  in  the
    present case.  In a response  to  this,  Mr  Southey  has  argued  that
    Ouseley J did not express a  decided  view  on  the  interpretation  of
    chapter 53 in Jaku, and that his concerns need to be  set  against  the
    decisions in Hakemi and Mohammed and the language  of  chapter  53,  in
    particular that delay on the part of UKBA need only have  "contributed"
    to residence.

23.  For my own part I have sympathy with the doubts of Ouseley  J  in  this
    regard.  It seems a somewhat curious use of language to  interpret  the
    phrase "residence accrued as a result of delay by  UKBA"  as  referring
    simply to the elapsing of time, but the weight of authority and  indeed
    Ouseley J's acceptance of the weight of that authority is against  that
    view and in the circumstances I accept the interpretation  of  this  as
    set out in Hakemi and Mohammed.

24.  Mohammed is a case upon which Mr  Southey  attaches  particular  weight
    since he says that it is the one most on fours with the  instant  case.
    To understand the relevance of this it is necessary to consider briefly
    the period and circumstances of residence  of  the  applicant.   It  is
    common ground that he was an absconder between 28 October 2003  and  15
    August 2007.  Otherwise, Mr Southey argues, he  was  not  an  absconder
    since, prior to 28 October 2003 he was an asylum claimant and after  15
    August  2007  he  was  a  person  who  had  made  an  application   for
    consideration under the legacy arrangements.

25.  By contrast Mr Malik argues that the applicant was  put  on  notice  in
    the respondent's letter of 15  November  2007  to  the  fact  that  his
    immigration status in the United Kingdom remained unchanged, and argues
    that therefore he continued to be an absconder.  He argued that in 2003
    the applicant had been told to report to a particular address  and  had
    not done so and the reporting requirement remained.  Mr Malik had  been
    unable to provide the documentation from 2003 but he provided a copy of
    the letter that had been sent to the applicant in  2013  and  submitted
    that  the  content  would   have   remained   essentially   the   same.
    Accordingly, he argued, the applicant as a person  who  had  failed  to
    report remained an absconder as all he had done in 2007  was  to  write
    asking for  consideration  under  the  legacy  programme  but  had  not
    reported as he originally had been told to do in 2003.

26.  Mr Southey argued that it was necessary to bear in  mind  the  previous
    paragraph of the letter when it was made clear to the applicant that he
    should not write in, otherwise there would be delay in dealing with his
    case.

27.  In the circumstances I do not think it would be right  to  characterise
    the applicant as an absconder after 15 August 2007.  It  has  not  been
    possible to provide documentation from 2003 to show the terms on  which
    he was required to report and I think in  the  circumstances  he  would
    have been entitled in any event to  conclude  from  the  terms  of  the
    penultimate paragraph of the respondent's letter to him of 15  November
    2007 that his application had been acknowledged and no more  was  asked
    of him.  There was no reference in that letter to an ongoing obligation
    to report: indeed he was discouraged from keeping in touch, and  it  is
    not suggested in the decision letter that he was an absconder after  15
    August 2007.  I therefore agree with Mr Southey  that  other  than  the
    period of some three years and ten months when he was an  absconder  he
    was not in the United Kingdom prior to that  period  or  thereafter  in
    breach of conditions.

28.  The significance of this, Mr Southey argues, is that the  applicant  is
    a person who on any reckoning has had more than six years in the United
    Kingdom other than as an absconder, and  that  that  distinguishes  him
    from the applicant in cases such as Jaku and in Hamzeh [2013] EWHC 4113
    (Admin), to which I shall have to turn in due course.

29.  Returning for the moment to Mohammed  however,  the  claimant  in  that
    case had been in the United Kingdom since 19 December  2001,  initially
    on a visa which expired in April 2002, and  thereafter  as  an  illegal
    overstayer, an asylum seeker and an applicant for indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  The judge noted the evidence of  Mr  Forshaw  which  had  been
    considered in Hakemi, including reference to the fact that "all  things
    being equal" six years' residence would result in a grant of leave.  Mr
    Morris QC at paragraph 74 in Mohammed stated that what was said in  the
    guidance about length of residence had particular relevance in a legacy
    case.  He went on to say at paragraph  75  that  in  his  judgment  the
    effect of paragraph 53.1.2 that weight was to be placed on  significant
    periods of residence and that  guidance  was  then  given  as  to  what
    periods of residence were to be considered or might be considered to be
    significant, and in a case such as that of the claimant  before  him  a
    period of 6 to 8 years was or might be considered  to  be  significant.
    Clearly such a significant period of residence was to weigh as a factor
    operating against removal.  He considered that  the  caseworker  should
    have consciously taken that  into  account.   He  went  on  to  say  at
    paragraph 76:

         "In my judgment if it were the case, on the facts, that the  person
         responsible for a decision under paragraph 395C  had  not  in  fact
         taken into account the Chapter  53  guidance  in  general  nor,  in
         particular, what is said there about length of residence, then that
         would amount to a failure to apply relevant policy and a failure to
         take account of a  relevant  consideration  and  would  render  the
         decision taken Wednesbury unreasonable or otherwise unfair...".

30.  He went on  to  say  (at  paragraph  78)  that  there  was  no  express
    reference in the decision letter to the chapter 53  guidance  and  that
    the letter merely enumerated the paragraph 395C factors, said that  the
    defendant  had  considered  those  factors  and  then  in  the  ensuing
    narrative gave the reasons for the decision applying those factors.  He
    noted that it was submitted on behalf of the respondent that there  was
    no requirement for such an express reference, and considered that  that
    might be so, but in the present case there  was  no  reference  in  the
    express terms of the letter to the fact that residence of  between  six
    to eight years was a significant fact or that it weighted in favour  of
    the grant of leave to remain.  All there was was the assertion  of  the
    bald fact of the claimant's residence of ten years and  one  month  and
    there was no indication in the letter  that  the  length  of  residence
    section of paragraph 53.1.2 had been consciously considered.   He  said
    that for example the letter did not say "it is noted that  you  resided
    in the UK for more than six to eight years, but other factors  in  your
    case  outweigh  the  length  of  your  residence".   He  accepted   the
    respondent's submission that the decision ultimately reached might  not
    necessarily be inconsistent with a proper application of the  paragraph
    395C factors or even the chapter 53 guidance, but he was not  satisfied
    that the respondent had specifically considered the chapter 53 guidance
    and in particular the provisions addressing  length  of  residence  and
    that there was no evidence that the claimant's residence of  more  than
    ten years was weighed in the balance as being a significant factor.  He
    went on to say at paragraph 86 that it was important in a  legacy  case
    such as this where a long period of residence is plainly liable to be a
    factor of weight, and where the defendant's own guidance indicates that
    it is, that it is considered by the decision maker.

31.  Mr Malik attaches significance to what was said by Simler J in  Hamzeh.
      This  was  again  a  legacy  case  and  indeed  was  the  lead   case
    unsuccessfully appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SH  (Iran).   At
    paragraph 35 Simler J noted what had been said by Stephen Morris QC  in
    Mohammed at paragraph 71:

         "I do not consider that it is arguable that there was a policy that
         leave would be granted on the basis of a sufficient long period  of
         residence alone."


32.  Simler J went on to give specific consideration to issues about  length
    of residence at paragraphs 79 to 95 of  her  judgment.   She  made  the
    point at paragraph 81 that where an individual  had  failed  to  comply
    with  UK  immigration  law,  for  example  by  failing  to  report   or
    absconding, that this was likely to weigh heavily against them  in  the
    chapter 53 consideration.  She noted at paragraph 82  that  chapter  53
    requires a holistic consideration of the relevant factors and  that  no
    single factor is identified as an overriding  or  determinative  factor
    and that the guidance expressly  states  that  the  discretion  not  to
    remove on the basis of exceptional circumstances will not be  exercised
    on the basis of one factor alone.  At paragraph 88 she  commented  that
    courts had repeatedly emphasised that the factors listed  in  paragraph
    395C and chapter 53 were not requirements to be met and nor  were  they
    an exhaustive list.  She accepted that it was the case that  there  was
    no requirement for any express reference to  these  paragraphs  or  the
    guidance in order for a decision to be lawful.  She  regarded  Mohammed
    as an example of a case in which on its facts the court held  that  the
    decision maker had not had sufficient regard to the guidance  and  said
    that as long as the guidance was considered and applied  there  was  no
    requirement to make express reference to it or to each factor listed.

33.  She went on to say, at paragraph  89,  citing  Westech  College  [2011]
    EWHC 1484 (Admin) that the court should not intervene to grant judicial
    review simply because the reasons given may disclose an error  of  law,
    unless the perceived deficiency in reasoning denotes that the  decision
    is flawed by error of law.  Accordingly, insofar as  the  reasoning  in
    any of the refusal decisions in those cases was deficient,  unless  the
    defective reasoning indicated or demonstrated  that  there  would  have
    been a different outcome (so that the decision was in error of law) the
    court should not intervene.

34.  At paragraph 91 she noted that the sole factor apart from  removability
    in the cases before her was length of residence and that in  each  case
    it was submitted that the length of  residence  between  four  and  ten
    years would by itself ordinarily justify the grant of leave to  remain.
    She commented that length of residence was considered in the context of
    compliance with UK immigration laws, and went on to say the following:

         "Where an individual has never had leave to enter, has  his  asylum
         claim refused and an  appeal  dismissed  and  thereafter  fails  to
         comply with reporting  restrictions  or  absconds,  the  length  of
         residence resulting from deliberate evasion of the  authorities  is
         most unlikely to weigh in that individual's favour of a grant."

35.  As regards the issue of the relevance of the period of absconding,  she
    stated at paragraph 93 that the wording and spirit of chapter 53  meant
    that periods of absconding did not count in an individual's  favour  as
    part of any significant period of long residence.

36.  Subsequently, in Jaku, Ouseley J referred to the  other  cases  raising
    issues about the effect of the legacy  programme  on  the  respondent's
    decisions on purported fresh claims  made  by  the  claimants.   It  is
    relevant to set out in full paragraph 6 of Jaku:

         "6.  At the heart of much of the litigation  over  the  years  have
             been  eventually  largely  fruitless  and   in   my   judgment
             misconceived attempts by claimants to show that  there  was  a
             special and more favourable policy which should be applied  to
             those in the Legacy Programme, derived from a target or aim as
             to the date by when decisions would be made.  This target then
             was elevated into a legitimate  expectation;  missing  it  was
             said to create unlawful delay such as to  create  an  historic
             injustice, leading to arguments that particular forms of leave
             should be granted, that policies should be treated as  frozen,
             that particular periods of residence  should  be  given  great
             weight,  all  deriving  from  a  misreading  of   policy   and
             especially of alleged policy documents at a  level  below  the
             EIG."


37.  This passage was specifically approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in  RN
    (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 938 at paragraph 24, and also by the  Court
    of Appeal in SH (Iran), at paragraph 52.

38.  Mr Southey argues that this passage and the approval of it have  to  be
    seen in the context of the legacy programme which is not, he says, what
    this case is about.  That is no doubt right in a narrower sense, but  I
    consider that the reference in particular to  a  flawed  argument  that
    particular periods of residence should be given great weight is  not  a
    matter that is specifically confined to legacy  issues  any  more  than
    other remarks in these cases upon which Mr Southey has relied,  are  so
    limited.

39.  I have noted above the discussion in Jaku  about  the  meaning  of  the
    word "delay" in the final bullet point  under  the  heading  "residence
    accrued as a result of delay by UKBA", paragraph 53.1.2.  Of  relevance
    to the particular issue with which I am concerned at this point in  the
    judgment is paragraph 61 of Jaku. This again is worth quoting in full:

         "61. I think that Mr Morris rather overstated the  significance  in
             paragraph 78 of Mohammed if  he  was  requiring  the  SSHD  to
             demonstrate that she had given the period  significant  weight
             in her thinking in order to show that she had properly applied
             her policy.   Or  at  least,  what  he  said  has  been  given
             significantly  greater  significance  than  he   intended   in
             relation  to  how  such  a  period  of  residence  should   be
             approached.  There is no requirement for an express  reference
             to the EIG for the SSHD to show that it has  been  considered;
             nor is it necessary for her to demonstrate that  it  had  been
             given significant weight.  It is necessary for a  decision  to
             show that the period of residence of six  years  or  more  has
             been considered in the round with all the other factors.   The
             significance of that period of residence may be diminished  by
             residence if non-compliant, or discounted by periods  of  non-
             compliance; it matters not precisely how  that  is  expressed.
             But all that is required is that the decision  should  explain
             why leave has not been granted  after  six  years'  residence.
             The fact that all or a significant proportion  of  the  period
             was non-compliant with  the  law  is  of  itself  a  perfectly
             satisfactory reason for discounting the period, on  the  basis
             set out in the EIG."


40.  I take Mr Southey's point that none of these cases other than  Mohammed
    were concerned with  persons  who  had  six  years  or  more  compliant
    residence.  I also take his point that, noting the specific wording  of
    the policy, it is a matter of delay by UKBA, as interpreted  in  Hakemi
    and Mohammed contributing to a significant period of residence.

41.  It is however important to bear in mind that both Hamzeh and Jaku  were
    specifically approved by the Court of Appeal in SH (Iran) and Jaku  was
    also specifically  approved  in  RN  (Sri  Lanka).   Neither  of  those
    authorities contains any reference to Mohammed.  Both Hamzeh  and  Jaku
    have the  clear  support  of  higher  authority  and  I  consider  that
    significant weight must be attached to the passages that I have set out
    above from those two judgments.  Length of residence is only one of the
    factors to be taken into account,  there  is  no  obligation  to  refer
    expressly to chapter 53 (a matter of common ground, I think,) and where
    a person has never had leave to enter, has had his asylum claim refused
    and whose appeal has been dismissed and who thereafter fails to  comply
    with reporting conditions or absconds, it is  most  unlikely  that  the
    length  of  residence  resulting  from  a  deliberate  evasion  of  the
    authorities will weigh in his  favour.   I  accept  that  that  is  not
    directly applicable to the facts of this case in its entirety, but  the
    thinking behind it is nevertheless relevant.

42.  I also attach weight to what was  said  in  Jaku  at  paragraph  61,  a
    passage upon which  both  parties  relied,  in  my  assessment  of  the
    decision in this case.  I do not read the statement by Ouseley  J  that
    it is necessary for a decision to show that the period of residence  of
    six years or more has been considered in the round with all  the  other
    factors and the requirement that the decision should explain why  leave
    has not been granted  after  six  years'  residence,  as  requiring  an
    express reference as for example in the terms  set  out  in  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 78 of Mohammed,  to  that  particular  period  of
    time.  The policy says no more than that where other  relevant  factors
    apply, four to six years may be considered significant but a more usual
    example would be a period of residence of six to eight  years.   It  is
    not appropriate to elevate this to a mandatory requirement.  The policy
    is guidance for the respondent's  caseworkers  and  contains  suggested
    periods of time  that  might  be  considered  significant  without  any
    obligation for them to be so considered.   It  is  very  clear  from  a
    reading of the decision letter in this case  that  the  respondent  was
    well aware of the period of time during which the applicant had been in
    the United Kingdom, and was also well aware of the period  of  time  of
    absconding.

43.  I agree with Mr Malik that the entire chapter must to  an  extent  take
    its colour from the first paragraph, speaking in  terms  of  compelling
    reasons usually of a compassionate nature, as being the umbrella  under
    which the policy operates.  Certainly though, as Mr Southey says,  that
    does not mean the detail within  the  policy  can  be  ignored.  It  is
    important also to bear in  mind  the  opening  paragraph  to  paragraph
    53.1.2 which emphasises the need to take the consideration of  relevant
    factors as a whole rather than individually, noting  for  example  that
    the length of residence may not of itself be a factor but it might when
    combined with age and strength of connections with the United  Kingdom.



44.  In my judgment the respondent properly evaluated the claim  before  her
    in the context of a proper  application  of  the  policy.   Mr  Southey
    accepts that there was no need to refer to the policy itself, but takes
    issue with  the  use  of  the  compelling  compassionate  circumstances
    criterion but for the reasons  set  out  above  I  consider  that  that
    argument is misplaced.  That was the context in which  the  chapter  53
    evaluation would require to be made, and although there is  no  express
    reference to the policy, it is to my mind sufficiently clear  from  the
    detail in the decision letter that the decision maker was aware of  the
    period of residence in the United Kingdom and took  that  into  account
    together with the other factors that were of relevance.  Accordingly  I
    do not consider that there is any public law error in the evaluation of
    the fresh claim in  this  case  as  regards  the  issue  of  length  of
    residence or otherwise.

45.  As regards the Article 8 evaluation,  Mr  Southey  argues  among  other
    things that the failure to give proper weight to  length  of  residence
    means that  there  has  been  a  failure  to  apply  policy  and  as  a
    consequence the decision is not in accordance with the law.  This  must
    further entail that it is not proportionate either.  He argues that the
    respondent has failed to ask the correct question  and  has  failed  to
    adopt anxious scrutiny.

46.  To a large extent what I have to say about this issue follows  on  from
    my decision on the first ground.  I consider  that  the  evaluation  of
    Article 8 took  into  proper  consideration  the  period  of  time  the
    appellant has spent in the United Kingdom  as  part  not  only  of  the
    evaluation of the fresh claim in the context of paragraph 395C but also
    in the context of Article 8 where as set out above there is a  detailed
    consideration of this issue in line with the Razgar guidance.  Again  I
    find no error of law in the respondent's approach to this matter.

47.  The final issue raised by Mr Southey was that of the  form  of  relief,
    bearing in mind that paragraph 395C was repealed in 2012.  In  my  view
    this argument is academic since I am not with Mr Southey on  the  first
    two points and therefore this is not a matter on which I  need  to  say
    anything.

48.  In conclusion therefore the application is refused.   I  will  consider
    submissions on costs issues and any other matters when the decision  is
    handed down. ~~~~0~~~~

Signed:                                      Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
