
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Uddin (2000 Order - notice to file) [2017] UKUT 00408 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 July 2017                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               Md Shahin uddin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(i)   Where the Secretary of State relies on a curtailment notice as  having
    been deemed to have been given by being placed "on file" in  accordance
    with article 8ZA(4) of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)
    Order 2000 (as amended), it is for the Secretary of State to  establish
    that that article applied.

(ii) The Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000 allows  for  the
    sending of a curtailment notice to an overseas address.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This  appeal  involves  an  issue  of  curtailment  of  leave  and  the
    application of articles 8ZA and 8ZB of the Immigration (Leave to  Enter
    and  Remain)  Order  2000  ("the  2000  Order")  as  inserted  by   the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) (Amendment)  Order  2013  ("the
    2013 Order").

 2. Although the appellant's complete immigration history is not  disclosed
    in the respondent's decision, it is apparent that he was granted  leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 30 April 2014 in order  to
    undertake a course of study at Barbican College, London.

 3. On 28 April 2014 he applied for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    student.  However, that application was refused in a decision  dated  3
    June 2014.  Although the appellant was awarded the requisite number  of
    points for having a Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  (CAS)  and
    for Maintenance (Funds), his application was refused with reference  to
    paragraph 245ZX(m) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules) on  the  basis
    that he had overstayed his leave.  The decision letter states that when
    he submitted his application on 28 April 2014 his leave to  remain  had
    already expired, on 9 December 2013, which was more than 28 days before
    the making of his application.  The decision letter went  on  to  state
    that because the appellant did not have leave to enter or remain at the
    time of his application, there was  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision.

 4. The reason the decision states that his leave to remain  expired  on  9
    December 2013 relates to an earlier  decision  dated  10  October  2013
    which purported to curtail the appellant's leave so as to expire  on  9
    December 2013.  That in turn followed from the fact  that  the  sponsor
    licence for  Barbican  College  was  revoked  on  9  March  2013.   The
    curtailment decision was made with reference to paragraph 323A(b)(i) of
    the Rules.

 5. Notwithstanding that the decision  of  3  June  2014  stated  that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal, he nevertheless  appealed  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  appeal  came  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ")  at  a  hearing  on  3  November  2016.   To
    summarise, the FtJ concluded that the appellant had been validly served
    with the curtailment decision dated 10 October 2013.  He had overstayed
    his leave and accordingly paragraph 245ZX(m)  applied.   She  therefore
    dismissed the appeal.

 6. The further background to  the  appeal  and  the  issues  arising,  are
    apparent  from  the  grounds  advanced  on  appeal  against  the  FtJ's
    decision.

    The grounds and submissions

 7. Although not expressed in this way, the grounds  can  be  divided  into
    four.  The first ground asserts that the FtJ erred in  law  in  stating
    that the appellant's  application  for  further  leave  to  remain  was
    refused under paras 322(1A) and 322(2) of  the  Rules,  whereas  it  is
    plain that it was refused with reference to para 245ZX(m).

 8. The second ground alleges error on the part of the FtJ in terms of  the
    burden of proof, in that the FtJ had said that it was for the appellant
    to prove that he did not receive the notice of  curtailment  (dated  10
    October 2013).

 9. The third ground concerns the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the  evidence  of
    service of the notice of curtailment on the appellant  given  that  the
    curtailment decision or notice itself records that it  was  "Served  on
    File".  The fourth ground relates to the FtJ's assessment of Article  8
    of the ECHR.

10. In  submissions,  Mr  Jarvis  argued  that  it  was  permissible,  with
    reference to art 8ZA(4) of the 2000 Order,  to  serve  the  curtailment
    decision 'to file'.  The reason for that in this case was that the only
    address that the respondent had for the appellant  was  in  Bangladesh,
    that being an address provided when he applied for entry clearance.  It
    was only in 2014 that the Home Office was notified of  the  appellant's
    address of 205 High Street (in London).  Art 8ZA was brought in  on  12
    July 2013 after the decision in Syed (curtailment of  leave  -  notice)
    [2013] UKUT 00144 (IAC).  Art 8ZA(3) applied in this case, it was said,
    because there was  no  postal  or  e-mail  address  for  correspondence
    provided by the appellant.

11. Accordingly, the FtJ in this case acted lawfully in concluding that the
    respondent was entitled to serve the notice of curtailment to file.

12. So far as  concerns  the  possibility  of  service  at  an  address  in
    Bangladesh, it was submitted that that would not come within the  terms
    of the 2000 Order.

13. Furthermore, although  it  may  be  that  the  appellant's  address  in
    Bangladesh was, or still is, the family home,  it  might  not  be.   It
    might be rented accommodation.  In this case there was no communication
    from the appellant as to where in the UK he was living.  The licence of
    the college had been revoked in March 2013.

14. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that "in  principle"  there
    was a burden of proof on the respondent,  at  least  in  terms  of  the
    initial facts, to establish that there had been service of the  notice.



15. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that art 8ZA  does  provide
    for overseas service.  In any event, given what  is  said  in  art  8ZB
    about the presumptions in relation to postal service outside the United
    Kingdom, by implication service at an overseas address is  contemplated
    within the 2000 Order.

16. I was referred to the decision in Shoaib v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWHC 2010 (Admin), in particular at para  46.ix)
    in terms of  the  permissibility  of  service  to  an  overseas  postal
    address.

17. It was further submitted that if the curtailment notice was not validly
    served, the appellant's application for further leave to remain  on  28
    April 2014 was made in time.  He therefore had a right  of  appeal  and
    should have been granted leave to remain.  Furthermore,  there  was  no
    procedure for requiring the appellant to provide an address in  the  UK
    and he should not therefore be disadvantaged.




    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

18. The FtJ said at [1] that  the  application  for  leave  to  remain  was
    refused with reference to paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2) of the Rules.

19. At [7] she stated that she found that at the date  of  the  application
    for further leave to remain the appellant had overstayed by  more  than
    28 days, having been validly served with a  curtailment  notice  on  10
    October 2013, his leave having been curtailed to 9 December 2013.   She
    went on to state that despite his  leave  having  been  curtailed,  the
    appellant did not make any further application to change his sponsor or
    to obtain further leave to remain in the seven months after the licence
    was revoked.  The appellant told the FtJ that his last  lesson  was  in
    October 2013 but after that he went to the college but  it  was  closed
    and he could not get in.  He had said that he was waiting to hear  from
    the Home Office.  However, he accepted in cross-examination that he had
    made no effort to get in touch with the Home Office.

20. At [8] the FtJ said that she accepted the evidence  of  the  respondent
    contained in the bundle to the effect that  the  curtailment  of  leave
    notice was served on the appellant.  She  rejected  the  argument  that
    there was any breach of common law duty to act fairly.  She  noted  the
    argument to the effect  that  she  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
    curtailment notice was properly served, and that no evidence of service
    had  been  provided.   She  distinguished  the  circumstances  of   the
    appellant in the case of Syed on the basis that  there  the  respondent
    had accepted that the curtailment notice had not been properly  served.
    She referred to an e-mail in the bundle before her  which  stated  that
    the curtailment notice was served on 10 October 2013.

21. At [10] she went on to state that it was for the appellant to prove  on
    a balance of probabilities that he did not  receive  the  notice.   She
    referred to the appellant's evidence as to his having lived at 205 High
    Street, but then having changed address to that recorded on his witness
    statement.  The appellant had initially said that  he  changed  address
    "last week" and then said it was about two weeks ago.  She  noted  that
    neither the Home Office nor the Tribunal  have  been  notified  of  the
    change of address and  when  there  had  been  an  application  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing on 1 November 2016, yet a different  address
    (in Reading) was recorded on the medical evidence  in  support  of  the
    adjournment application.  She also referred to his evidence that he did
    not live at that address in Reading but that it was a friend's  address
    where he was staying.

22. She concluded that the appellant was not a credible witness in relation
    to his evidence as to his addresses.  She also concluded  that  it  was
    not credible that he would carry on attending classes until October and
    that when the College shut he would do nothing about it but simply wait
    for the College to contact him.  She then stated that in the  light  of
    her findings on credibility, she did not accept that he did not receive
    the curtailment notice.

23. At [11] her findings are summarised.  She concluded that the respondent
    had not acted in breach of any duty to act fairly.  The  appellant  did
    not have a valid sponsor for seven  months  prior  to  the  curtailment
    notice, and he then took no action.  She did not  accept  his  evidence
    about his different  addresses,  and  the  notice  of  curtailment  was
    validly served.  Thus, the appellant had overstayed and did not satisfy
    the requirement of paragraph 245ZX(m).

24. She then went on to deal with Article 8, concluding that the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Article 8 Rules, that there  would
    be no interference with family or private life, alternatively that  any
    interference would be proportionate.

    Conclusions

25. As well as the decisions to which I have already referred,  I  directed
    the parties' attention to two further decisions which concern the  2000
    Order, these being R (on the application of  Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (effective  service  -  2000  Order)  IJR
    [2016] UKUT 0057  (IAC)  and  R  (on  the  application  of  Khurram)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (effective  service;  2000
    Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 00281 (IAC),  given  that  they  are  relatively
    recent decisions which consider aspects of  the  2000  Order.  However,
    neither party made submissions in relation to either case, and they are
    not directly relevant to the issues arising in this appeal.

26. Art 8ZA provides as follows:

         "8ZA.- Grant, refusal or variation of leave by notice in writing

         (1) A notice in writing-

         (a) giving leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

         (b) refusing leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

         (c) refusing to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom; or

         (d) varying a person's leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom,

         may be given to the person affected as required by section 4(1)  of
         the Act as follows.

         (2) The notice may be-

         (a) given by hand;

         (b) sent by fax;

         (c) sent by  postal  service  to  a  postal  address  provided  for
         correspondence by the person or the person's representative;

         (d)  sent  electronically  to  an  e-mail  address   provided   for
         correspondence by the person or the person's representative;

         (e) sent by document exchange to  a  document  exchange  number  or
         address; or

         (f) sent by courier.

         (3) Where no postal or e-mail address for correspondence  has  been
         provided, the notice may be sent-

         (a) by postal service to-

         (i) the last-known or usual place of abode, place of study or place
         of business of the person; or

         (ii) the last-known or usual place  of  business  of  the  person's
         representative; or

         (b) electronically to-

         (i) the last-known e-mail address for the person (including at  the
         person's last-known place of study or place of business); or

         (ii) the last-known e-mail address of the person's representative.

         (4) Where attempts to give notice in accordance with paragraphs (2)
         and (3) are not possible or have failed,  when  the  decision-maker
         records the reasons for this and places  the  notice  on  file  the
         notice shall be deemed to have been given.

         (5) Where a notice is deemed to have been given in accordance  with
         paragraph (4) and then subsequently  the  person  is  located,  the
         person shall as soon as is practicable  be  given  a  copy  of  the
         notice and details of when and how it was given.

         (6) A notice given under this article may, in the case of a  person
         who is under 18 years of age and does not have a representative, be
         given to the parent, guardian or another adult  who  for  the  time
         being takes responsibility for the child."

27. Art 8ZB provides the following  in  relation  to  certain  presumptions
    about receipt of a notice:

         "8ZB.- Presumptions about receipt of notice

         (1) Where a notice is sent in accordance with article 8ZA, it shall
         be deemed to have been given to the  person  affected,  unless  the
         contrary is proved-

         (a) where the notice is sent by postal service-

         (i) on the second day after it was sent by postal service in  which
         delivery or receipt is recorded if  sent  to  a  place  within  the
         United Kingdom;

         (ii) on the 28th day after it was posted if sent to a place outside
         the United Kingdom;

         (b) where the notice is sent by fax, e-mail, document  exchange  or
         courier, on the day it was sent.

         ..."

28. So far as ground 1 is concerned, I am not satisfied that there  is  any
    error of law in the FtJ's decision.  Although she plainly  did  make  a
    mistake at [1] of her  decision  in  stating  that  it  was  paragraphs
    322(1A)  and  322(2)  of  the  Rules  which  were  the  basis  of   the
    respondent's decision, it is plain from her decision  from  that  point
    onwards that she recognised that the issue was one of overstaying.   In
    the same paragraph she identified that as the issue,  and  referred  to
    para 245ZX(m) at [11].  She plainly made her findings  in  relation  to
    the issue of overstaying, and those findings are the very basis of  the
    complaint in the grounds.

29. At [10] the FtJ said that it was for the appellant  to  prove,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, that  he  did  not  receive  the  notice  (of
    curtailment) but that is at best an incomplete statement of  the  legal
    position. Mr Jarvis accepted that the Secretary of State does,  in  the
    first instance, have to "make out a case" in relation  to  the  (method
    of) giving of notice, and that in that respect there  is  a  burden  of
    proof on the Secretary of State. I was not referred to any  authorities
    on that distinct point.  Certainly,  in  Syed,  which  was  not  itself
    concerned with the 2000  Order,  but  with  the  Immigration  (Notices)
    Regulations 2003, it was decided that it was for the Secretary of State
    to prove that the notice of curtailment  of  leave  in  that  case  was
    communicated to the person concerned, in order for it to be  effective.
    In Mahmood it was assumed that the burden of proof is on the respondent
    to prove notice of curtailment was given, (see for example [69]).

30.  Although,  of  course,  art  8ZB  provides  for   certain   rebuttable
    presumptions in terms of the  giving  of  a  notice,  it  is  right  in
    principle for the respondent to have to establish the facts giving rise
    to those presumptions, such as for example  that  notice  was  sent  by
    post, fax, e-mail etc.  Not only is  that  proposition  'in  principle'
    legally justifiable, it also makes good practical  sense  in  that  the
    information as to whether a notice was sent is information  within  the
    respondent's knowledge and not of an  appellant,  who  would  otherwise
    have to prove a negative.

31. Although the FtJ recognised that the curtailment decision on  its  face
    is stated as having been "Served on File", there is  no  assessment  by
    her of the basis upon which the respondent was entitled to rely on  the
    notice having been placed "on file", and thus deemed to have been given
    in accordance with art 8ZA(4).  Indeed, there is no  reference  to  the
    2000 Order at all in the FtJ's decision, although in fairness it is not
    apparent that she was referred to its provisions.

32. Although the FtJ rejected the appellant's credibility in terms  of  his
    various addresses, that was  not  a  sufficient  basis  from  which  to
    conclude that the curtailment notice  was  properly  given.   This  can
    quite simply be demonstrated with reference to the terms of art  8ZA(2)
    and (3).  To summarise, a notice may be given by hand or may be sent by
    various means, and where attempts to give  notice  in  accordance  with
    paragraphs (2) and (3) are not  possible  or  have  failed,  notice  is
    deemed to be given when the decision-maker records the reasons for  the
    failure of those attempts and places the notice on file, and the notice
    shall be deemed  to  have  been  given.   However,  evidence  of  those
    attempts  at  giving  notice  must  necessarily  therefore,  form   the
    foundation for the "notice on file".   There  was  simply  no  evidence
    before the FtJ  as  to  what  efforts  were  made  to  give  notice  of
    curtailment to the appellant.

33. A similar situation arose  in  Shoaib  which  was  an  application  for
    judicial review of a decision  to  curtail  leave  and  to  detain  the
    claimant.  He had entered the UK as a student but the  sponsor  licence
    was revoked in February 2013.  The curtailment decision was  placed  on
    file.  The issue in the proceedings before the Deputy High Court  Judge
    was whether the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    provisions of art 8ZA(4) of the 2000 Order (notice on file,  deemed  to
    have been given).

34. The argument for the claimant,  materially  for  the  purposes  of  the
    appeal before  me,  was  that  the  defendant  could  have  served  the
    curtailment notice on the postal address in Pakistan which the claimant
    gave when making his  application  for  entry  clearance.   The  Deputy
    concluded that a postal address  provided  for  correspondence  may  be
    outside the UK.  It was concluded that as there  was  no  procedure  in
    place, to which the deputy's attention was drawn in any event, by which
    a migrant is asked to provide an address for correspondence,  it  would
    be difficult to conclude that the address which was given (in  Pakistan
    in  that  case)  was   not   given,   amongst   other   purposes,   for
    correspondence.   In  that  case,   the   defendant's   General   Cases
    Information Database ("GCID")   did not provide an  explanation  as  to
    why it was not possible to serve the notice on the address in Pakistan.
     Although the GCID case record sheet  did  state  that  the  claimant's
    whereabouts were unknown, there  was  no  record  of  a  representative
    acting for him, the officials were unable to contact the sponsor for  a
    last known UK address and they did not  have  an  e-mail  address.  The
    record did not however, state that it was not  possible  to  serve  the
    decision notice on the address in Pakistan.

35. It was concluded therefore, that the defendant had erred when she found
    that it was not possible to give notice in accordance with  art  8ZA(2)
    of the  2000  Order.   The  "jurisdictional  pre-requisite"  to  permit
    reliance on art 8ZA(4) of the 2000 Order was not met, as it  could  not
    be said that it was not possible to give notice  to  a  postal  address
    provided for correspondence by the claimant, as  a  letter  could  have
    been sent to the address in Pakistan which had been supplied by him and
    was recorded as his 'local address'.

36. In the alternative, the decision that  it  was  not  possible  to  give
    notice to a postal address for correspondence was irrational,  as  such
    an address, the 'local address' in Pakistan, had been provided  by  the
    claimant.  Further, the reasons, as required by art 8ZA(4) of the  2000
    Order, given by the defendant for concluding that it was  not  possible
    to serve the decision notice to an address were deficient, as there was
    no explanation in the GCID Case Record Sheet  as  to  why  it  was  not
    possible to send the notice to the local address in Pakistan.

37. The argument on behalf of the claimant in relation  to  the  giving  of
    notice in accordance with art 8ZA(3) to the last known place  of  abode
    or place of study, was however, rejected.

38. In Shoaib the Deputy was referred to the Secretary of State's  guidance
    on Curtailment of Leave, which is set out at  [27]  of  that  decision.
    Neither party relied on that guidance  before  me  and  I  respectfully
    agree with what was said in Shoaib to the  effect  that  that  guidance
    does not assist in interpreting the effect of the 2000 Order (see  also
    Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16).

39. Before me, Mr Jarvis referred to GCID system notes  which  stated  that
    the curtailment decision was served to file because  the  only  address
    was an address in Bangladesh which had been provided when the appellant
    had applied for entry clearance.  However, no further justification  or
    explanation appears to have been recorded.  It  is  apparent  that  the
    respondent did have an address for the appellant, albeit an address  in
    Bangladesh.

40. In Shoaib the claimant's address was described  as  a  'local  address'
    which, as I understood  Mr  Jarvis's  submissions,  is  said  to  be  a
    relevant distinction between that case and the appeal before me.

41. The proposition that the 2000 Order does not make provision for service
    to an address outside  the  UK  is  inconsistent  with  art  8ZB  which
    provides for a presumption about receipt of a notice where it  is  sent
    to a place outside the UK (8ZB(1)(a)(ii)).

42. I cannot see any significant distinction between the facts of the  case
    in Shoaib and that in the appeal before me.  The Deputy concluded  that
    it was irrational for the defendant in that case to  conclude  that  it
    was not possible to give notice to a postal address for  correspondence
    where the address had been provided by the  claimant.   The  fact  that
    that address was recorded as  his  'local  address'  hardly  makes  any
    difference, it seems to me.  In the appeal before me it is evident that
    the respondent had an address for the appellant in Bangladesh and there
    was nothing to indicate that it  was  possibly  a  rented  address,  as
    hypothesised by Mr  Jarvis,  or  that  it  was  an  address  which  was
    evidently not to be used for correspondence.

43. Art 8ZA(4) makes it clear that a prerequisite for a notice to be placed
    "on file" and therefore notice deemed to have been given, is that there
    have been attempts to give notice in accordance with paragraphs (2)  or
    (3) which have not been possible or have failed.  There is no  evidence
    at all of any attempt by the respondent to have  sent  the  curtailment
    notice  by  postal  service  to   a   postal   address   provided   for
    correspondence by the appellant under art 8ZA(2)(c).

44. It follows therefore, that the appellant's leave to enter granted until
    30 April 2014 was not validly curtailed.  The  further  consequence  is
    that his application for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student
    made on 28 April 2014 was in time.  The respondent's decision  that  he
    had overstayed was in error, and paragraph 245ZX(m) did  not  apply  to
    him.  The FtJ's decision to  the  contrary  was  itself  therefore,  in
    error.

45. Although the FtJ did not conclude that the appellant had  no  right  of
    appeal, which should have followed from her conclusions on the facts, I
    am satisfied that the appellant did have a right of appeal and that the
    First-tier Tribunal did have jurisdiction to consider the appeal.

46. Having concluded that the FtJ erred in law in the respects to  which  I
    have referred, I set aside  her  decision,  the  errors  of  law  being
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  In  re-making  the  decision  I
    take into account that the respondent awarded the appellant the  points
    claimed for a CAS and for Maintenance (Funds).  It  follows  therefore,
    that the respondent was wrong to refuse  the  application  for  further
    leave to remain, no other aspect of the Rules having been in issue.

47. In the light of those conclusions, it  is  not  necessary  to  consider
    further the ground in relation to Article 8.

48. Accordingly, I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.




    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the  decision  is  re-
    made, allowing the appeal.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            8/09/17





