
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of MW) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(Fast track appeal: Devaseelan guidelines) [2019] UKUT 00411 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 September 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between
                                  THE QUEEN
                            ON THE APPLICATION OF
                               MW (Sri lanka)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Anderson, Counsel instructed by the Government
                  Legal Department

(1)   The fact that an  appeal  was  decided  pursuant  to  the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Fast Track Procedure) Rules 2005 does  not  mean  that
the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  decision  necessarily  falls  to  be
materially reduced, when applying the Guidelines in Devaseelan  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2002] UKAIT 702.

(2)  Under those Guidelines, the first judicial decision  is  "the  starting
point"  for  the  subsequent  judicial  fact-finder.  The  "starting  point"
principle is not a legal straitjacket. It permits subsequent judicial  fact-
finders to depart from the earlier judicial decision  on  a  principled  and
properly-reasoned basis.

                                  JUDGMENT

A. INTRODUCTION

 1. The applicant seeks judicial review of the respondent's decision of  30
    June 2015 to decline to treat the applicant's further submissions as  a
    "fresh claim" pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.   The
    application raises the issue of the significance, or  otherwise,  to  a
    decision on whether the submissions amount to a fresh asylum  or  human
    rights claim, of the fact that the applicant had an appeal dismissed by
    the First-tier Tribunal on asylum (now, protection) grounds  and  human
    rights grounds, where that appeal was decided pursuant  to  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Fast  Track  Procedure)  Rules  2005.   Those
    Rules were declared by Ouseley J to be ultra vires in a judgment of  20
    January 2017 ([2017] EWHC 59 (Admin)).  Ouseley J found, however,  that
    appeal decisions made under the Rules were not automatic nullities  and
    therefore require an application to be made to set them aside.

 2. Ouseley J envisaged that an  application  to  set  aside  a  particular
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal under the  Fast  Track  Rules  2005
    would be made to, and determined by, that Tribunal, pursuant to rule 32
    of the current Procedure Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal, however, held
    that  it  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  do  this.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusion was upheld by a Divisional Court (sitting also as
    a Court of Appeal to determine an appeal against Ouseley J's judgment):
    TN (Vietnam) and Another v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    and Another [2018] EWCA Civ 2838.

B.  HISTORY

(a) The applicant's asylum claim

 3. After that brief introduction  to  the  main  issue  in  this  judicial
    review, it is necessary to engage with the somewhat complex history  of
    the current application.  The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born
    in 1986.  He has a twin brother, who also features prominently  in  the
    account that follows.  The applicant and his brother entered the United
    Kingdom in September 2009, with entry clearance as students.  In  2010,
    they each applied for, and were granted, limited  leave  to  remain  as
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrants.  A day before that leave was due  to
    expire, both of them applied for leave as Tier  4  (General)  Students,
    which was also granted.

 4. However, in March 2014 the brothers were encountered working in  breach
    of their visas and enforcement action was commenced.  Three days later,
    each of them claimed asylum, some four and half years  after  they  had
    entered the United Kingdom.

 5. The respondent refused their claims on 24 April 2014 and on 7 May 2014,
    their appeals were heard at Hatton Cross by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro. In a decision promulgated on 9  May  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pedro dismissed both of the appeals.



(b) The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision needs to be examined  in  some
    detail.  At paragraph 5, he stated that the core of the brothers' claim
    to asylum concerned the murder of a journalist named  Mr  De  Silva  in
    2006.  Mr De Silva had been working for  the  Sri  Lankan  Intelligence
    Service and the brothers claimed that he was their  cousin,  with  whom
    they had formed a close association.  Mr De  Silva  told  the  brothers
    about the nature of his work with the Intelligence Service and, indeed,
    they assisted him with  it.   Part  of  Mr  De  Silva's  work  involved
    gathering sensitive information implicating the Sri Lankan  authorities
    in war crimes and assassinations, for which reason  the  brothers  told
    the judge that they believed Mr De Silva had been  murdered  by  those
    authorities.  Although no direct threats had been  made  at  that  time
    against them, the brothers' father took the  step  of  moving  them  to
    another address where they remained in hiding, with the  only  visitors
    being two individuals known as Mohan and Ravi.

 7. The brothers believed that Mohan and Ravi  were  also  working  for  or
    associated with the Government Intelligence Service.   They  frequently
    visited the brothers' hiding place between  2006  and  2009,  when  the
    brothers left Sri Lanka for the United  Kingdom.   Shortly  before  the
    brothers departed, Mohan and Ravi came and told  them  that  they  also
    planned to leave Sri Lanka and reveal all of the sensitive  information
    they had stored on their computer to the outside world.  Mohan and Ravi
    duplicated this information on the brothers' laptop as a backup and the
    brothers subsequently took this with them to the United Kingdom.

 8. After Mohan and Ravi left the brothers' residence  in  some  haste  and
    disappeared, the brothers had no further contact with  them.   However,
    on 5 October 2009, a few days after arriving in  the  United  Kingdom,
    their father told  them  that  the  army  had  come  to  the  brothers'
    residence looking for them and had made it known that  Mohan  and  Ravi
    had been captured and killed.  The brothers' mother had been  assaulted
    and threatened with a pistol to her head, whereupon  she  revealed  the
    brothers had  left  Sri  Lanka.   The  army  warned  her  that  if  any
    information were  revealed  they  would  kill  the  entire  family  and
    demanded that the brothers returned to Sri Lanka, leaving a threatening
    note to that effect, accompanied, a few days later, by a photograph  of
    the dead bodies of Mohan and Ravi.

 9. Both brothers gave oral evidence to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro.
    He did not find them to be credible witnesses.  On the totality of  the
    evidence before him, both oral  and  documentary,  he  found  that  the
    credibility of their claim was seriously undermined.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro set out his reasons for  that  finding.
    He concluded that they had fabricated their claim and  the  facts  upon
    which it was based, in order  to  prolong  their  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom and frustrate their removal after they had ceased  any  studies
    in this country and had been arrested for  being  in  breach  of  their
    conditions of stay, detained and served with removal directions.

11. Although the core of the brothers' claim was their alleged relationship
    with Mr De Silva, the judge found  that  they  had  not  produced  any
    corroborative  evidence  of  that  claimed  relationship  as   cousins.
    Although the judge was given evidence that showed that Mr De Silva  had
    been killed and that there was a strong suspicion that  this  had  been
    instigated by the army or Intelligence Service, the  internet  material
    regarding  this  made  no  mention  at  all  of  the  brothers  or  any
    involvement  of  them  with  his  journalistic  or  other   activities.
    Although the brothers had had supporting  documents  sent  to  them  by
    their family in Sri Lanka,  including  a  statement  from  their  older
    brother and their birth certificates, the judge concluded that none  of
    this corroborated the claimed relationship with Mr De Silva.

12. The judge  went  on  to  find  that,  "quite  apart  from  the  claimed
    relationship  with  Mr  De  Silva",  the  brothers'  account  of  their
    involvement  with  his  activities  was  "riddled  with   a   lack   of
    credibility" (paragraph 22).  The judge considered it was curious that,
    although they were cousins from birth, they had  only  become  involved
    with Mr De Silva at the point of which they  became  engaged  with  his
    military intelligence work.  The judge also considered that  if  Mr  De
    Silva was, as claimed, working for  the  Intelligence  Service  against
    Tamil separatists, whilst at the same  secretly  gathering  information
    against the government, he would have made a conscious effort  to  keep
    these activities a secret.  The brothers claimed to the judge  that  Mr
    De Silva needed to do  this  as  he  required  "their  assistance  with
    writing articles as he had poor writing skills".  The judge  considered
    that that did not sit comfortably with the internet  articles  produced
    about Mr  De  Silva's  death,  which  indicated  that  he  had  been  a
    journalist since the age of 17 and "was a born  writer  as  well  as  a
    skilled speaker ... he was internally writing novels  and  poetry  ..."
    (paragraph 22).

13. The judge was also troubled by the fact that although the father of the
    brothers sent them away for their safety, he continued to reside in the
    same family home in which they had all  been  living.   The  judge  was
    puzzled as to how the brothers' father would think that  simply  moving
    the brothers to another address  would  prevent  the  authorities  from
    pursuing them, should  the  authorities  ever  become  aware  of  their
    involvement with Mr De Silva's work.

14. The judge also considered it  incredible  that  the  brothers'  father,
    having done this, would have informed Mohan and Ravi of  the  brothers'
    secret address or that the brothers  would  have  entertained  them  as
    visitors from 2006 to 2009.

15. The judge found it incredible that, although the brothers'  father  had
    decided to send the brothers abroad immediately after De Silva's  death
    in July 2006, no arrangements had been  made  until  some  three  years
    later.  The brothers said that their father needed to  save  funds  and
    that he had paid an initial course fees of  approximately  �20,000,  as
    well as funding their stay in the United Kingdom from 2009 until he had
    a stroke in 2013.  The judge considered that the father could  have  at
    least attempted to  make  arrangements  to  send  the  brothers  abroad
    "whether through an agent or otherwise, a lot earlier than  he  did  if
    really concerned as to their safety in Sri Lanka" (paragraph 25).  This
    was all the more so, given that, in  the  end,  particularly  expensive
    courses of study had been selected  for  the  brothers.  The  delay  in
    leaving strongly indicated to the judge that the brothers were never in
    fear of their safety, which  seriously  undermined  their  credibility.
    The judge found that, instead of a hasty departure, the  brothers  left
    as a result of "a carefully planned and orderly departure  designed  to
    enable them to arrive in the United Kingdom as students"  and  not  for
    reasons of international protection.  The truth of the matter was  that
    the brothers had at all times been motivated by the  desire  to  settle
    and work in the United Kingdom rather than return and  seek  employment
    in Sri Lanka.

16. At paragraph 26, the judge noted that the brothers  appeared  never  to
    have had any concerns about approaching the Sri Lankan  government  for
    passports to  be  issued  in  Colombo  in  March  2009,  in  their  own
    identities, which  they  obtained  without  apparent  difficulty.   The
    brothers also did not leave  Sri  Lanka  until  six  months  after  the
    passports had been issued to them  and  did  not  apply  for  UK  entry
    clearance as students until five more months had elapsed.

17. At paragraph 27, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  alleged
    events in Sri Lanka on 5 October 2009, at the home  of  the  brothers'
    parents.  The brothers claimed that, after the phone  call  from  their
    father, they "panicked into deleting all of the  sensitive  information
    that they held on their laptop implicating the Sri  Lankan  government"
    which had been put there by Mohan  and  Ravi.   This  was  particularly
    problematic, given that the brothers claimed that  they  had  left  Sri
    Lanka with every intention of revealing this information to bodies such
    as  the  United  Nations,  in  order  to  incriminate  the  Sri  Lankan
    government.  At the hearing, the explanation provided for the  deletion
    changed, in that the brothers told the judge that they did  so  because
    they feared the Sri Lankan government would send someone to kill  them.
    The judge did not find this explanation to be  satisfactory:  "Frankly,
    it makes no sense at all", since the brothers confirmed  they  had  not
    told the authorities that they had deleted the  information  (paragraph
    27).

18. At the time of the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro,  the
    brothers' mother was in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor,  but  she
    intended to return to Sri Lanka.  The mother, however, failed to attend
    the hearing to give oral evidence.  The brothers said that she was "too
    traumatised by the incident of  5  October  2009  and  has  a  fear  of
    attending this tribunal to give  evidence".   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not find that to be a satisfactory  or  credible  explanation
    for her failure to attend the hearing.

19. The judge also noted that the mother had made  several  visits  to  the
    United Kingdom, in order to see the brothers, returning to Sri Lanka at
    the end of every such visit.  This had been in  2010,  2011,  2012  and
    2014.  The judge found it lacked any credibility that the mother  would
    be able to travel freely in and out of Sri  Lanka  without  ever  being
    questioned on departure or return about them, if the authorities really
    believed they were of adverse interest.

20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave no weight to the document,  said  to
    have been produced by the army at the time of its visit to the house of
    the father and mother.  It was anonymous and undated, and unaccompanied
    by  any  photograph.   The  judge  considered  the  document  had  been
    manufactured.  He considered the birth certificates and other materials
    took the brothers' case nowhere.

21. At paragraph 31, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  the  delay  of
    several years in the brothers claiming asylum.  Their explanation, that
    they did not want to be a burden on the United  Kingdom  as  they  were
    young and  fit  to  work,  was  not  considered  by  the  judge  to  be
    satisfactory, as their fitness to work had no bearing on their  alleged
    need for international protection.  He also  rejected  the  explanation
    that the brothers did not want to cause problems for  their  family  in
    Sri Lanka or put them at risk.  Any asylum claim would be  confidential
    by its very nature.  Overall, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    believe any of the explanations provided by the brothers for the  delay
    in making their asylum claims.

(c) Subsequent events

22. Following the dismissal of their appeals, the applicant and his brother
    applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   This  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 15 May  2014  and  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 21 May 2014, following  which  they  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted.  The respondent then set removal directions for 6 June  2014
    but the applicant and his brother were disruptive and refused to  board
    the flight.

23. In June 2014, they made submissions which they wished to be treated  as
    a fresh claim.  Although these were rejected by the  respondent  on  27
    June 2014, she did accept that Mr  De  Silva  was  the  cousin  of  the
    brothers, on the basis of evidence produced to her.

24. On 11 July 2014, the applicant's brother was removed to Sri Lanka.   On
    14 July 2014, the applicant made another set of submissions, citing the
    alleged detention and mistreatment of his brother at the airport in Sri
    Lanka, on the latter's arrival there.  The submissions were rejected.

25. On 30 June 2015, a third set of further submissions from the  applicant
    was rejected by the respondent.  It is this decision of the  respondent
    that is the one under challenge in the present judicial review.

(d) The decision under challenge

26. After setting  out  the  immigration  history  of  the  applicant,  the
    decision of 30 June 2015 described paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the task to be undertaken by the respondent  in  relation  to
    it, as articulated by the Court of Appeal in WM (DRC)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.  The respondent was
    required "to give anxious scrutiny to the question of  whether  further
    submissions will create a  realistic  prospect  of  success  before  an
    immigration judge" (paragraph 19).

27. At paragraph 20, the letter noted that the applicant claimed  he  could
    not return to Sri Lanka due to his association with  Mr  De  Silva  and
    that he carried sensitive material on his laptop regarding  war  crimes
    in Sri Lanka, bringing this into the United Kingdom.

28. The letter continued as follows:-

         "21. Your client further claims that he cannot return to Sri  Lanka
             as he will face persecution as  the  son  of  his  father  who
             claimed to be 'Jesus Christ reborn'.  In addition, your client
             claims to be a Satanist  who  would  face  discrimination  and
             persecution on his return to Sri Lanka."

29. It is common ground that the applicant no longer seeks  to  pursue  the
    claims set out in paragraph 21 as reasons for  fearing  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

30. Beginning at paragraph 23, the letter described the Country Guidance of
    the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013]. Beginning at paragraph 28,  the  letter  examined  the
    submissions relating to the return of the applicant's  brother  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Having regard to the broad categories listed in GJ and  Others,
    and bearing in mind the fact that the applicant and his brother had not
    been arrested or detained in Sri Lanka  and  had  claimed  asylum  only
    after being detected illegally  working  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    respondent observed  that  the  applicant  and  his  brother  were  not
    journalists and had not engaged in sur place activities whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Nor had they given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
    Reconciliation Committee  or  witnessed  war  crimes.   They  were  not
    members of the LTTE nor was any member of their family such  a  member.
    It was not accepted that the applicant and  his  brother  were  on  any
    watch list or of any interest to the government of Sri Lanka.

31. Following his enforced return to Sri  Lanka,  the  applicant's  brother
    said that he had been detained and ill-treated.  This  information  had
    been conveyed by email to the applicant's solicitor,  Ms  Laura  Smith.
    The email provided an account of the applicant's detention by  the  CID
    in Colombo Airport.  His solicitor in Sri Lanka had confirmed that  the
    applicant's brother was not detained when he contacted the CID  at  the
    airport at 14:47 hours on  12  July.   The  brother  had  also  emailed
    photographs of injuries, claimed to have been received  by  him  during
    his interrogation through being hung upside down by the CID.

32. At paragraph 40, the letter noted that the brother  was  said  to  have
    been released from the airport after payment of a bribe and that he had
    been detained there for almost six  hours.   The  respondent,  however,
    rejected this account "in its entirety".  Reference  was  made  to  the
    evidence in the Country Guidance case of GS and Others, which was  that
    there were "no detention facilities at the airport, if a  returnee  was
    of interest by reason [of] past or current links with known LTTE  front
    organisations abroad, they would be invited for interview once they had
    returned home, rather than at the airport".

33. At paragraph 41, the respondent noted the discrepancy in the  evidence,
    in that the brother's email of 13 July said he gave  the  CID  his  old
    address whereas, in the 14 July submissions, it was claimed  that  the
    brother had given the CID his brother's father-in-law's address.

34. In the email, the brother further explained (according to paragraph 42)
    that he was taken downstairs  in  a  lift  to  a  small  office/torture
    chamber where the  CID  "produced  a  dusty  old  file  regarding  your
    client's father".  The respondent noted that the father had  been  able
    to remain living in the family home for 34 years "whilst claiming to be
    'Jesus Christ reborn' and it  is  maintained  that  the  GOSL  have  no
    interest in your client's father".  The brother's claim that his cousin
    (Mr De Silva)  was  a  supporter  of  the  LTTE  was  rejected  by  the
    respondent "as it is not consistent with your client's account  of  his
    cousin's occupation as a member of the GOSL Intelligence Services".

35. The brother's email asserted that  the  CID  had  told  him  they  were
    planning to detain and torture him for another  day  and  that  he  was
    hooded and hung upside down and that the inquisitors were talking about
    Mohan and Ravi.  The brother then voluntarily disclosed that it was not
    his laptop ("he didn't claim they asked him about the laptop") and that
    he further informed the CID that the applicant "was a selfish  person".



36. At paragraph 44, the respondent noted the witness statement from  Laura
    Smith in respect of the email she had received on  12  July  and  that,
    being concerned that the  brother  may  have  been  mistreated  at  the
    airport, she made a series of  phone  calls.   Laura  Smith  said  that
    Frances Harrison [a former BBC journalist with experience of Sri Lanka]
    advised her that Ms Harrison had been involved  in  other  cases  where
    returnees had been detained at the airport for  nine  -  eleven  hours.
    The respondent considered, however, that the brothers  had  "failed  to
    provide independent and objective evidence to support these assertions"
    (paragraph 44).

37. At paragraph 45, the respondent set out a letter from the British  High
    Commission in Colombo of 2  November  2012,  explaining  who  would  be
    subject to arrest on arrival in Sri Lanka.

38. At paragraph 46, the respondent stated that  she  did  not  accept  the
    applicant's brother had been detained at the airport as  claimed.   The
    brother's account  lacked  credibility,  when  considered  against  the
    evidence of various country experts and the evidence from  the  British
    High Commission.  Whilst bribes were accepted to be common at  IDP  and
    detention centres, there was no  evidence  that  bribes  were  used  to
    ensure the release of those detained at the airport.  The evidence also
    showed that it was, in any event, rare for returnees to be detained  at
    Colombo Airport and the brother did not fit the profile  of  those  who
    (according to the British High Commission document) would be likely  to
    be detained there.  If the government had any interest  in  a  returnee
    they would normally be visited at their home  address  after  they  had
    passed through the airport, as the airport was routinely  monitored  by
    the British High Commission and others and there were no facilities  to
    detain people at the airport.

39. At paragraph 47, the respondent said that the brother's account of  his
    detention, interrogation  and  threats  was  not  consistent  with  the
    submissions made in the Country Guidance case in GJ and Others, and was
    therefore rejected.  Had the government had any interest in the  father
    of the brothers, who had been claiming to be Jesus Christ  since  1980,
    they would have had ample opportunity to interview the  brothers  prior
    to their arrival in the United Kingdom in 2009.   The  respondent  also
    stated that she "not aware of the existence of  a  room  used  for  the
    purposes of hanging returnees upside down below the airport" (paragraph
    47).

40. At paragraph 48, the respondent did not consider it credible  that  the
    brother would voluntarily implicate himself in  the  transportation  of
    evidence related to war crimes in Sri Lanka.  In this regard, the email
    from the human rights lawyer in Columbo did not assist the applicant as
    it merely said "CID informed me that they released him.  Can you  check
    with the family?"  The email from the lawyer did  not,  in  any  event,
    confirm that the brother was ever detained; nor did it confirm that  he
    was held by the CID for six hours as claimed.  It simply stated that he
    had been released.

41. Paragraph 49 also stated that the applicant's brother was  due  at  the
    airport at 12:45 and the lawyer confirmed at  14:27  that  he  was  not
    being interviewed and had been released.  This meant that  the  brother
    was not detained as claimed at the airport and that his assertions were
    made for the sole purpose of being returned to the United Kingdom to be
    reunited with his mother and brother.

42. So far as photographs of the brother were concerned, no independent  or
    objective medical evidence had been shown in respect of the marks shown
    on the feet of the person in the photograph.  It was  also  noted  that
    the  brother  had  self-harmed  before,  according  to  the   applicant
    (paragraph 50).

43. Turning to Frances Harrison's  observations,  the  respondent's  letter
    noted the judgment of AK (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 535, where the  court  found  that  the
    respondent must ask  herself  whether  an  independent  tribunal  might
    realistically  come  down  in  favour  of  the  applicant's  claim,  on
    considering the new material with the material  previously  considered.
    In this regard, the  respondent,  whilst  acknowledging  Ms  Harrison's
    extensive knowledge of the situation in Sri Lanka, did not consider her
    views could be given any real weight,  since  she  had  had  no  direct
    involvement in the case and was merely consulted on an  advisory  basis
    in respect of returns to the airport (paragraph 57).

44. Having given anxious scrutiny to the issues and considered the evidence
    in the round, the respondent stated at paragraph 59 that there was  "no
    realistic prospect that your client's submissions when  taken  together
    with  all  the  previously  considered  material,  create  a  realistic
    prospect of an immigration judge deciding that your  client  should  be
    allowed  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom".   At  paragraph  60,  the
    respondent's conclusion was that the submissions, taken  together  with
    previous material "would not create a  realistic  prospect  of  success
    before an immigration judge and do not amount to a fresh claim".

C.  TN (VIETNAM)

45. We have referred at paragraph 2 above to TN  (Vietnam).   Before  going
    any further, it is necessary to say more about the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment, delivered by Singh LJ.  The court upheld Ouseley J's  finding
    that appeals decided under the Fast Track Rules 2005 were not automatic
    nullities,  notwithstanding  that  the  Rules  were  ultra  vires.   At
    paragraph 116 of his judgment, Ouseley J had refused to countenance the
    suggestion that "in considering the lawfulness of the  SSHD's  decision
    on fresh claims,  the  court  could  consider  whether  she  had  taken
    'improper account of the content of the appeal decision ...  given  the
    particular circumstances in  which  the  appeal  was  decided  ...  '".
    Ouseley J considered that

         "to be a recipe for  confusion  in  relation  to  a  lawful  appeal
         decision and irrelevant to the consequences of  one  set  aside  or
         held unlawful as unfair ... I see nothing  but  confusion  in  some
         halfway  house,  which  could  still  require  examination  of  the
         lawfulness and fairness of the decision, and  it  would  not  be  a
         confusion  born  of  some  necessary  but  unhappy  application  of
         principle".

46. Singh LJ upheld Ouseley J on this issue:-

         "82. In my judgement, the straightforward argument made  on  behalf
             of the Appellants by Ms Lieven must be  rejected  on  its  own
             merits in  the  present  context  and  without  the  need  for
             extensive reference to authority from other contexts.

         83.  The first and fundamental reason for this is that, in my view,
             there is a conceptual distinction  between  holding  that  the
             Procedural Rules were ultra vires and the question whether the
             procedure in an individual appeal decision was unfair.

         ...

         88.  In my  view,  the  decision  of  this  Court  in  Connors,  if
             anything, supports the submissions advanced on behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State by Mr Tam rather than those advanced by  Ms
             Lieven.   This  is  because  the  question  which  has  to  be
             addressed  is  whether  the  ultra  vires  act  influenced  or
             infected  the  later  decision  which  it  is  now  sought  to
             challenge.  That requires an assessment of whether  there  has
             in fact been procedural unfairness in the individual case.

         89.  Finally, I would add that, as a matter of legal principle,  if
             the Appellants' submissions on the first issue  were  correct,
             it would necessarily follow that even appeal  decisions  where
             the appeal was allowed would fall to  be  set  aside,  because
             they would be a nullity.  That cannot possibly be correct.  At
             the hearing before us Ms Lieven  submitted  that  this  was  a
             theoretical point and  not  a  real  one,  since  in  practice
             individuals will have been granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
             light of a successful appeal decision and this  would  not  be
             curtailed.  However, in my view, it is revealing that, if  the
             logic of her submission  were  accepted,  this  would  be  the
             result as a matter of principle.  That analysis  of  principle
             helps to test whether the submission can be correct.

         90.  For those reasons, I conclude on  the  first  issue  that  the
             Appellants' submissions must be rejected.  It follows that  it
             is necessary, if an  application  is  made  to  set  aside  an
             earlier  appeal  decision,  to  assess   whether   there   was
             procedural unfairness on the particular facts  of  that  case.
             There may or may not have been. That will depend on a  careful
             assessment of the individual facts. It is not  enough  to  say
             that the 2005 Rules were ultra vires."

47. At paragraph 144 of his judgment, Ouseley J held as follows:-

         "114.    Even where some such challenge is permitted, for it to  be
                successful there would also have to be a basis  for  holding
                that the decision was unfair  beyond  that  it  was  reached
                under the FTR 2005.  There is no presumption  of  unfairness
                in relation to appeal decisions under  the  2005  FTR.   The
                basis must  be  evidenced  by  reference  to  disadvantages,
                specific to the case, which the  FTR  timetable  caused  but
                which the Principal Rules timetable and practice would  have
                avoided, and  which  led  to  an  unfair  process.   A  high
                standard of fairness is required. The SSHD might be able  to
                show that there was no unfairness in reality.  This  is  not
                the same at all as requiring the appellant to show that  the
                result would have been different under a  different  regime;
                that is not required. But  the  claim  may  require  greater
                justification where no applications for transfer out of  the
                fast track or for adjournments have been made, and where  no
                attempt has been made to  advance  claims  or  circumstances
                based on vulnerability, or if no issues about fairness  have
                been raised during the appeal, or if the evidence which  was
                said to be missing is not provided as part of a fresh  claim
                made reasonably swiftly after  the  appeal  concluded.   The
                points I have referred to in relation to the  "interests  of
                justice" in the FtT  would  also  be  relevant  in  judicial
                review cases as to whether or not time should  be  extended,
                and relief granted, if that were a route to relief available
                for challenging appeal decisions."

48. Singh LJ said this about paragraph 114:-

         "98. In my judgement, on  a  fair  reading  of  para.  114  in  the
             judgment of Ouseley J, it is clear that he was not imposing  a
             burden on the claimant to show that there had been unfairness.
             To the contrary, he said: "The SSHD might be able to show that
             there was no unfairness in reality."  Furthermore, it is clear
             that Ouseley J did not fall into the error  (as  suggested  on
             behalf of the Appellants) of not appreciating  the  importance
             of procedural fairness irrespective of the outcome.  He  said:
             "This is not the same at all as  requiring  the  appellant  to
             show that the result would have been different ... that is not
             required."

         99.  In my view, there was nothing  wrong  in  the  approach  which
             Ouseley J took in  para.  114.   Indeed  in  my  view  it  was
             correct: he was in  essence  saying  that  the  issue  of  the
             fairness of the procedure had to be determined by reference to
             the specific facts of an individual case.

         100. However, it is important not to  read  what  he  said  in  the
             second half of para. 114 as if it were a  checklist.   Mr  Tam
             disavowed any suggestion that it is a  checklist  and  invited
             this Court to make it clear that it should not be regarded  as
             such. I agree.  This Court should make it clear, in  my  view,
             that there is no such checklist. Each such case will be highly
             fact-sensitive.

         101. As long as that is understood, it seems to me that  there  was
             no error of law into which  Ouseley  J  fell  in  setting  out
             specific factors which he said might or might not be  relevant
             in a particular case."

49. An application by TN for permission to appeal  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment is currently outstanding before the Supreme Court.   This  has
    particular relevance for the present applicant.  In an earlier judicial
    review brought by the applicant against a refusal by the respondent  on
    11 July 2014 to treat his submissions  as  a  fresh  claim,  the  Upper
    Tribunal refused  permission.   The  judicial  review  application  was
    brought on the basis that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro was asserted to be a nullity.  Permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal against the Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission was sought
    from that court in July 2015.  That application was stayed by Singh  LJ
    on 28 January 2019, pending the determination of the application by  TN
    for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.



D. THE APPLICANT'S GROUNDS

50. It is now possible to address the applicant's grounds  in  the  present
    proceedings.  It is convenient to begin with ground 7, added  with  the
    permission of the Upper Tribunal when the latter granted the  applicant
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings.

(a) Ground 7: the significance of the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  the
paragraph 353 exercise

51. Ground 7 alleges unlawfulness on the part of  the  respondent,  in  her
    paragraph 353 decision,  in  relying  on  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro.  Mr Bandegani rightly accepted that,  as  matters
    currently stand, the Upper Tribunal is bound by  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in TN  (Vietnam).   Unless  and  until  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision is declared  a  nullity  in  judicial  review
    proceedings, it retains its status as an undisturbed  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  As we have mentioned, a direct challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  is  a  feature  of  the  judicial
    review proceedings which are currently stayed in the Court  of  Appeal,
    pending a decision from the Supreme Court (whether by way of refusal of
    permission to appeal or otherwise) on  the  issue  of  whether  appeals
    decided under  the  Fast  Track  Rules  2005  fall  to  be  treated  as
    automatically void.

52. In the light of this, Mr Bandegani's development before us of ground  7
    took the following form.   Even  if  the  applicant's  appeal  was  not
    unfairly determined by the First-tier Tribunal, or if that question did
    not arise, it is, Mr Bandegani submits, still a relevant  consideration
    in  determining  a  submission  pursuant  to  paragraph  353   of   the
    Immigration Rules that the applicant's original claim  for  asylum  and
    the resulting appeal, were  subjected  to  the  Fast  Track  procedure.
    Matters such as the speed of the Fast Track  process,  the  ability  or
    otherwise of the  applicant  to  secure  and  translate  documents  and
    whether he was  without  legal  representation  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal may all be relevant, according to Mr  Bandegani,  in  deciding
    whether there is a realistic prospect of the applicant succeeding in an
    appeal before a  putative  or  hypothetical  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

53. The fact that a challenge to the respondent's decision under  paragraph
    353 not to treat submissions as a fresh claim is one that may  be  made
    only on Wednesbury irrationality grounds was articulated by  the  Court
    of Appeal in WM (DRC) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.  Notwithstanding Buxton LJ's judgment in WM,  the
    legal basis of a challenge to a paragraph 353  decision  was,  however,
    not authoritatively resolved until MN (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 193.

54. Although the basis of challenge is rationality, the  intensity  of  the
    judicial review of a paragraph 353 decision will be at the  higher  end
    of the spectrum.  This is because of the obligation on the  respondent,
    also deriving from WM, to apply "anxious scrutiny" to the  submissions.



55. At the heart of Mr Bandegani's submission on ground 7 is  the  approach
    which a  hypothetical  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  would  take  to  be
    undisturbed findings in a decision of an earlier such judge, reached in
    an appeal by the applicant against a relevant adverse decision  of  the
    respondent.  The leading case on this matter is  the  decision  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Devaseelan v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2002] UKIAT 702.

56.  In BK (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1358, the Court of Appeal (per Rose LJ) summarised  the
    Devaseelan Guidelines as follows:-

         "(1) The first adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting-point.  It is the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             appellant's status at the  time  it  was  made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

         (2)  Facts happening since the  first  adjudicator's  determination
             can always be taken into account by the second adjudicator.

         (3)  Facts happening before the first  adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always be
             taken into account by the second adjudicator.

         (4)  Facts personal to the appellant that were not brought  to  the
             attention  of  the  first  adjudicator,  although  they   were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second adjudicator with the greatest circumspection.

         (5)  Evidence of other facts, for example country evidence, may not
             suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but should be
             treated with caution.

         (6)  If before the second adjudicator the appellant relies on facts
             that are not materially different from those put to the  first
             adjudicator, the second adjudicator should regard  the  issues
             as settled by the first adjudicator's determination  and  make
             his findings in  line  with  that  determination  rather  than
             allowing the matter to be re-litigated.

         (7)  The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and  (6)
             is greatly reduced if there is some very good reason  why  the
             appellant's failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the
             first adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him.
             Such reasons will be rare.

         (8)  The foregoing does not cover every  possibility.  By  covering
             the major categories  into  which  second  appeals  fall,  the
             guidance is intended to indicate the  principles  for  dealing
             with such appeals. It will be for the  second  adjudicator  to
             decide which of them is or are appropriate in any given case."
              (Paragraph 32)

57. The judgment of Rose LJ in BK contains a useful summary of the  way  in
    which the Devaseelan Guidelines have  been  interpreted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal:

         "34. The guidance was referred to with approval  by  the  Court  of
             Appeal in Djebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 804,  [2004]  Imm  AR
             497 on the basis that it had not created any difficulty for or
             inconsistency among special adjudicators.   Judge  LJ,  giving
             the judgment of the Court, said that the  specialist  Tribunal
             was entitled  to  provide  guidance  to  the  entire  body  of
             specialist adjudicators about how they should  deal  with  the
             fact of an earlier unsuccessful application  when  deciding  a
             later one.   The  extent  of  the  relevance  of  the  earlier
             decision and the proper approach to it should be addressed  as
             a matter of principle. He went on:

                  "29. ... Such guidance was essential to ensure consistency
                      of  approach   among   special   adjudicators.    The
                      guidelines  remedied  an   immediate   and   pressing
                      difficulty,  with  direct  application  to,  but  not
                      exclusively concerned with, the many cases in  which,
                      after  unsuccessfully  exhausting  all  the  possible
                      legal channels, asylum seekers remained in the United
                      Kingdom and  put  forward  a  case  on  human  rights
                      grounds after October 2000."

         35.  He then said this about the application of the guidelines:

                  "30. Perhaps the most important feature of the guidance is
                      that the  fundamental  obligation  of  every  special
                      adjudicator  independently   to   decide   each   new
                      application  on  its  own   individual   merits   was
                      preserved."

         36.  Having set out the guidance and considered the criticisms made
             of it by the claimant in that case, Judge LJ said:

                  "40. ... The great  value  of  the  guidance  is  that  it
                      invests   the   decision-making   process   in   each
                      individual  fresh  application  with  the   necessary
                      degree  of   sensible   flexibility   and   desirable
                      consistency  of  approach,   without   imposing   any
                      unacceptable restrictions on the second adjudicator's
                      ability to make the findings which he conscientiously
                      believes to be right.  It therefore admirably fulfils
                      its intended purpose."

         37.   The  importance  of  not  allowing  the  guidance  to   place
             unacceptable restrictions on the second adjudicator's  ability
             to determine the appeal in front of him has been emphasised in
             subsequent cases.  In Mubu and others [2012] UKUT 00398  (IAC)
             a tribunal judge, Judge Tipping, had made a finding that  copy
             birth certificates provided by the Mubu  family  were  genuine
             and showed that Mr Mubu was the grandson of a British citizen,
             Mr Ernest Alletson.  When Mr Mubu later applied for indefinite
             leave to remain for himself and his family, the SSHD  rejected
             the application on the grounds that the certificates were  not
             authentic. The FTT allowed the  appeal  on  the  grounds  that
             Judge Tipping's conclusion on the issue  of  the  relationship
             between Mr Mubu and Ernest Alletson was determinative  of  the
             issue.  The Upper Tribunal held that that was an error of law.
              They confirmed that the principle of  res  judicata  was  not
             applicable in immigration  appeals.   After  setting  out  the
             Devaseelan guidance, the Tribunal concluded that there was  no
             logical  basis  for  holding   that   the   guidance   applied
             differently depending on whether the previous decision was  in
             favour of or against the SSHD.  However, they  held  that  the
             FTT judge had erred because Judge Tipping's decision  had  not
             been determinative of the issue before him; according  to  the
             Devaseelan  guidance  it  should  have  been  treated  as  the
             starting point.  They went on to remake  the  decision.   They
             examined in detail what had happened before Judge Tipping, the
             further evidence adduced by the SSHD before them, whether that
             evidence pre-dated the previous tribunal hearing and why  that
             evidence had not  been  available  previously.   The  Tribunal
             concluded:

                  "66.  We are well aware that, in the field of public  law,
                      finality of  litigation  is  subject  always  to  the
                      discretion of the Court if wider interests of justice
                      so require.  We  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  the
                      nature of  the  issue  now  in  dispute  between  the
                      parties was the same issue that was determinative  of
                      the appeal before Judge Tipping. We also bear in mind
                      the failure of the Secretary of State to produce  all
                      of the relevant evidence to Judge Tipping that  ought
                      to have been, or  could  have  been  with  reasonable
                      diligence, made available to him.  In  the  light  of
                      these   considerations   we   conclude    that    the
                      determination of Judge Tipping should be  treated  as
                      settling the issue of the  relationship  between  the
                      first claimant and Mr Ernest Alletson".

         38.   The  ability  of  a  tribunal  to   depart,   after   careful
             examination, from a previous conclusion on the facts does  not
             always operate in favour of the  appellant.   For  example  in
             Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1276, [2007] Imm AR 1 the  Court
             of Appeal upheld a decision  by  the  tribunal  rejecting  the
             asylum claim of the claimant.  This was despite the fact  that
             before a different tribunal, his  daughter  had  been  granted
             asylum on the basis of her father's flight from Colombia.  The
             further evidence  which  the  tribunal  hearing  the  father's
             appeal had considered would not have met the Ladd  v  Marshall
             criteria because it could have been put before the adjudicator
             in the daughter's appeal.  The Court held however that it  was
             right that the tribunal  as  a  matter  of  common  sense  and
             fairness took the evidence into account.  Auld LJ  (with  whom
             Rix and Hooper LJJ agreed) stressed at paragraph 26  that  the
             daughter's status as a refugee was not affected by any finding
             in reliance on new and cogent evidence  that  the  father  had
             lied in supporting her successful appeal  against  refusal  of
             asylum.  The flexibility for the  tribunal  to  take  a  fresh
             decision allowed proper regard  to  be  given  to  the  public
             interest giving effect to a consistent  and  fair  immigration
             policy - the matter should be judged, Auld LJ said, "as one of
             fairness and maintenance of proper immigration control"."

58. Rose LJ also  had  this  to  say  about  the  juridical  basis  of  the
    Guidelines:-

         "39. There  has  been  some  discussion  in  the  cases  about  the
             juridical  basis   for   the   Devaseelan   guidelines.    The
             authorities are clear that the guidelines are not based on any
             application  of  the  principle  of  res  judicata  or   issue
             estoppel.  The Court of Appeal in Djebbar referred to the need
             for consistency of  approach.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
             (Somalia) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1040  also  referred  to
             consistency as  a  principle  of  public  law  and  the  well-
             established  principle  of  administrative  law  that  persons
             should be treated uniformly unless there is some valid  reason
             to treat them differently.

         ...

         44.  I do not accept that in addressing the question of whether the
             finding of fact should be carried forward  in  that  way,  the
             tribunal is only entitled to look  at  material  which  either
             post-dates the earlier tribunal's decision or  which  was  not
             relevant to the earlier tribunal's determination.  To restrict
             the second tribunal in that way would be inconsistent with the
             recognition  in  the  case  law  that  every   tribunal   must
             conscientiously decide the case in front of them.   The  basis
             for the guidance is not estoppel or res judicata but fairness.
              A tribunal must be alive to the unfairness  to  the  opposing
             party of having to relitigate  a  point  on  which  they  have
             previously succeeded particularly where the point was not then
             challenged on appeal."

59. Beginning at paragraph  45  of  her  judgment,  Rose  LJ  analysed  the
    criticisms made of the decision of the earlier judge,  from  which  the
    Upper  Tribunal  had  departed  in  the  decision  challenged  by   the
    respondent before the Court  of  Appeal.   There  were,  amongst  other
    things, unusual procedural aspects because BK had not been subjected to
    an asylum interview in which his  alleged  complicity  in  torture  and
    murder could be explored.  It was also unclear  where  the  finding  in
    paragraph 40 of the earlier decision, "that BK had tortured and  killed
    anyone", had come from.  Rose LJ's conclusions on this  issue  were  as
    follows:-

         "50. In my judgment those procedural features of the 2004  Decision
             coupled with the difficulty of  identifying  the  evidence  on
             which the Adjudicator's finding was based, entitled the  Upper
             Tribunal, once they had recognised that the 2004 Decision  was
             the starting point, to depart from  that  starting  point  and
             make their own assessment of the evidence before them.

         51.   The  position  might  well  have  been   different   if   the
             Adjudicator's finding had been based on admissions made in the
             asylum interview, or in a witness statement or in  the  course
             of  the  hearing.   It  would  also  have  been  different  if
             conflicting evidence had been placed  before  the  Adjudicator
             and  she  had  decided  that  she   preferred   the   evidence
             demonstrating a greater severity of BK's involvement.   As  it
             was, this was an unusual case which was not covered by any  of
             the paragraphs of the Devaseelan  guidance.   A  conscientious
             tribunal would not have been acting fairly if they had decided
             that BK had tortured and killed people and hence had committed
             war crimes and was a person of bad character  and  hence  that
             his  answers  to  the  terrorist   activity   questions   were
             inaccurate, all on the strength of a few words in the PO Notes
             which were at best bordering on illegible."

60. Mr Bandegani also relied upon the  judgment  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker in R (Saboun) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 0269 (IAC).  This was a fresh  claim  judicial  review,  in
    which it was said that  the  undisturbed  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who had dismissed the applicant's appeal in March 2013,
    was, in fact, defective.

61. At paragraph 10 of her judgment, the Upper Tribunal Judge  described  a
    point of contention before her as follows:-

         "10. The essence of the  issue  before  the  parties  is  that  the
             respondent took as her starting point for consideration of the
             issues  raised   in   submissions   by   the   applicant   the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal  as  per  Devaseelan.
             The applicant's premise is that  although  that  is  certainly
             permissible in the generality of  cases,  in  this  case  that
             approach is incorrect: this applicant's case falls within  one
             of the few cases  where  such  an  approach  is  inappropriate
             because the result is that her lack of credibility as found by
             the  First-tier  Tribunal  significantly   and   substantially
             undermined all subsequent submissions yet  those  findings  on
             credibility  were  significantly  flawed  for  the   following
             combination of reasons:
             (a)  the applicant had been unrepresented and  had  sought  an
                  adjournment to obtain legal representation;
             (b)   she had to give evidence through an interpreter;
             (c)  the reasons for refusal letter had not been read  through
                  to her;
             (d)   there was a significant error in the reasons for refusal
                  letter;
             (e)  significant challenges to her account,  which  she  could
                  have explained and has done so since, were not put to  her
                  at the hearing;
             (f)        the   further   evidence   produced,   namely   the
                  psychiatrist report, the sister's witness  statement,  the
                  cousin's statement and the  social  services  report  were
                  corroborative of persecutory treatment."
62. At paragraph 16, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker acknowledged that "This  is
    not an appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision".   However,  at
    paragraph 17, she described the issue for her as  "essentially  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing could have been vitiated by  procedural
    unfairness such that the findings  could  not  reasonably  stand".   At
    paragraph 18, she held  that  if  the  respondent  had  been  right  to
    consider the further evidence "through the  prism  of  the  credibility
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, i.e.  applying  Devaseelan",
    then the respondent had acted correctly  in  terms  of  paragraph  353.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker concluded, however,  that  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter had not been read to the applicant and that  there  were
    significant errors in that refusal letter, which had not  been  put  to
    the applicant.  These involved "significant challenges to  her  account
    which she could have explained" which were "not put to her"  (paragraph
    22).

63. Mr Bandegani submitted that the Upper Tribunal Judge's  conclusion  was
    that the applicant's case was  "one  of  those  rare  cases  where  the
    credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal did not  stand  as  the
    starting point" (paragraph 19).  That does, indeed, appear  to  be  the
    way in which the Upper Tribunal Judge determined the matter.

64. We  do  not  accept  Mr  Bandegani's  submissions  on  ground  7.   His
    contention that the weight to be attached to First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro's decision necessarily falls to be  materially  reduced,  because
    that decision was taken pursuant to  the  Fast  Track  Rules  2005,  is
    incompatible with the upholding by the Court of Appeal in TN  (Vietnam)
    of Ouseley J's conclusion that there is no "halfway  house"  between  a
    decision of this kind being void and valid.  Generic  criticisms,  such
    as that the applicant was in detention and had little  time  to  obtain
    documents from abroad or legal representation, will not do.

65. Where the earlier judicial decision has been taken under the 2005  Fast
    Track Rules, the Devaseelan Guidelines apply,  as  they  would  to  any
    other First-tier Tribunal decision.  As those  Guidelines  make  plain,
    and as has been subsequently confirmed by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  the
    first  judicial  decision  is  "the  starting-point".   The  Guidelines
    prescribe a process which, as Rose LJ identifies in BK, has  its  roots
    in the principle of administrative law that persons should  be  treated
    uniformly unless there is some valid reason to treat them  differently.
    We do, however, agree  with  Ms Anderson,  for  the  respondent,  that
    principles of finality, legal certainty and judicial loyalty  are  also
    relevant.  So much is plain from TN (Vietnam).

66. BK shows how the "starting point" principle  in  Devaseelan  is  not  a
    legal straitjacket.  It permits  subsequent  judicial  fact-finders  to
    depart from the earlier judicial decision on a principled and properly-
    reasoned basis.  We therefore respectfully disagree with the conclusion
    in  Saboun  that  the  Guidelines  themselves  may  be  jettisoned,  if
    circumstances demand.

67.  It is plain from BK (and the other cases there mentioned) and, indeed,
    from Saboun that there needs to be a  very  good  reason  why,  on  the
    particular facts of  a  case,  the  Devaseelan  Guidelines  should  not
    require the second judicial decision-maker to  "regard  the  issues  as
    settled by the [first judicial decision-maker's decision] and make  his
    findings in line with that ... rather than allowing the matter to be re-
    litigated".  In the context of submissions pursuant to  paragraph  353,
    there will, accordingly, need to be a reason why the hypothetical First-
    tier Tribunal Judge hearing the new appeal would not see themselves  as
    being subject to this requirement.

68. No such reason has been put forward on behalf of the present applicant.
     He advances no detailed  forensic  criticism  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pedro's decision, such as we find in BK or Saboun.

69. As a result, the applicant has not  shown  any  reason  why  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro's decision should not be treated as  the  starting
    point  for  the  analysis  of  what  the   hypothetical   judge   might
    realistically do. This means the respondent was entitled  to  view  the
    subsequent submissions (including the documentary evidence) through the
    prism of that decision.

(b) The other grounds

70. We turn to the other grounds of challenge, in the  order  in  which  Mr
    Bandegani advanced them before us.  Grounds 4 and 6 alleged  a  failure
    on the part of the respondent  to  give  reasons  for  aspects  of  her
    decision.  The respondent accepted that Ms  Harrison,  formerly  a  BBC
    correspondent in Sri Lanka, had "extensive knowledge" of the  situation
    there.  Ms Harrison said she had seen the applicant's brother's account
    of his detention and torture and that this was typical of what she  had
    seen, as were the events described  by  the  brother  at  the  airport,
    extending over several hours.  Ms Harrison's evidence was supported  by
    a contemporaneous note from the  applicant's  legal  adviser,  together
    with a series of exchanges between them and the Sri Lankan  lawyer,  Mr
    Dias.  The grounds submit  that  no  good  or  indeed  any  reason  was
    provided to reject this evidence individually or in the round.

71. We agree with Ms Anderson's submission, for the  respondent,  that  the
    challenge to the treatment of these submissions is in the nature  of  a
    disagreement which could, in any event, never  have  been  sufficiently
    material to the overall outcome.  It is no criticism of Ms Harrison  or
    to question her expertise to observe that she had no direct involvement
    in the case and was merely consulted on an advisory basis in respect of
    returns at the airport.  Although she could offer some mild support, to
    the extent that what the brother was asserted to have  said  about  his
    treatment at the airport fitted with her own experience of  what  might
    happen there, given the manifest credibility problems identified by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge regarding the basis of the brothers'  claims,
    the respondent did not err in law in concluding that this aspect of the
    new submissions would not be reasonably likely to be  given  weight  by
    the hypothetical judge.  Furthermore, it is, we consider, impossible to
    know precisely what Ms Harrison was told and which aspects  of  it  she
    was agreeing to.

72. Ground 5 alleges a material error of fact.   At  paragraph  49  of  her
    decision, the respondent said that the brother was not detained for six
    hours but only for two.  This was  based  upon  timings  given  by  the
    applicant's solicitors, including in  emails.   The  brother's  arrival
    time of 12:45 was, the applicant says, the time in Sri Lanka,  not  the
    United Kingdom.  The email of 14:27, confirming the brother's  release,
    was given in United Kingdom time.  The two  events  were,  accordingly,
    six hours apart.  This is said to constitute "a  significant  error  of
    fact".

73. Again, looking at matters overall, we find the applicant has failed  to
    demonstrate that this error has any materiality.   We  agree  with  the
    respondent's submission that it is unlikely the email  of  14:27  would
    have coincided with the actual release of the brother, which must  have
    happened earlier.  More particularly, however, paragraphs 41 to  43  of
    the  respondent's  decision  identify  incoherence  in  the   brother's
    description of what was supposed to have happened to him.  The evidence
    is inconsistent as to what address the brother is said  to  have  given
    his interrogators.  The suggestion that the authorities had a  file  on
    the applicant's father is inconsistent with the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and with the fact that the father was able to  live
    without problems in Sri Lanka, notwithstanding his claim to  be  "Jesus
    Christ reborn".  The respondent was also entitled to  place  weight  on
    the claim that the brother voluntarily disclosed that he did  not  have
    the laptop upon  which  anti-government  information  was  said  to  be
    stored, despite the fact that the brother did not say  that  those  who
    interrogated him had even asked about this.

74. The respondent was, we find, entitled to place weight  on  the  Country
    Guidance that detention facilities were not  to  be  found  at  Colombo
    Airport.  The evidence adduced by the applicant appears to  be  to  the
    effect that the brother was taken  to  some  sort  of  ad  hoc  torture
    chamber.  Taken in the round,  however,  the  respondent  did  not  act
    unlawfully in concluding in effect that the Country  Guidance  on  this
    issue would not be seen  by  the  hypothetical  judge  as  having  been
    displaced.

75. Grounds 1 and 3 concern the submission that, in reaching her  decision,
    the respondent took into account irrelevant matters and failed to  take
    into account  relevant  ones.   So  far  as  alleged  irrelevances  are
    concerned, the respondent is criticised for examining  the  applicant's
    case, by reference  to  the  Country  Guidance,  in  finding  that  the
    applicant had not, for example, undertaken sur place activity, such  as
    to make him a person of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.
     A thorough consideration of  the  applicant  in  the  context  of  the
    Country Guidance was, however, called for.  It has not been shown to be
    a material error  on  the  part  of  the  respondent  to  look  at  the
    categories of those identified by  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  being,  in
    general, at real risk on return.  We agree with Ms Anderson that  these
    matters were unarguably relevant as to whether the applicant  could  be
    said to have a risk profile.

76.  So far as relevant matters are concerned, the grounds contend that the
    respondent failed to follow the Country Guidance, which held that  risk
    "runs in families" and that those  who  seek  to  reveal  human  rights
    abuses put themselves at risk. As we have seen, however, these  aspects
    of the applicant's case had been emphatically rejected  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge.  With  the  exception  of  the  link  between  the
    brothers and Mr De Silva,  for  the  reasons  we  have  given  the  new
    submissions did not take matters further.

77. We have had full regard to the fact that the respondent accepts  Mr  De
    Silva was a cousin of the applicant and his brother.  That was a matter
    upon  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  did  not  believe  the
    brothers.  We conclude, however, that the respondent did not err in law
    in concluding that this would not, in  effect,  undermine  the  adverse
    credibility findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro, in the eyes of
    the hypothetical judge.  At paragraph 22 of  his  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro made it abundantly plain that  "quite  apart  from
    the claimed relationship with Mr De Silva", the  brothers'  account  of
    their involvement with his activities  was  "riddled  with  a  lack  of
    credibility" (our emphasis).  Put bluntly, viewed in its own terms  the
    account made no sense.  For instance, it was bizarre that Mr De  Silva,
    a noted journalist, needed the assistance of the brothers  "as  he  had
    poor writing skills".  Whether or not the brothers were related  to  Mr
    De Silva also had  no  material  bearing  on  the  adverse  credibility
    findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro concerning the individuals,
    Mohan and Ravi, who formed an integral part of the rejected claim.

78. Standing back and looking at matters overall,  we  are  satisfied  that
    none  of  the  grounds,  either   individually   or   in   combination,
    demonstrates  that  the  respondent  erred  in  law  in  rejecting  the
    applicant's submissions as amounting to a fresh claim  under  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules.

79. The application is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the applicant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 16 December 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
