


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Bano (procedural fairness, withdrawal of representatives) [2019] UKUT 00416
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                             |Issued on                   |
|on 5 July 2019                               |                            |
|                                             |............................|
|                                             |...........                 |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 ARSHAD BANO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Anderson
Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



(1) Fairness means fairness to both sides: it does not  mean  favouring  the
appellant at the expense of the respondent.

(2) Tribunals must ensure appellants have a fair hearing,  but  they  should
not be intimidated by unjustified withdrawal of representatives.

(3) Unless unfairness has resulted in there being  no  proper  consideration
of their case at all, appellants who allege procedural unfairness  may  find
it difficult to have a decision set aside, without  showing  that  they  may
have suffered prejudice through inability to present a better case.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. On 10 September 2018 the respondent  refused  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  On 8 November 2018 the  FtT  issued
    notice of a full hearing to take place on 13 December 2018.

 3. Practice Directions of the FtT and UT, and standard directions  issued,
    required the appellant to serve her evidence on  the  FtT  and  on  the
    respondent not later than 5 days before that hearing.   The  same  time
    limit applied to documents to be relied upon by the respondent.

 4. A covering notice advised the appellant that it was important to submit
    her documents "as soon as available".

 5. FtT Judge Green dismissed the appeal by a decision  promulgated  on  18
    December 2018.  As appears from paragraph  3,  the  appellant  did  not
    comply with foregoing directions and did not explain that  shortcoming.
    Statements were provided on 10 December 2018.

 6. In a letter faxed to the appellant's solicitors and to the  FtT  on  12
    December 2018 the respondent sought, in response to  those  statements,
    to file a copy of an application made by the appellant and the decision
    in her subsequent  appeal  in  2009.   The  respondent  said  that  the
    evidence she provided therein was at odds with the statements  she  had
    just produced.

 7. It is necessary to clarify that from before making her  application  to
    the respondent until the time of the FtT  hearing,  the  appellant  was
    represented by Mr A Liaquat of  LKW,  Solicitors.   From  the  time  of
    making her application for permission to appeal to  the  UT  until  the
    hearing before us, she has been represented by Mr Liaquat  of  Anderson
    Rizwan, Solicitors.  Mr Haddow advised us that  although  the  two  are
    related there was no connection or  communication  between  them  about
    this case.  In the rest of this determination our references are to the
    first mentioned Mr Liaquat only.

 8. At paragraph 3 of his decision Judge Green  narrates  that  Mr  Liaquat
    objected to  admission  of  the  respondent's  productions,  sought  an
    adjournment, and was offered  3  hours  to  take  instructions  on  the
    earlier  decision,  which  was  admitted  into  evidence.   Mr  Liaquat
    declined that offer, asked for a 40-day adjournment, and when that  was
    refused, withdrew from acting.  The hearing proceeded, and  the  appeal
    was dismissed.  The material discrepancies  between  the  circumstances
    advanced in 2009 and in 2018 were significant to the outcome.

 9. Correcting the several grammatical errors in the grounds of  appeal  to
    the UT, their essence is as follows:

      ... The  FtT  Judge  refused  the  adjournment  request  made  by  the
      appellant's representative when the respondent produced  new  evidence
      during the hearing.  Further, the Judge  proceeded  with  the  hearing
      while the appellant was unrepresented.  The appellant has  not  had  a
      fair hearing ...

10. Those grounds are commendably succinct, but they  are  disingenuous  in
    failing to disclose that the appellant was herself  late  in  producing
    the evidence by which she intended to support her case,  to  which  the
    new evidence from the other side  was  a  response.   The  grounds  are
    inaccurate in saying that the respondent's  evidence  was  produced  in
    course of the hearing; it was intimated the day before, and Mr  Liaquat
    told the FtT he had read it, although at that  stage  there  were  some
    pages missing from the copy provided by the respondent.   The  evidence
    may have been new to him, but it was not new to  his  client,  who  was
    party to the proceedings  in  2009.   We  accept  that  may  have  been
    difficult and perhaps rather embarrassing for Mr  Liaquat,  through  no
    fault of his own.  We were advised by Mr Haddow  that  Mr  Liaquat  had
    known of the existence  of  the  prior  proceedings,  but  not  of  the
    details.

11. It is not now said, as it was by Mr Liaquat, that the  FtT  should  not
    have admitted the information from the respondent.  It would have  been
    absurd to enable an appellant to conceal her hand  until  late  in  the
    day, and then to prevent  the  respondent  from  contradicting  her  by
    matters of indubitable public record.

12.  The  duty  of  fairness  would  be  owed  not   to   the   appellant's
    representative but to the appellant herself;  but  fairness  cannot  be
    assessed without considering the interests of  all  parties,  including
    the public as represented by the Secretary of State.  The document  was
    the appellant's  own  document,  being  the  means  by  which  she  had
    originally obtained admission to the United Kingdom.  She was aware  of
    it, as were the other members of her family who were with  her  at  the
    hearing, one of whom (at least) had  been  a  witness  at  the  earlier
    hearing.

13. The first question is whether it was unfair, as Mr Haddow submitted, to
    offer an adjournment of 3 hours.

14. We consider that plainly was fair.  Mr Haddow accepted in the course of
    his submissions that in general it is not necessary to give any  notice
    of intention to cross-examine on  a  previous  inconsistent  statement,
    even where a criminal conviction may be the result.  He was  unable  to
    formulate  any  reason  why  immigration  proceedings  should   be   an
    exception.  The only surprise to the  appellant  was  that  information
    which she and her family knew was also now known to others.  Mr Liaquat
    had the documents the day before.  The circumstances were not difficult
    to apprehend.  The questions to ask the  appellant  and  her  witnesses
    were obvious.  We see no reason why 3 hours would not be enough for  an
    ordinarily competent representative to regroup and be ready to proceed.
     No sensible argument was made for it not being enough.

15. Nothing said to Judge Green, or since, begins to justify insistence  at
    the outset on a 40-day adjournment.  The reason advanced by Mr  Liaquat
    was "to obtain and serve a subject access request on  the  respondent",
    which makes very little sense.  Whatever it means,  the  appellant  has
    not acted upon it in the time since the FtT hearing.

16. We observed that even if 3 hours turned out not to be enough to prepare
    fully, it was ample to prepare a reasoned explanation of why longer was
    needed. Mr Haddow submitted that the Judge had closed his mind  to  the
    possibility of any delay beyond 3 hours.  As he puts the matter in  his
    written submission at paragraph 12, "... it was unfair ... to refuse to
    adjourn for longer than 3 hours".  We see  no  justification  for  that
    line of challenge, which is an entirely unsupported allegation of  bias
    or pre-judgment.  There is nothing in the decision to suggest  that  if
    Mr Liaquat had come back with good reasons for longer delay, the  Judge
    would have failed to consider that application on its merits, as he was
    bound to do.

17. We observed during submissions that on the application  form  submitted
    to the respondent and giving rise to these proceedings,  the  appellant
    declared an earlier entry clearance application but not the  one  which
    gave rise to the 2009 appeal.   While  Mr  Haddow  submitted  that  the
    respondent always knew about the earlier appeal and could have  founded
    upon the discrepancies, that convenient omission by the  appellant  may
    explain why the matter did not come to light earlier.

18. We see no justification for the conduct of Mr Liaquat in  (a)  opposing
    admission of the documents, (b) attempting to  force  the  FtT  into  a
    lengthy adjournment or none, or (c) leaving his client unrepresented.

19. We are, however, left with the question whether  the  FtT  should  have
    adjourned once Mr Liaquat had withdrawn.

20. It is highly undesirable that representatives should  try  to  force  a
    tribunal's hand by unjustified withdrawal,  and  tribunals  should  not
    lightly give  way  to  such  pressure;  but  when  faced  with  such  a
    situation, there remains a duty to ensure that an appellant has a  fair
    hearing.

21. Mr Haddow referred us to Pine v Law  Society,  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1574,
    [2002] 2 All ER 658.  He submitted that denial of legal  representation
    might create unfairness, depending on such factors as the complexity of
    the allegations and facts, the nature of the unrepresented person,  and
    their capacity to advance their own case.

22. In Pine at [11] the Vice-Chancellor summarised  the  principles  to  be
    derived from the European Convention jurisprudence on article 6 in  the
    words of Airey v Ireland 32 Eur Court HR Ser A (1979):  [1979]  2  EHRR
    305, as follows:


      "only in exceptional circumstances, namely where  the  withholding  of
      legal aid would make  the  assertion  of  a  civil  claim  practically
      impossible, or where it  would  lead  to  obvious  unfairness  of  the
      proceedings can such a right be invoked by virtue of Article  6(1)  of
      the Convention."


23. The present proceedings are not governed  by  article  6,  but  we  are
    content to apply the same principle.

24. The appellant knew what the documents meant for her case.  If she  kept
    her representative in the dark in the hope that her self-contradictions
    would not emerge, that was her choice.  She had her daughter and  other
    relatives and supporting witnesses with her on the day.  They were  not
    together a team of representatives, but they  had  some  experience  of
    such proceedings, and clear knowledge of the circumstances.   All  they
    needed to do was tell the truth.

25. The appellant and her family members did not ask for an adjournment  on
    the withdrawal of Mr Liaquat.  Her daughter made submissions in support
    of the appeal at the end of the hearing.

26. Applying the above principles, we find that the appellant was  able  to
    advance  her  claim,  unrepresented,  without  any   unfairness.    The
    circumstances did not require the Judge to  raise  the  possibility  of
    adjournment further with her.

27. Mr Haddow invited the UT to conclude (as put in his written submission)
    that, "Had the FtT proceeded fairly, it is not possible to rule out the
    possibility that the appellant and her witnesses may have been able  to
    satisfactorily answer  the  credibility  challenges  now  made  by  the
    respondent.  Consequently, the FtT's failures ... represent an error of
    law".

28. The UT's standard directions, issued to  parties  with  the  notice  of
    hearing, reminded them of the presumption that if the decision  of  the
    FtT is set aside its re-making will take place  at  the  same  hearing,
    based on the evidence before the FtT and any further evidence admitted,
    and that parties must prepare accordingly in every case.

29. Directions also require parties  to  apply  for  admission  of  further
    evidence, either to establish error of law, or for any  re-making.   No
    such application was before us.

30. Mr Haddow advised us at the outset that no statement had been  obtained
    from Mr Liaquat (or anyone else) and it was not proposed to call him to
    give evidence; nor was there,  even  now,  any  proposal  to  call  the
    appellant or any member of her family to indicate what they would  have
    said at the hearing if they had been given a greater opportunity.  This
    is even though the appellant has had much longer than the 40 days asked
    for by Mr Liaquat to show how her case might be improved.

31. If this decision were to be remade on the evidence which was before the
    FtT, there could not rationally be a different outcome:  as  the  judge
    remarked,  the  appellant's  story  in  this  appeal  is  diametrically
    opposite to that presented in her earlier appeal.

32. We recognise that procedural fairness may require re-hearing even of an
    apparently hopeless case, where  there  has  been  no  proper  judicial
    consideration.  Our view that this is no such instance is fortified  by
    the absence of any hint that the appellant has a case better  than  she
    showed to the FtT.

33. In HA and TD v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28 Lord Reed, giving the opinion of the
    Court, said:

      [15] Finally, it is necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  a  procedural
      impropriety will not vitiate a decision if  it  is  apparent  that  no
      prejudice was suffered: Ahmed v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [1994]  Imm  AR  457  (following Malloch v Aberdeen
      Corporation 1971 SC (HL) 85 at pages 104 and 118).

34. We conclude that (a) there was no procedural impropriety, in any of the
    ways argued for the appellant, and (b) it is apparent,  even  if  there
    was impropriety, that no prejudice was suffered.

35. Three general points emerge:

      (1) Fairness means fairness to both sides: it does not mean  favouring
      the appellant at the expense of the respondent.

      (2) Tribunals must ensure appellants have a  fair  hearing,  but  they
      should not automatically be intimidated by unjustified  withdrawal  of
      representatives.

      (3)  Unless  unfairness  has  resulted  in  there  being   no   proper
      consideration of their case at all, appellants who  allege  procedural
      unfairness may find it difficult to have a decision set aside, without
      showing that they may have suffered  prejudice  through  inability  to
      present a better case.

36. The appeal to the UT is dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  FtT  shall
    stand.

37. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      9 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




