

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2015 and 7 June 2016                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                 SHEMSI SALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan (7 June 2016) and Mr P Bonavero (7
                    July 2015) instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Smyth instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department (7 June 2016) and Mr P Deller, Senior Home
                    Office Presenting Officer (7 July 2015)
Friend to the Court:   Ms S Broadfoot instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department

There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
of State not to grant a Residence  Card  to  a  person  claiming  to  be  an
Extended Family Member.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal raises the issue of whether a  person  who  is  refused  a
      residence card as  an  "extended  family  member"  ("EFM")  under  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended) (the "EEA
      Regulations 2006") has a right of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      under reg 26 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

   2. For the reasons we give below, we have reached the conclusion that  no
      right of appeal exists.

Introduction

   3. The appellant (as we shall continue to  call  him)  is  a  citizen  of
      Albania who was born on 19 January 1987.  He entered the UK  illegally
      on 28 June 2011.  On 3 May 2013, the appellant applied for a residence
      card as the EFM of an EEA national, Ms Livia Valasekova, a national of
      the  Slovak  Republic  with  whom  he  claimed  to  have  a   "durable
      relationship" and as such was  an  EFM  under  reg  8(5)  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006.

   4. On 10 October 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      application.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied on the evidence
      that the appellant's relationship with Ms Valasekova, though  genuine,
      was a durable one.  In addition, the Secretary of State concluded that
      as the appellant had entered the UK illegally  he  had  not  "provided
      enough evidence to allow us to exercise discretion in your favour".

   5. The notice of refusal to issue a residence card dated 10 October  2013
      stated that the appellant had a right of appeal  against  the  refusal
      under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the
      "NIA Act 2002") and the EEA Regulations 2006.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 26 June 2014, Judge Knowles  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
      under the EEA Regulations 2006 and also under Art 8.

   7. On the  evidence,  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Valasekova were in a "durable relationship"  and  that  therefore  the
      appellant was an EFM under reg 8(5) of the EEA Regulations  2006.   As
      regards the exercise of discretion to issue a residence card under reg
      17(4), the judge decided that the Secretary of  State's  consideration
      of her discretion was not consistent with the requirement in reg 17(5)
      that there be an "extensive examination of the personal circumstances"
      of the appellant.  Judge Knowles went on to consider  the  appellant's
      circumstances and concluded that the discretion under reg 17(4) should
      not be exercised differently so as to issue a residence  card  to  the
      appellant and consequently he  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   8. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      essentially on the basis that discretion should have been exercised in
      the appellant's favour under  reg  17(4).   Permission  was  initially
      refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 16 October  2014  the  Upper
      Tribunal (UTJ Perkins) granted the appellant permission to  appeal  on
      the basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge's  "approach  to  the
      exercise of discretion is flawed".

   9. The appeal was initially listed before the Upper Tribunal (VP Ockelton
      and UTJ Grubb) on 5 February 2015.   At  that  hearing,  the  Tribunal
      raised  with  the  representatives  two  issues  which  concerned  the
      Tribunal, namely whether the appellant had a right of appeal under the
      EEA Regulations 2006 and whether,  if  he  did,  the  judge  had  been
      entitled to exercise the discretion under reg 17(4) himself.   As  the
      first issue went to the jurisdiction of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
      matter could not be settled by the parties' agreement or consent.   In
      order to allow the parties to deal with these issues, the  appeal  was
      adjourned and directions were issued  by  the  UT  on  3  March  2015,
      identifying these  two  points  of  law  and  directing  that  written
      submissions be made by the parties in respect of both issues.

  10. The  appeal  was  then  again  listed  before  the  UT  as  previously
      constituted on 7 July  2015.   At  that  hearing,  the  appellant  was
      represented by Mr Bonavero and the  respondent  by  Mr  Deller.   Both
      representatives made submissions to the UT to the effect that  an  EFM
      (such as the appellant) did have a  right  of  appeal  under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006  against  the  (discretionary)  refusal  to  issue  a
      residence card.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  Tribunal
      reserved its determination.

  11. Following the hearing, we concluded that it would  be  of  benefit  to
      have argument seeking to put forward the contrary case to that of  the
      parties, namely that no right of appeal existed.  As a consequence,  a
      request was made to  the  Attorney  General  for  the  appointment  of
      counsel to act as a friend to the court to  present  those  arguments.
      There was a delay  whilst  arrangements  were  agreed  and  made  and,
      ultimately on 7 June 2016, the UT reconvened to hear argument from the
      parties represented by Mr O'Callaghan and Ms  Smyth  respectively  and
      from Ms Broadfoot instructed as a Friend to the Court.

  12. We are grateful to all counsel for their oral submissions as  well  as
      their written skeleton arguments.  In addition, at  the  direction  of
      the UT, on 21 June 2016 the parties filed further submissions  (agreed
      between Ms Smyth and Mr O'Callaghan) on a specific point raised by the
      Tribunal as to the scope of reg 26(2A) of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
      which was relied upon by the parties in support of their position that
      there was a right of appeal.

The Legislative Scheme in Outline

     1. EFMs and 'Family Members'

  13. In this appeal, we are concerned exclusively with the right of  appeal
      of an EFM as defined in reg 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006.  We are not
      concerned with the right of appeal  of  an  EEA  national  or  of  the
      "family member" of an EEA national as defined in  reg  7  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006.

  14. We have set out in full the relevant parts of the EEA Regulations 2006
      in the Appendix to this determination along with  relevant  provisions
      in the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2000  (SI  2000/2326)  (the  "EEA
      Regulations 2000").

  15. So far as relevant to this appeal, reg 8(1)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
      2006 defines an EFM to include someone who satisfies the condition  in
      reg 8(5).  It provides that:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national."

  16. That is the provision which the appellant in this  appeal  claimed  to
      satisfy and which the judge concluded he did satisfy.

  17. Regulation 17 provides for the issue of a residence card to a  non-EEA
      national "family member" (reg 17(1)-(3)) and "extended family  member"
      of an EEA national (reg 17(4) and (5)).  Equivalent  provisions  exist
      in reg 16 for the  issue  of  a  registration  certificate  where  the
      "family member" or EFM is an EEA national (see reg 16(3)-(4) and  regs
      16(5)-(6) respectively.  In each case issue is  required.   Regulation
      17(4), however,  deals with EFMs and is in the following terms:

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

         (a)      the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended
             family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15; and

         (b)      in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
             State appropriate to issue the residence card."

  18. The appellant's application in this case was for a residence  card  as
      an EFM based upon his durable relationship with Ms Valasekova who  was
      an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  UK  and  fell  to  be
      considered under reg 17(4).

  19. As will be clear from reg 17(4)(b),  the  Secretary  of  State  has  a
      discretion to issue a residence card where a person  establishes  they
      are an EFM.  Unlike the position  with  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national, an EFM has no right to be issued with a residence card as is
      the case for EEA nationals and their "family members" under reg 16 and
      reg 17(1)-(3).

  20. In exercising that discretion, reg 17(5) provides that:

         "Where  the  Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
         paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive  examination  of  the
         personal circumstances of the  applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
         application shall give reasons justifying the refusal  unless  this
         is contrary to the interests of national security."

  21. We have set out the  relevant  domestic  law,  contained  in  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006, rather  than  Directive  2004/38/EC  (the  "Citizens
      Directive") which is primarily concerned with the  free  movement  and
      residence of EEA nationals and their "family members"  as  defined  in
      Art 2.2 of that Directive.  So far as "other family members" including
      those in a "durable  relationship",  are  concerned  Art  3.2  of  the
      Citizens Directive provides that a Member State should "in  accordance
      with its national legislation, facilitate entry and residence" of "the
      partner with whom the Union Citizen has a durable  relationship,  duly
      attested".  Further, the Citizens Directive (mirrored in reg 17(5)  of
      the EEA Regulations 2006) provides in Art 3.2 that:

         "The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people."

  22. It is  not  necessary  to  make  further  reference  to  the  detailed
      provisions of the Citizens Directive.  It has  been  accepted  by  the
      CJEU that the rights of free movement and residence conferred upon EEA
      nationals and their "family members" are not  directly  replicated  in
      the case of EFMs (see, SSHD v Rahman and others (Case C-83/11)  [2013]
      Imm AR 73).  A Member State's obligations are limited, only  requiring
      it to "facilitate" entry and residence  in  accordance  with  national
      legislation founded on an extensive  examination  of  an  individual's
      personal circumstances.

  23. It was not suggested before us  that  our  domestic  law  in  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 is, in any way, inconsistent with the  provisions  of
      the Citizens Directive.  Further, if no right of appeal  exists,  then
      judicial review will lie as the appropriate  remedy.   In  Rahman  the
      court made clear that a full merits-based appeal was not  required  by
      the Citizens Directive; only a judicial  review  to  ensure  that  the
      decision-maker has "remained within the limits of the  discretion  set
      by [the] Directive"(see [25]).

  24. Once a residence card is issued, the EEA Regulations 2006  place  EFMs
      in the same position as "family members" ("treated as family members")
      provided that they continue to satisfy the conditions in reg  8  which
      resulted in their being EFMs and their documentation remains valid and
      has not been revoked.  Regulation 7 lists those who are to be  treated
      as family members for the purposes of the  Regulations,  including  in
      reg 7(3):

         "(3)     ... a person who is an extended family member and has been
             issued with an EEA family permit, a  registration  certificate
             or a residence card shall be treated as a family member of the
             relevant EEA national for as long as he continues  to  satisfy
             the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation
             to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or  card  has
             not ceased to be valid or been revoked."

  25. Thereafter, the EFM has the same  right  to  admission  and  residence
      under the EEA Regulations 2006 as does a "family member".

  26. It will be clear from this analysis that for EFMs recognition of their
      rights of admission and residence is  conditional  upon  the  relevant
      document, whether family permit, registration certificate or residence
      card, being issued under the EEA Regulations 2006 (see, Aladeselu  and
      others v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  144  at  [52]).   This,  of  course,
      contrasts with the position  of  "family  members"  who  derive  their
      rights of admission  and  residence  directly  from  EU  law  and  the
      relevant documentation is merely evidence  of  that  right.   This  is
      important.  The EEA Regulations 2006 see the rights of family  members
      and EFMs in different ways.  The rights of family members derive  from
      the Citizens Directive, those of EFMs from national law apart from the
      procedural right  to  have  their  applications  determined  following
      extensive examination of their personal circumstances.  Family members
      have rights independent of being issued with a residence card.   EFMs'
      rights, if any, derive from the exercise of the Secretary  of  State's
      discretion to issue (and allow them to keep) a residence  card;  their
      substantive rights arise only after the card is issued.





     2. Right of Appeal

  27. What then is the right of appeal, if any, in respect of the refusal of
      a residence card to an extended family member under reg 17(4)  of  the
      EEA Regulations 2006?

  28. The relevant provisions dealing with a right of appeal  are  found  in
      reg 26.  Reg 26(1) sets out a 'general' right  of  appeal  against  an
      "EEA decision":

         "(1)     Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation,  a
             person may appeal  under  these  Regulations  against  an  EEA
             decision.

  29. Regulation 2(1) defines an "EEA decision" as follows:

         "'EEA decision' means  a  decision  under  these  Regulations  that
         concerns -

         (a)      a person's  entitlement  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom;

         (b)      a person's entitlement to be issued with or have  renewed,
             or not to have revoked, a registration certificate,  residence
             card, derivative residence card, document certifying permanent
             residence or permanent residence card;

         (c)      a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or

         (d)       the  cancellation,  pursuant  to  regulation  20A,  of  a
             person's right to reside in the United Kingdom; but  does  not
             include  decisions  under  regulations  24AA   (human   rights
             considerations and interim orders to suspend removal) or  29AA
             (temporary admission in order to submit case in person); ..."

  30. Regulations 26(2)-(3A) provide for limitations on that right of appeal
      for certain categories of individuals.  Regulation 26(2) is  concerned
      with an appeal by an EEA national:

           "If a person claims to be an EEA national,  he  may  not  appeal
           under these provisions  unless  he  produces  a  valid  national
           identity card or passport issued by an EEA State."

  31. We are not concerned with EEA nationals in this appeal.

  32. Regulations 26(2A) and (3) are  important,  particularly  the  former.
      Regulation 26(2A) deals with an appeal by a person who "claims  to  be
      in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national".   It  provides  as
      follows:

         "(2A)    If a person claims to be in a durable relationship with an
             EEA national he may not appeal under these Regulations  unless
             he produces -

             (a)       a passport; and

             (b)       either -

                  (i)  an EEA permit; or

                  (ii)       sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of
                 State that he is in a relationship with an EEA national."

  33. That provision was inserted by amendment from 8 November 2012  by  the
      Immigration (EEA) (Amendment) (No 2) Regulations 2012 (SI  2012/2560).
      It is relied upon by the parties to support the submission that an EFM
      (based upon a 'durable relationship' with an EEA national) must have a
      right of appeal under reg 26(1): otherwise, there would have  been  no
      point in placing a limitation on such a person's ability to appeal.

  34. Finally, for our purposes, we must set out reg 26(3).  This applies to
      appeals by persons who claim  to  be  a  "family  member"  of  an  EEA
      national (and with  which  we  are  not  concerned  in  this  appeal).
      Regulation 26 (3) provides:


           "(3) If a person to whom paragraph (2) does not  apply  [i.e.  a
           non-EEA national] claims to be a family member who has  retained
           the right of residence or the family member or  relative  of  an
           EEA national he may not appeal under these Regulations unless he
           produces-

                 (a) ... a passport; and

                 (b) either-

                       (i) an EEA family permit;

                       (ia) a qualifying EEA State residence card;

                       (ii) proof that he is the family member or relative
                 of an EEA national; or

                       (iii ) in the case of a person claiming to be a
                 family member who has retained the right of residence,
                 proof that he was a family member of the relevant person."


  35. The reference to a "relative" (which has existed since the Regulations
      were enacted) may to be a reference to a person who  claims  to  be  a
      "relative" of an EEA national, his spouse or civil  partner  and,  for
      example, claims to be a dependent or member of the  household  of  the
      EEA national and, as such, is an EFM by virtue of reg 8(2)  (see  also
      reg 8(3) and (4) for other 'relative' EFMs).

  36. As a consequence, the appellant's  right  of  appeal  rests  on  there
      being:

          (1)    a decision made under the EEA Regulations 2006; and

          (2)    that decision "concerns ... a person's entitlement  to  be
              issued with ... a ... residence card".

Discussion and Analysis

  37. There is, of course, no argument but that the Secretary of State  made
      a decision under the EEA Regulations  2006  to  refuse  to  issue  the
      appellant with a residence card.  The issue in this appeal is  whether
      that decision "concerns" the appellant's "entitlement"  to  be  issued
      with a residence card.  Both Mr O'Callaghan and Ms Smyth urged upon us
      that  the  respondent's   decision   did   concern   the   appellant's
      "entitlement" to a residence card.  Their respective submissions  were
      largely in harmony with one another.

  38. Mr O'Callaghan's submissions (also adopted by  Ms  Smyth)  were  that,
      properly analysed, a decision under reg 17(4) involves two steps  from
      which an individual's entitlement to the residence card flowed.   Step
      1 is a factual one requiring the individual to establish that he is an
      EFM of a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent right of
      residence.  Having established that, step 2 requires the Secretary  of
      State to exercise discretion whether to issue a  residence  card.   If
      the  Secretary  of  State  decides  to  exercise  discretion  in   the
      individual's favour then, it was argued, the individual has a right or
      entitlement to that residence card.   Where  the  Secretary  of  State
      makes an adverse decision in respect of an individual  at  step  1  or
      step  2  that,  it  was  argued,  is  nevertheless  a  decision  which
      "concerns" an individual's eventual entitlement to a  residence  card.
      The word "concerns", it was submitted, had a broad definition  meaning
      "is relevant or important to"  or  "relates  to"  or  "is  about"  the
      entitlement to the residence card.  When  the  respondent  refuses  an
      application  for  a  residence  card  that  decision  under  the   EEA
      Regulations 2006  falls  within  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word
      "concerns" and the 'potential' entitlement to the residence card.

  39. Both representatives prayed in aid the amendment to reg 26 in sub-para
      (2A) which,  it  was  submitted,  clearly  indicated  that  Parliament
      supported the position that an EFM (at least where  that  is  said  to
      derive from a "durable relationship") had a right of appeal  including
      against a refusal of a residence  card.   Regulation  26(2A),  it  was
      submitted, would make no sense if an EFM had no right of appeal.

  40. Those were the principal submissions made by  Mr  O'Callaghan  and  Ms
      Smyth on behalf of the parties.   We  shall  return  to  them  shortly
      together with a number of additional points made in their submissions.

  41. Ms Broadfoot, as a Friend of the Court,  helpfully  sought  to  put  a
      contrary case on the proper  interpretation  of  the  EEA  Regulations
      2006.  In particular, she referred us to the decision of  the  Supreme
      Court in R (Brown) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 8; [2015] 1 WLR 1060.   In  that
      decision, Ms Broadfoot pointed out, the Supreme Court  (in  particular
      Lord Toulson at [24] and Lord Hughes at [33]) held  that  a  provision
      amending legislation could not affect the meaning of  the  legislation
      as originally passed; although, of course,  it  could  do  so  if  the
      amendment changed a  definition  in  the  original  legislation.   The
      authority for the latter caveat  was  found  in  the  speech  of  Lord
      Neuberger in Boss Holdings Limited v Grosvenor West End Properties and
      others [2008] UKHL 5 at  [23].   Thus,  Ms  Broadfoot  submitted,  reg
      26(2A), as an amending provision, could not affect the meaning of  the
      definition of an EEA decision in reg 2(1) and, in particular,  whether
      the decision "concerns" a person's "entitlement" to a residence  card.



  42. However, in respect of the submissions made by Mr O'Callaghan  and  Ms
      Smyth that the two-step decision making process under reg 17(4) led to
      an "entitlement" to a residence card and that a negative  decision  at
      either of those steps "concerns" that "entitlement", Ms  Broadfoot  in
      her written submissions accepted  that  there  was  a  logic  to  that
      submission.

  43. We  have  not  found  this  an  easy  issue  to  determine.   It  has,
      undoubtedly, long been assumed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  by
      numerous judges hearing appeals against decisions to refuse  to  issue
      an EFM with a residence card that a right of appeal exists  under  the
      EEA Regulations 2006.  There have been onward appeals to the Court  of
      Appeal.   With one exception, the issue of whether a right  of  appeal
      exists has never been addressed.  A right of appeal  was  accepted  by
      the AIT in LO (Partner of EEA National) Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00034.

  44. The fact that the right of appeal has been long assumed or accepted is
      not, in itself, determinative of how  we  should  decide  this  appeal
      which  must  be  based  upon  the  proper  construction  of  the   EEA
      Regulations 2006 taking into account,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,
      detailed submissions on the point.  'Longstanding  universal  mistake'
      is not a canon of construction of a legislative  instrument;  nor,  in
      the case of domestic legislation,  is  there  any  equivalent  of  art
      31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention on the Law  of Treaties (adopted  23
      May 1969, Vienna, Austria) which requires subsequent  practice  "which
      establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation"
      to be taken into account in construing an international Treaty.

  45. At the heart of the  parties'  submissions  is  the  premise  that  in
      enacting the EEA Regulations in 2006  Parliament  did  not  intend  to
      differentiate, in terms of appeal rights, between  those  cases  where
      the Secretary of State "must"  issue  a  registration  certificate  or
      residence card to an EEA national or family member as defined in reg 7
      (see reg 16(1), (3) and (4) and reg 17(1) and (2)) and cases  of  EFMs
      who, even if they are able to establish the basis upon which they seek
      a registration certificate, if an EEA national,  or residence card  if
      a third country national (see reg 16(5) and reg 17(4)), there  remains
      a discretion whether to grant a registration certificate or  residence
      card, and hence to  confer  any  of  the  rights  arising  from  being
      'treated as' a family member.

  46. We begin with the language used in reg 2(1)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
      2006.  In our judgment, there is a fundamental difference between  the
      two situations contemplated for the issue of a residence card.  In the
      former, the individual has a right to  the  residence  card  once  the
      qualifying criteria are established: that is properly said  to  be  an
      "entitlement".  In the latter, the individual does not have a right to
      that card but is reliant upon  a  favourable  exercise  of  discretion
      before a card will be issued.  It does not seem to us that it assists,
      as Mr O'Callaghan urged upon us, to describe the individual's position
      when discretion  is  exercised  in  his  favour  as  amounting  to  an
      "entitlement" to that card.  The plain fact is that  the  exercise  of
      discretion 'sits between' the basis upon which he or she qualifies  as
      an EFM and the outcome of whether or not the residence card is  to  be
      issued.  If this latter situation can  properly  be  described  as  an
      "entitlement" to the residence card, it would merge into one  category
      situations where choice exists (a discretion) and those where  a  duty
      or obligation arises.  Only in the latter case can it be said that the
      individual seeking the benefit of the decision-making  process  has  a
      right to that benefit or outcome.  There is  a  clear  jurisprudential
      distinction, well recognised in  public  law  generally,  between  the
      exercise  of  discretion  and  the  carrying  out  of  a  duty.   That
      distinction is, in our judgment, reflected in the  provisions  dealing
      with the issue of residence cards under the EEA Regulations  2006.  As
      the case law makes clear, the only right or entitlement  that  an  EFM
      has in the decision-making process is that the discretion  whether  to
      issue a residence card is exercised lawfully and  in  accordance  with
      the Citizens Directive (Rahman at [21]-[25]).

  47. It does not, in our judgment, assist to rely upon  the  definition  in
      reg 2(1) that the decision "concerns" the "entitlement" of a residence
      card.  The decision-making process leading  to  the  ultimate  outcome
      does not entail a "right" or an "entitlement"  to  the  card  and  any
      decision made cannot "concern" an "entitlement" to the residence  card
      when the decision-making process does not entail such an  entitlement.
      Likewise, there is no basis for interpreting the definition so  as  to
      expand  its  natural  meaning  to   cover   "potential   entitlement".
      Regulations 2(1) says what it says.

  48. In our judgment, the natural and ordinary meaning of the definition of
      an EEA decision in reg 2(1), point (b) with which we are concerned  in
      this appeal does not include a decision to refuse a residence card  to
      an EFM under reg  17(4)  or,  by  parity,  to  refuse  a  registration
      certificate to an EEA national EFM under reg 16(5).   The  consequence
      of that would be that the decision in the present case was not an 'EEA
      decision' and the appellant has no right of appeal.  The question then
      is whether  there  is  anything  in  the  context  or  other  material
      demonstrating that the natural and ordinary meaning was not intended.

  49. During the course of argument, we raised  with  counsel  the  question
      whether the list of EEA decisions in reg 2(1) at  points  (a)  to  (d)
      would be unnecessary if the submissions of the appellant and Secretary
      of State were correct  -  because  there  would  be  no  un-appealable
      decisions under the 2006 Regulations, and Parliament could have simply
      stated  that  an  "EEA  decision"  means  a   decision   under   these
      Regulations.  It would be a powerful  argument  against  the  parties'
      position if, in a fact, the list in (a) to  (d)  was  simply  rendered
      otiose if the refusal of a residence card fell within point (b).   Why
      would Parliament create the  list  if  all  decisions  under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 were appealable?

  50. Counsel, however, drew to our attention  (and  we  understand  it  was
      accepted by all three counsel) that there was at least one decision in
      the EEA Regulations 2006 as originally  enacted  which  did  not  fall
      within the list (a) to (d) so that the list was not otiose  since  all
      decisions under "these Regulations" were not appealable.

  51. The decision which was identified is found in reg 28 under  which  the
      Secretary of State certifies that  an  EEA  decision  was  taken,  for
      example, in the interests of national security and so any appeal  lies
      to the Special Immigration Appeals Commission rather than to the First-
      tier Tribunal.  It is, in one sense, a singular example of a  decision
      made under the EEA Regulations 2006 which would have  been  appealable
      unless the "list" (which omits the decision under reg 28) was included
      as part of the definition  of  an  EEA  decision.   Nevertheless,  its
      identification removes any force from the  argument  which  would  run
      counter  the  parties'  submissions.    Subsequent  amendment  to  the
      definition of the EEA  decision  has  excluded  from  that  definition
      decisions made under reg 24AA (certification leading to removal and an
      out of country appeal only)  and  reg  29AA  (temporary  admission  to
      conduct an in-country appeal).  Both of those are by way of  amendment
      and,  as  we  shall  see  shortly,  therefore   present   considerable
      difficulties as an aid to  interpreting  the  definition  of  an  "EEA
      decision".  But, in any event, they also operate by way  of  exception
      to what would otherwise be an "EEA decision" falling within points (c)
      and (a) respectively of the definitional list in reg 2(1).

  52. Mr O'Callaghan placed some reliance upon the argument that  Parliament
      intended in 2006 to provide for rights of appeal against decisions  to
      refuse residence cards to the new category of individual introduced by
      that Directive, namely EFM.  That gave effect to  the  requirement  to
      provide  for  "judicial  review"  of  decisions  involving   EFMs   as
      recognised in [25] of Rahman.    Ms Smyth did not go  so  far  in  her
      submissions, acknowledging that the limited requirement of  review  to
      ensure compliance with the Directive in the cases of EFMs  - which was
      not a full 'merits-based appeal' - could be achieved without an appeal
      to the First-tier Tribunal  but  rather  through  an  application  for
      judicial review (currently) filed with the Upper  Tribunal.   However,
      she submitted an appeal to the FtT was more 'expedient' as it  allowed
      resolution of the factual issue of qualification as an EFM at the same
      time as a determination of the proper scope of  the  exercise  of  the
      discretion to issue a residence card.

  53. We do not accept  these  submissions.   The  distinction  between  the
      situation where a residence document must be issued (for example, to a
      qualifying 'family member') and one where such a document will only be
      issued if discretion is exercised by the Secretary of State (as is the
      case of a third-country national EFM) does not originate  in  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006.  The precursor Regulations, namely  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000  (SI  2004/2326)  (the  "EEA
      Regulations 2000")  also  contained  provisions  which  differentiated
      between the situation where a residence document "must" be issued  and
      one where such a document "may" be issued.  Regulation 15 set out  the
      circumstances where the Secretary of State "must"  issue  a  residence
      permit (as it was then called) to a qualified person who  was  an  EEA
      national.  Regulation 15(2) stated that the Secretary of State  "must"
      issue a residence permit to a family member of a qualified person who,
      in effect, proves that they were  a  "family  member  of  a  qualified
      person".  Regulation 15  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2000  mirrors,  in
      substance, the provisions in regs 16 and 17  of  the  EEA  Regulations
      2006.  They are both, on any  view,  cases  of  "entitlement"  to  the
      relevant documentation.

  54. However, reg 10 of the EEA Regulations 2000 dealt,  inter  alia,  with
      the issue of a "EEA family permit, a  residence  permit  or  residence
      document" to dependents and members of the household of EEA nationals.
       Regulation 10(1) provided that:

         "If a person satisfies any of the conditions in paragraph (4),  and
         if  in  all  the  circumstances  appears  to   the   decision-maker
         appropriate to do so, the decision-maker may issue to  that  person
         an EEA family permit, a residence permit or a residence  (document)
         as the case may be".

  55. Regulation 10(4)(c) set out the conditions referred to in reg 10(1) as
      follows:

         "The conditions are that person -

         (a)      is dependent on the EEA national or his spouse;

         (b)      is living as part of the EEA national's household  outside
             the United Kingdom; or

         (c)      was living as part of the EEA national's household  before
             the EEA national came to the United Kingdom."

  56. That reflects, albeit not precisely, the definition of an EFM  in  reg
      8(2) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  In this instance, unlike that of an
      EEA national who is a  qualified  person  or  their  "family  member",
      having established the criteria, reg 10(1)  of  the  2000  Regulations
      states that the Secretary of State "may" issue the  relevant  document
      to that individual.  In  other  words,  even  prior  to  the  Citizens
      Directive and the EEA Regulations 2006, our domestic law  allowed  for
      the issuance of a residence document to a person who  was  neither  an
      EEA national qualified person nor their  family  member  but  was,  in
      effect, in our current language an EFM.  Of course, qualifying  as  an
      EFM on the basis of a "durable relationship" did  not  come  into  our
      domestic law until the EEA Regulations 2006 as a result of Art 3.2  of
      the Citizens Directive.  However, the point remains that even prior to
      the EEA Regulations 2006, domestic  law  drew  a  distinction  between
      situations where the Secretary of State must issue  a  residence  card
      and those where he had a discretion to do so.

  57. In terms of rights of appeal, the EEA Regulations 2000,  as  with  the
      EEA Regulations 2006, provided (via regs 9 and  28)  for  a  right  of
      appeal against "an EEA decision" (see reg 29(1)).  An  "EEA  decision"
      was defined (initially in reg 27(2) and  later  in  reg  2)  in  terms
      identical in substance to that in reg 2(1) of the EEA Regulations 2006
      at points (a) to (c).  In particular, it included

            "a decision  under  these  Regulations  ...  which  concerns  a
           person's ... entitlement to be issued with or to  have  renewed,
           or  not  to  have  revoked,  a  residence  permit  or  residence
           document".

  58. Consequently, the language of the EEA  Regulations  2006  was  carried
      across from the EEA Regulations  2000  in  respect  of  the  scope  of
      appealable decisions and in a context where  the  distinction  already
      existed between situations where the  Secretary  of  State  "must"  or
      "may" issue a residence document.  Consequently, it cannot  be  argued
      that, for the first time, in 2006  Parliament  used  the  language  of
      "entitlement" so as  to  include  challenges  to  decisions  where  an
      individual "must" be issued with a residence document but  also  those
      where he "may" be issued with such a document in order to give  effect
      to the Citizens Directive and its recognition  of  the  position  EFMs
      (including for the first time those in a 'durable relationship').   In
      our judgment, the issue of construction with which we are concerned in
      this appeal cannot  be  resolved  by  divining,  on  this  basis,  the
      intention by Parliament in enacting the  EEA  Regulations  2006.   The
      identical point arose under the earlier EEA Regulations 2000 and  was,
      so far as we are aware, never judicially determined.

  59. A further argument relied upon to urge us that the  definition  of  an
      "EEA decision" and, in particular that the term "entitlement" included
      a  decision  which  entailed  a  discretionary  element,  was  that  a
      challenge to  a  decision  to  revoke  a  residence  document  was  an
      appealable decision falling within reg 2(1) point (b).  It  was  urged
      upon us that such a decision was a discretionary one when taken  under
      reg 20, for example, on the grounds of public policy, public  security
      or public health.  Regulation 20(1) states:

         "The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke  or  refuse  to
         renew a registration certificate,  a  residence  card,  a  document
         certifying permanent residence or a permanent residence card if the
         refusal or revocation is justified on  grounds  of  public  policy,
         public security or public health or on grounds of abuse  of  rights
         in accordance with Regulation 21B(2)."

  60. Thus, it was argued that an "EEA decision" against which  a  right  of
      appeal lies includes a decision to revoke a resident card.  That is  a
      discretionary decision and falls within the wording of reg 2(1), point
      (b) of the EEA Regulations 2006 as a decision which  "concerns  ...  a
      person's entitlement ... not to have  revoked"  that  residence  card.
      Hence, a decision not to issue a residence card to an EFM, albeit  one
      entailing the exercise of  discretion,  is  also  a  decision  falling
      within the definition of an "EEA decision" under reg 2(1) as one which
      "concerns ... a person's entitlement to be issued with" that card.

  61. In our judgment, that argument misunderstands the effect of reg 20 and
      the basis upon which a residence  card  may  be  revoked.   Regulation
      20(1) does not  create  a  discretion  to  revoke  a  residence  card.
      Rather, it sets out  the  public  policy  ground  upon  which  such  a
      revocation can occur and then  recognises  the  Secretary  of  State's
      ability to revoke the residence card when the qualifying criteria  are
      satisfied.  In reaching a decision whether the qualifying criteria are
      satisfied, the Secretary of State's decision  is one  that   "concerns
      ... a person's entitlement  ...  not  to  have  [the  residence  card]
      revoked".  The Secretary of State is only entitled to revoke it on the
      specific grounds set out in reg 20(1). The argument based upon reg 20,
      therefore, adds no strength to the parties' submission in respect of a
      decision made under reg 17(4).  There clearly is a right of appeal  on
      the ground that the qualifying criteria are not satisfied.

  62. Thus far, therefore, we see nothing  in  reg  26(3)  to  displace  the
      natural and ordinary meaning of the definition of an EEA decision  set
      out in reg 2(1) point (b) that a decision under reg 17(4) to refuse to
      issue a residence card to an EFM does not give  rise  to  a  right  of
      appeal.

  63. Both Mr O'Callaghan and Ms Smyth placed reliance upon reg 26(2A) which
      was introduced by way of amendment to reg 26 from 8 November 2012  (SI
      2012/260).  Both submitted that Parliament must have  understood  that
      an EFM had a right of appeal, including against a refusal to  issue  a
      residence card.  Otherwise, the amendment  would  have  been  entirely
      irrelevant and without purpose so as to include  sub-para  (2A)  where
      the "appellant" claims to be in a "durable relationship  with  an  EEA
      national" as that is one of the basis upon which an individual  is  an
      EFM set out in reg 8(5).  Regulation 26(2A), it was submitted, clearly
      sets out an exception to a recognised right of appeal.   It  would  be
      futile for Parliament to establish an exception to a right  of  appeal
      that did not exist.

  64. At first blush, the parties' submissions have an  attractive  quality.
      The difficulty is that the submissions are contrary to authority which
      prohibits us  from  taking  into  account  an  amendment  to  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 in order to interpret the meaning of the  Regulations
      as originally enacted, i.e. whether the wording of reg 2(1), point (b)
      includes a decision refusing to issue a residence card to an EFM.

  65. In the Boss Holdings case, Lord Neuberger at [23] summarised his  view
      as follows:

         "In my opinion, the legislature cannot have intended the meaning of
         a sub-section  to  change  as  a  result  of  amendments  to  other
         provisions of the same statute, when no  amendments  were  made  to
         that sub-section, unless, of course,  the  affect  of  one  of  the
         amendments was, for  instance,  to  change  the  definition  of  an
         expression used in the sub-section."

  66. Lords Hoffman, Scott, Roger and  Walker  expressly  agreed  with  Lord
      Neuberger's reasoning.

  67. The present case is, of course, not a case where the amendment in  reg
      26(2A) has  amended  (and  thereby  changed)  "the  definition  of  an
      expression used" in the Regulations.  It is rather prayed in aid as  a
      tool of construction to reach the conclusion that Parliament must have
      understood (at least at the  time  of  amendment  in  2012)  that  the
      definition of an EEA decision included  a  decision  not  to  issue  a
      residence card to an EFM.  Thus, we are required to conclude  that  is
      what reg 2(1), point (b) was intended to include in 2006 at  the  time
      the EEA Regulations were enacted.  However,  whatever  may  have  been
      Parliament's understanding in amending the Regulations so as to insert
      sub-para (2A) into reg 26, Lord Neuberger is clear that cannot  affect
      the  interpretation  of  the  Regulations  and,  in  particular,   the
      definition of an "EEA decision" as originally enacted in 2006.

  68. We were also referred to the more recent decision of the Supreme Court
      in R (Brown) v SSHD in 2005.  That case concerned  the  interpretation
      of s.94(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   That
      provision permitted the Secretary of State to designate  a  state  for
      the purposes of certification of a  human  rights  claim  as  "clearly
      unfounded"  if  "there  is  in  general  ...  no   serious   risk   of
      persecution".  The  issue  in  Brown  was  whether  those  words  were
      applicable where the risk was to a defined minority such as persons at
      risk because of their sexual orientation.  Section 94 had,  subsequent
      to  its  enactment,  been  amended  in  s.94(5A)  to  (5C)  to  permit
      designation where there was "a serious risk of persecution" in a  part
      of a state or in relation to individuals of a particular "description"
      such as, gender, language, race, religion, nationality, membership  of
      a social or other  group  or  political  opinion.   In  Brown  it  was
      submitted by  the  claimant,  challenging  the  Secretary  of  State's
      designation under  the  original  legislation,  that  the  legislation
      should be read as a whole, including  the  amending  provisions,  such
      that it was clear that the power could not be  exercised  where  there
      was a risk to a defined minority. Again, as in  this  case,  why  else
      would Parliament enact the amendment provision if  the  power  already
      existed in the Act as originally enacted?

  69. Interestingly, in Brown the  Secretary  of  State  made  the  opposite
      submission to that made by Ms Smyth in  this  case,  namely  that  the
      amending provisions could not be  taken  into  account.   The  Supreme
      Court adopted that latter view.  At [24], Lord Toulson said this:

         "Since the hearing the court has received written submissions  from
         both parties on the issue whether it is permissible to have  regard
         to the provisions of section 94(5A) to (5C) when construing section
         94(5).  The Secretary of State submits that it is impermissible and
         relies on Boss Holdings Ltd v Grosvenor West End Properties  [2008]
         1 WLR 289, para 23, in which Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury  endorsed
         the  proposition  that  a  later  amendment  does  not  affect  the
         construction of earlier legislation.  The claimant submits that the
         revised statute should be construed as a whole, i.e. in its present
         form, and relies on R v Brown (Northern Ireland) [2013]  4  All  ER
         860, para 34, where  Lord  Kerr  of  Tonaghmore  JSC  endorsed  the
         proposition that an amended statute is to be construed as  a  whole
         in its amended form, although in so doing he did not  suggest  that
         the legislative history is  to  be  ignored  and  he  examined  the
         purpose of the relevant amendment in  its  context.   There  is  no
         inconsistency  between  what  was  said  in  the  two  cases.    In
         construing any legislation it is relevant to consider  its  purpose
         and that may include  considering  the  purpose  of  an  amendment.
         Parliament may sometimes amend legislation in order  to  correct  a
         previous interpretation by the court.   That  said,  and  with  the
         qualification that we have not heard full argument,  I  am  content
         for present purposes to accept that generally speaking an amendment
         cannot affect the construction of an Act as originally enacted, and
         therefore that it would not be right to be influenced by the  later
         introduction of section 94(5A)  to  (5C)  in  interpreting  section
         94(5).   It  is  nevertheless  of  interest  that  Parliament   has
         considered it appropriate to give the Home Secretary the additional
         power to add a state to  the  list  in  relation  to  a  particular
         description of a person."

  70. Lord Hughes agreed with Lord Toulson and at [33] he said this:

         "I agree with Lord Toulson JSC that although subsections 94(5A)  to
         (5C) cannot alter the meaning of  "in  general",  the  presence  of
         those subsections and the  possible  means  of  dealing  with  some
         situations in destination states which they  now  provide  will  be
         relevant to that decision."

  71. It seems to us clear that both  Lord  Toulson  (with  whom  the  other
      Justices agreed) and Lord Hughes denied the legitimacy  of  permitting
      an amendment to affect, in general, the construction of legislation as
      originally enacted (see also MS(Uganda) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 33 at  [28]
      per Lord Hughes with whom the other Justices agreed).

  72. The present case is not  one  in  which  Parliament  amended  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 so as to clarify or amend the definition of  an  "EEA
      decision" in reg  2(1).   The  purpose  of  the  amendment  is  simply
      unclear.  We were not referred to any Explanatory Memorandum  relevant
      to the 2012 amendment.  We have consulted  the  appended  'Explanatory
      Note' to the Regulations and it records that the new reg 26(2A) is:

           "to ensure that someone who claims to be the durable partner  of
           an EEA national may only appeal under the Regulations  where  he
           or she can provide evidence which is sufficient to  satisfy  the
           Secretary of State as to the existence of  the  relationship  in
           question."

  73. It is speculation by us but it may be  that  the  2012  amendment  was
      prompted by the AIT's decision in LO.  In that case, the AIT  accepted
      (without the benefit of any argument on the point) that an EFM  had  a
      right of appeal against the refusal to  issue  a  residence  card  but
      noted that,  unlike  appeals  brought  by  EEA  nationals  or  "family
      members", there was an unlimited right of  appeal  not  requiring  any
      proof, for example, of identity or relationship.  The  2012  amendment
      may be in response to this as it provides a  limit  on  any  right  of
      appeal under reg 26(1) requiring proof of the "relationship"  but  not
      its durability in order for an EFM relying on a 'durable relationship'
      to bring an appeal.

  74. Further, the Explanatory Memorandum, to which  we  were  referred,  in
      relation  to  the  original  EEA  Regulations  2006  provides   little
      assistance  in  determining  the  purpose  underlying   the   original
      Regulations themselves.  At para 7.9 it is stated:

         "Part 6 and Schedule 1 set out the appeal  rights  in  relation  to
         decisions taken under the Regulations.  This is broadly  comparable
         to the existing appeal rights for EEA nationals  and  their  family
         members.  An in-country right of appeal is  normally  provided  for
         when a decision could lead to  the  removal  of  an  individual  in
         question ..."

  75. As regards the "existing appeal rights" there  referred  to,  we  have
      already set out the provisions in  the  EEA  Regulations  2000  which,
      indeed, mirror in large measure the EEA Regulations 2006 as regard the
      position not only of EEA nationals and their family members  but  also
      what we now refer to as EFMs.  Neither immediately prior to  2006  nor
      thereafter is there any statement (at least to which we were referred)
      which indicates that the  purpose  of  Parliament  in  either  set  of
      Regulations was to confer a right of  appeal  against  a  decision  to
      refuse to issue a residence document to a person who is now  known  as
      an EFM.

  76. At its highest, the 2012 amendment, if we were  entitled  to  take  it
      into account, assumes that there can be  an  appeal  under  reg  26(1)
      brought by an EFM relying on a 'durable relationship' as the basis for
      being an EFM.  That was an assumption which would have been  supported
      by the decision in LO. However, we must determine whether the decision
      in LO, reached on the papers and without submissions, correctly stated
      the law.

  77. At our request, we invited the parties to provide written  submissions
      on whether reg 26(2A) could apply in cases not concerned with  an  EFM
      (claiming to  be  in  a  'durable  relationship')  who  is  refused  a
      residence card under reg 17(4).  The force of the argument relying  on
      the amendment would be diluted if it could apply to an appeal  against
      a decision not falling within reg 2(1) point (b).

  78. Ms Smyth's written submissions were agreed by those  representing  the
      appellant.   In  essence,  she  submitted  that  reg  26(2A)  had   no
      application except in an appeal by an EFM against a refusal to issue a
      residence card.   We are not persuaded that this is correct.

  79. First, we agree that a third country national who has been issued with
      a residence card on the basis he is  an  EFM  because  of  a  'durable
      relationship' would be "treated as a family member" by virtue  of  reg
      7(3)  -  at  least  so  long  as  the  condition  qualifying  him  was
      maintained.   Any  appeal  against  a  decision  made  under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 by such a person, including a refusal  to  renew  the
      card would, on the face of it, fall within reg 26(1)  and  (3)  as  an
      appeal by "a person...[who] claims to be a  family  member".   We  say
      "appears" because we do not consider  this  argument  to  be  entirely
      water-tight.  Regulation 26(2A) is not 'subject to' reg 26(3) or  visa
      versa.  Contrast that with reg 26(3) which is stated not to  apply  if
      reg  26(2)  applies  because  the  individual  is  an  EEA   national.
      Consequently, reg 26(2A) may  well  apply  to  any  appeal  against  a
      decision under the  EEA  Regulations  2006  where  the  basis  of  the
      individual's claim is that he is in a 'durable relationship'  with  an
      EEA national, including a refusal to renew the card.

  80. Secondly, we agree that a third country national who now claims to  be
      an EFM is subject to removal under the general removal provisions  and
      not under the EEA Regulations 2006 (see Bilal Ahmed v SSHD [2016] EWCA
      Civ 303).  Consequently reg 26(2A) can have no application in  such  a
      case.

  81. Thirdly, Ms Smyth raised the possibility of an EEA national  appealing
      against a removal decision made under the EEA Regulations 2006 but who
      seeks to resist it on the basis he has a right to reside,  not  as  an
      EEA national, but as an EFM based upon a 'durable  relationship'  with
      another EEA national, in circumstances where that relationship has not
      previously been the subject of the grant of a residence card.  (It  is
      to be noted that neither art 3.2 of the  Citizens  Directive  nor  reg
      8(5) is limited to those who are not themselves Citizens of the  Union
      or EEA nationals.) Ms Smyth submitted that reg  26(2A)  would  not  be
      applicable; the individual, as an EEA national, would only be required
      to satisfy the appeal limit in reg 26(2), namely  that  he  produce  a
      valid national identity card or passport in order to  appeal.   We  do
      not agree.  Whether this is a fanciful  example  in  practice  as  she
      asserts, it is nevertheless a potential one.  Regulation 26(2A) is not
      'subject to' the application of reg 21(2) (as reg 26(3)  dealing  with
      'family members' is expressly stated to be) and so both  are  arguably
      applicable.  We see no reason to suppose that  regulations  26(2)  and
      (2A) are mutually exclusive: neither is said  to  be  subject  to  the
      other  and  on  their  face  both  apply  to  the  situation  we  have
      identified.

  82. There is a further example.   An  individual  may  be  issued  with  a
      'family permit' under reg 12(2) as  an  EFM  who  is  accompanying  or
      joining an EEA national in the UK.  Suppose a family permit is  issued
      on the basis of a 'durable relationship' with that EEA  national.   On
      arrival in the UK, the individual is  refused  admission  because  the
      Immigration Officer concludes (perhaps on receipt of further evidence)
      that the relationship is not 'durable'.  The individual  is  "treated"
      as a "family member" of the EEA national once he is  issued  with  the
      family permit (see reg 7(3)).   Provided  that  he  produces  a  valid
      passport; is accompanying or joining the EEA  national;  and  the  EEA
      national has a right to reside in the UK, he "must be admitted" to the
      UK (see reg 11(2) read with reg 19(2)(a)).  The individual may  appeal
      against that EEA decision to refuse him admission as it  "concerns...a
      person's entitlement to be admitted to the United  Kingdom"  (see  reg
      2(1), point (a)).  Even assuming he continues to  be  "treated"  as  a
      "family member" despite it being said he does not  meet  the  required
      condition for being an EFM under reg  8(4),  as  we  noted  above  reg
      26(2A) would apply even if reg 26(3) (the limitation on  appeal  by  a
      "family member") also applies.  As we noted above, the two  provisions
      are not mutually exclusive.  For  the  purposes  of  reg  26(2A),  the
      individual is someone who "claims to be in  a  durable  relationship".
      That position is a fortiori if he is no longer "treated" as  a  family
      member because he is not considered to satisfy the EFM requirement  of
      being in a 'durable relationship'.

  83. We are not persuaded, therefore, that reg 26(2A)  can  only  apply  if
      there is an appeal by an  EFM  (relying  on  a  durable  relationship)
      against a decision to issue a residence card.  It may  also  apply  to
      appeals against other "EEA decisions" by such a person.   It would  be
      impossible, therefore, to read the amendment in 2012 - even if we were
      permitted to do so - as a tool of construction of reg 2(1), point  (b)
      so as to make good  the  parties'  argument  that  it  can  only  have
      relevance to appeals such as the present.

Conclusion

  84. Although we have found the issue raised in  this  appeal  a  difficult
      one, we see no sustainable argument to deflect  us  from  the  natural
      meaning of the definition of an "EEA decision" in reg 2(1)  point  (b)
      that we identified earlier.  A decision, taken  by  the  Secretary  of
      State in the exercise of her discretion, not to issue  an EFM  with  a
      residence card under reg  17(4)  is  not  a  decision  under  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006 which  "concerns...  a  person's  entitlement  to  be
      issued with...a residence card".

   Final Matters

  85. It is unnecessary for us to deal with the parties' submissions on  the
      scope of any appeal by an EFM against a refusal to issue  a  residence
      card.  Given our conclusion that no right of appeal  exists,  we  need
      say no more.

  86. One matter which arose at the previous hearing which we note  for  the
      record and which may be relevant to the future  consideration  of  the
      appellant's application. Mr Deller, who then represented the Secretary
      of State, conceded that the purported exercise of  discretion  against
      the appellant was unlawful.  He accepted that it was  wrong  to  state
      that the appellant had  not  provided  enough  evidence  to  allow  an
      exercise of the discretion and then to exercise discretion against the
      appellant merely on the basis that the appellant had  entered  the  UK
      illegally.  That was not an adequate consideration of the  appellant's
      claim to meet the requirement in reg 17(5) that the Secretary of State
      must undertake an "extensive examination of the personal circumstances
      of the applicant".  We did not understand Ms Smyth to resile from that
      concession before us at the most recent hearing.

Disposal

  87. The appellant has no right of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal  had  no
      jurisdiction to hear the appeal. It erred in law in doing so.

  88. We set its decision to allow the appeal and substitute a decision that
      there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.




                               Signed










                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal








                                  APPENDIX


  The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003)
                   as amended and in force for this appeal


                                   "Part 1
                             Interpretation etc.
....

General interpretation

2(1)   In these Regulations ....

    'EEA decision' means a decision under these Regulations that concerns -


    (a)    a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
    (b)    a person's entitlement to be issued with or have renewed, or not
         to  have  revoked,  a  registration  certificate,  residence  card,
         derivative residence card, document certifying permanent  residence
         or permanent residence card;
    (c)    a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or
    (d)    the cancellation, pursuant to  regulation  20A,  of  a  person's
         right to reside in the United Kingdom;
    but does not include decisions under  regulations  24AA  (human  rights
    considerations  and  interim  orders  to  suspend  removal)   or   29AA
    (temporary admission in order to submit case in person);....

....

    Family member


    7(1)   Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these  Regulations
          the following persons shall be treated as the  family  members  of
          another person -
          (a)     his spouse or his civil partner;
          (b)     direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
              who are -
              (i)      under 21; or
              (ii)     dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
          (c)     dependent direct relatives in his ascending line  or  that
              of his spouse or his civil partner;
          (d)     a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
              other person under paragraph (3).

    (2)    A person shall not be treated under paragraph (1)(b) or (c)   as
          the family member of a student  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
          after the period of three months beginning on the  date  on  which
          the student is admitted to the United Kingdom unless -
          (a)     in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the  dependent
              child of the student or of his spouse or civil partner; or
          (b)     the student also falls within one of the other  categories
              of qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).

    (3)    Subject to paragraph (4), a person who  is  an  extended  family
          member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,   a
          registration certificate or a residence card shall be  treated  as
          the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long  as  he
          continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2),  (3),  (4)
          or  (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the   permit,
          certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

    (4)    Where the relevant EEA  national  is  a  student,  the  extended
          family member shall only be treated as the family member  of  that
          national under paragraph (3) if either the EEA family  permit  was
          issued under regulation 12(2), the  registration  certificate  was
          issued under regulation 16(5) or the  residence  card  was  issued
          under regulation 17(4).
....


    'Extended family member'


    8(1)   In these Regulations 'extended family member' means a person who
          is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5).

    (2)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil  partner
          and -
          (a)     the person is residing in a country other than the  United
              Kingdom ... and is dependent upon the EEA national  or  is  a
              member of his household;
          (b)     the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
              accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes
              to join him there; or
          (c)     the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
              joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom  and  continues
              to be dependent upon him or to be a member of the household.

    (3)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA  national  or  his  spouse  or  his  civil
          partner and, on serious  health  grounds,  strictly  requires  the
          personal care of  the  EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
          partner.

    (4)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA national and would meet  the  requirements
          in the immigration rules  (other  than  those  relating  to  entry
          clearance) for definite leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
          Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national were  the  EEA
          national a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.

    (5)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and
          can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a  durable
          relationship with the EEA national.

    (6)    In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in  relation
          to an extended family member, the EEA national  who  is  or  whose
          spouse or civil partner is the relative  of  the  extended  family
          member for the purposes of paragraph (2), (3) or (4)  or  the  EEA
          national who is the partner of the extended family member for  the
          purpose of paragraph (5).

....

                                   Part 3
                           Residence Documentation

    Issue of registration certificate

    16(1)  The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          a qualified person immediately on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA State;
          (b)     proof that he is a qualified person.

    (2)    In the case of a worker, confirmation of the worker's engagement
          from his employer or a certificate  of  employment  is  sufficient
          proof for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b).

    (3)    The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          an EEA national who is the family member of a qualified person  or
          of an EEA national with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
          regulation 15 immediately on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA  State;
              and
          (b)     proof that the applicant is such a family member.

    (4)    The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          an EEA national who is a family member who has retained the  right
          of residence on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport; and
          (b)     proof that the  applicant  is  a  family  member  who  has
              retained the right of residence.

    (5)    The Secretary of State may issue a registration  certificate  to
          an extended family member not falling within regulation  7(3)  who
          is an EEA national or application if -
          (a)     the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended
              family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a
              permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
          (b)     in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
              State appropriate to issue the registration certificate.

    (6)    Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
          paragraph (5) he shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
          personal circumstances of the applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
          application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this
          is contrary to the interests of national security.

    (7)    A registration certificate issued under  this  regulation  shall
          state the name and address of the person registering and the  date
          of registration ...

    (8)    But this regulation is subject to regulations 7A(6) and 20(1).


     Issue of residence card

    17(1)  The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to  a  person
          who is not an EEA national and is the family member of a qualified
          person or of an EEA national with a permanent right  of  residence
          under regulation 15 on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid passport; and
          (b)     proof that the applicant is such a family member.

    (2)    The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to  a  person
          who is not an EEA national but who is  a  family  member  who  has
          retained the right of residence on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid passport; and
          (b)     proof that the  applicant  is  a  family  member  who  has
              retained the right of residence.

    (3)    On receipt of an application under paragraph (1) or (2) and  the
          documents that are  required  to  accompany  the  application  the
          Secretary of State shall immediately issue the  applicant  with  a
          certificate  of  application  for  the  residence  card  and   the
          residence card shall be issued no later than six months after  the
          date on which the application and documents are received.

    (4)    The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an extended
          family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is not an EEA
          national on application if -
          (a)     the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended
              family is a qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
              permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
          (b)     in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
              State appropriate to issue the residence card.

    (5)    Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
          paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
          personal circumstances of the applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
          application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this
          is contrary to the interests of national security.

    (6)    A residence card issued under this regulation may take the  form
          of a stamp in the applicant's passport and shall be ... valid  for
          -
          (a)     five years from the date of issue; or
          (b)     in the case of a  residence  card  issued  to  the  family
              member or extended family member of a qualified  person,  the
              envisaged period of residence in the United  Kingdom  of  the
              qualified person, whichever is the shorter.

    (6A)   A residence card issued under this regulation shall be  entitled
          'Residence card  of  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national'  or
          'Residence card of a family member who has retained the  right  of
          residence', as the case may be.

    (7)    ...

    (8)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1) and (1A).

....

                                   Part 4
                    Refusal of Admission and Removal etc.

....
    Refusal to issue or renew and revocation of residence documentation

    20(1)   The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke or refuse to
          renew a registration certificate, a residence  card,  a  document
          certifying permanent residence or a permanent residence  card  if
          the refusal or revocation  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
          policy, public security or public health or on grounds  of  abuse
          of rights in accordance with regulation 21B(2). ...

....







                                   Part 6
                       Appeals Under These Regulations

....
    Appeal rights

    26(1)  Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation, a person
          may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision.

    (2)    If a person claims to be an EEA  national,  he  may  not  appeal
          under these  Regulations  unless  he  produces  a  valid  national
          identity card or passport issued by an EEA State.

    (2A)   If a person claims to be in a durable relationship with  an  EEA
          national he may not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
          produces -
          (a)     a passport; and
          (b)     either -
              (i)      an EEA family permit; or
              (ii)     sufficient evidence  to  satisfy  the  Secretary  of
                   State  that  he  is  in  a  relationship  with  that  EEA
                   national.

    (3)    If a person to whom paragraph (2) does not apply claims to be  a
          family member who has retained  the  right  of  residence  or  the
          family member or relative of an EEA national  he  may  not  appeal
          under these Regulations unless he produces -
          (a)     ... a passport; and
          (b)     either -
              (i)      an EEA family permit;
              (ia)     a qualifying EEA State residence card;
              (ii)     proof that he is the family member or relative of an
                   EEA national; or
              (iii)    in the case of a person  claiming  to  be  a  family
                   member who has retained the  right  of  residence,  proof
                   that he was a family member of the relevant person.

    (3A)   If a person claims to be a person with  a  derivative  right  of
          entry or residence he  may  not  appeal  under  these  Regulations
          unless he produces a passport, and either -
          (a)     an EEA family permit; or
          (b)     proof that -
              (i)      where the person claims to have a  derivative  right
                   of entry or residence as a result of  regulation  15A(2),
                   he is a direct relative or guardian of  an  EEA  national
                   who is under the age of 18;
              (ii)     where the person claims to have a  derivative  right
                   of entry or residence as a result of  regulation  15A(3),
                   he is the child of an EEA national;
              (iii)    where the person claims to have a  derivative  right
                   of entry or residence as  a  result  of  residence  under
                   regulation 15A(4), he is a direct relative or guardian of
                   the child of an EEA national;
              (iv)     where the person claims to have a  derivative  right
                   of entry or residence as a result of  regulation  15A(5),
                   he is under the age of 18 and is a dependant of a  person
                   satisfying the criteria in (i) or (iii).
              (v)      where the person claims to have a  derivative  right
                   of entry or residence as a result of regulation  15A(4A),
                   he is a direct relative or guardian of a British citizen.

    (4)    A person may not bring an appeal under these  Regulations  on  a
          ground certified under paragraph (5) or rely on such a  ground  in
          an appeal brought under these Regulations.

    (5)    The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may  certify  a
          ground for the purposes of paragraph (4) if it has been considered
          in a previous appeal brought  under  these  Regulations  or  under
          section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.

    (6)    Except where an appeal lies to the Commission, an  appeal  under
          these Regulations lies to the First-tier Tribunal.

    (7)    The provisions of or made under the  2002  Act  referred  to  in
          Schedule 1 shall have effect for the purposes of an  appeal  under
          these Regulations to the First-tier Tribunal  in  accordance  with
          that Schedule."



  The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003)
                          in force at 30 April 2006


                                   "Part 1
                             Interpretation etc

....

2(1)   In these Regulations -

    'EEA decision' means a decision under these Regulations that concerns a
    person's -
    (a)    entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
    (b)    entitlement to be issued with or have renewed, or  not  to  have
         revoked,  a  registration  certificate,  residence  card,  document
         certifying permanent residence or permanent residence card; or
    (c)    removal from the United Kingdom; ...

....

    Family member

    7(1)   Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these  Regulations
          the following persons shall be treated as the  family  members  of
          another person -
          (a)     his spouse or his civil partner;
          (b)     direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
              who are -
              (i)      under 21; or
              (ii)     dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
          (c)     dependent direct relatives in his ascending line  or  that
              of his spouse or his civil partner;
          (d)     a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
              other person under paragraph (3).

    (2)    A person shall not be treated under paragraph (1)(b) or  (c)  as
          the family member of a student  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
          after the period of three months beginning on the  date  on  which
          the student is admitted to the United Kingdom unless -
          (a)     in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the  dependent
              child of the student or his spouse or civil partner; or
          (b)     the student also falls within one of the other  categories
              of qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).

    (3)    Subject to paragraph (4), a person who  is  an  extended  family
          member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,   a
          registration certificate or a residence card shall be  treated  as
          the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long  as  he
          continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2),  (3),  (4)
          or  (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the   permit,
          certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

    (4)    Where the relevant EEA  national  is  a  student,  the  extended
          family member shall only be treated as the family member  of  that
          national under paragraph (3) if either the EEA family  permit  was
          issued under regulation 12(2), the  registration  certificate  was
          issued under regulation 16(5) or the  residence  card  was  issued
          under regulation 17(4).

     'Extended family member'

    8(1)   In these Regulations 'extended family member' means a person who
          is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5).

    (2)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil  partner
          and -
          (a)     the person is residing in an EEA State in  which  the  EEA
              national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA  national
              or is a member of his household;
          (b)     the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
              accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes
              to join him there; or
          (c)     the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
              joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom  and  continues
              to be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

    (3)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA  national  or  his  spouse  or  his  civil
          partner and, on  serious health  grounds,  strictly  requires  the
          personal care of the EEA national his spouse or his civil partner.

    (4)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is a relative of an EEA national and would meet  the  requirements
          in the immigration rules  (other  than  those  relating  to  entry
          clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or remain in  the  United
          Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national were  the  EEA
          national a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.

    (5)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
          is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and
          can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a  durable
          relationship with the EEA national.

    (6)    In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in  relation
          to an extended family member, the EEA national  who  is  or  whose
          spouse or civil partner is the relative  of  the  extended  family
          member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or  (4)  or  the  EEA
          national who is the partner of the extended family member for  the
          purpose of paragraph (5).

....

                                   Part 3
                           Residence Documentation

    Issue of registration certificate

    16(1)  The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          a qualified person immediately on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA State;
          (b)     proof that he is a qualified person.

    (2)    In the case of a worker, confirmation of the worker's engagement
          from his employer or a certificate  of  employment  is  sufficient
          proof for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b).

    (3)    The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          an EEA national who is the family member of a qualified person  or
          of an EEA national with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
          regulation 15 immediately on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA  State;
              and
          (b)     proof that the applicant is such a family member.

    (4)    The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate  to
          an EEA national who is a family member who has retained the  right
          of residence on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport; and
          (b)     proof that the  applicant  is  a  family  member  who  has
              retained the right of residence.

    (5)    The Secretary of State may issue a registration  certificate  to
          an extended family member not falling within regulation  7(3)  who
          is an EEA national on application if -
          (a)     the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended
              family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a
              permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
          (b)     in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
              State appropriate to issue the registration certificate.

    (6)    Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
          paragraph (5) he shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
          personal circumstances of the applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
          application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this
          is contrary to the interests of national security.

    (7)    A registration certificate issued under  this  regulation  shall
          state the name and address of the person registering and the  date
          of registration and shall be issued free of charge.

    (8)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1).


    Issue of residence card

    17(1)  The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to  a  person
          who is not an   EEA  national  and  is  the  family  member  of  a
          qualified person or of an EEA national with a permanent  right  of
          residence under regulation 15 on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid passport; and
          (b)     proof that the applicant is such a family member.

    (2)    The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to  a  person
          who is not an EEA national but who is  a  family  member  who  has
          retained the right of residence on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid passport; and
          (b)     proof that the  applicant  is  a  family  member  who  has
              retained the right of residence.

    (3)    On receipt of an application under paragraph (1) or (2) and  the
          documents that are  required  to  accompany  the  application  the
          Secretary of State shall immediately issue the  applicant  with  a
          certificate  of  application  for  the  residence  card  and   the
          residence card shall be issued no later than six months after  the
          date on which the application and documents are received.

    (4)    The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an extended
          family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is not an EEA
          national on application if -
          (a)     the relevant EEA national  in  relation  to  the  extended
              family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a
              permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and
          (b)     in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
              State appropriate to issue the residence card.

    (5)    Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
          paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
          personal circumstances of the applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
          application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this
          is contrary to the interests of national security.

    (6)    A residence card issued under this regulation may take the  form
          of a stamp in the  applicant's  passport  and  shall  be  entitled
          'Residence card of a family member of  an  EEA  national'  and  be
          valid for -
          (a)     five years from the date of issue; or
          (b)     in the case of a  residence  card  issued  to  the  family
              member or extended family member of a qualified  person,  the
              envisaged period of residence in the United  Kingdom  of  the
              qualified person, whichever is the shorter.

    (7)    A residence card issued under this regulation  shall  be  issued
          free of charge.

    (8)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1).

....




                                   Part 4
                    Refusal of Admission and Removal etc.

....
    Refusal to issue or renew and revocation of residence documentation

    20(1)  The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke or refuse  to
          renew a registration certificate, a  residence  card,  a  document
          certifying permanent residence or a permanent  residence  card  if
          the refusal or  revocation  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
          policy, public security or public health.
....

                                   Part 6
                       Appeals Under These Regulations

....
    Appeal rights

    26(1)  Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation, a person
          may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision.

    (2)    If a person claims to be an EEA  national,  he  may  not  appeal
          under these  Regulations  unless  he  produces  a  valid  national
          identity card or passport issued by an EEA State.

    (3)    If a person claims to be the family member or relative of an EEA
          national he may not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
          produces -
          (a)     an EEA family permit; or
          (b)     other proof that he  is  related  as  claimed  to  an  EEA
              national.

    (4)    A person may not bring an appeal under these  Regulations  on  a
          ground certified under paragraph (5) or rely on such a  ground  in
          an appeal brought under these Regulations.

    (5)    The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may  certify  a
          ground for the purpose of paragraph (4) if it has been  considered
          in a previous appeal brought  under  these  Regulations  or  under
          section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.

    (6)    Except where an appeal lies to the Commission, an  appeal  under
          these Regulations lies to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.

    (7)    The provisions of or made under the  2002  Act  referred  to  in
          Schedule 1 shall have effect for the purposes of an  appeal  under
          these Regulations  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  in
          accordance with that Schedule."




  The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000 (SI 2000/2326)
               as in force immediately prior to 30 April 2006


                                   "Part I
                             Interpretation etc.

2. General

    1) ....
    'EEA decision' means a  decision  under  these  Regulations,  or  under
    Regulation 1251/70, which concerns a person's -
    (a)    removal from the United Kingdom;
    (b)    entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom; or
    (c)    entitlement to be issued with or to have renewed, or not to have
         revoked, a residence permit or residence documentation;"

....

    6. 'Family member'

    (1)    In these Regulations, paragraphs (2) to (4) apply  in  order  to
          determine the persons who are family members of another person.

    (2)    If the other person is a student, the persons are -
          (a)     his spouse; and
          (b)     his dependent children.

    (2A)   If the other person has divorced his spouse, the person  is  his
          divorced spouse  provided  she  is  the  primary  carer  of  their
          dependent child who is  under  19  and  attending  an  educational
          course in the United Kingdom.

    (2B)   If the other person has ceased  to  be  a  qualified  person  on
          ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom, the persons are -
          (a)     his spouse or his divorced spouse,  provided  she  is  the
              primary carer of  their dependent child who is under  19  and
              attending an educational course in the United Kingdom; and
          (b)     descendants of his or of his spouse who are  under  21  or
              are their dependants, provided that they  were  attending  an
              educational course in the United Kingdom when  the  qualified
              person was residing in the United Kingdom and are  continuing
              to attend such a course.

    (2C)   For the  purposes  of  paragraph  (2A)  and  (2B),  'educational
          course'  means  a  course  within  the  scope  of  Article  12  of
          Regulation (EEC) No.  1612/68  of  the  Council  of  the  European
          Communities  on  freedom  of  movement  for  workers  within   the
          Community.

    (2D)   For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  a  person  to  whom
          paragraph (2B) applies shall be treated as the family member of  a
          qualified person, notwithstanding that the other person has ceased
          to be a qualified person.

    (3)    ...

    (4)    In any other case, the persons are -
          (a)     his spouse;
          (b)     descendants of his or of his spouse who are  under  21  or
              are their dependants;
          (c)     dependent relatives in his ascending line or that  of  his
              spouse.

....

                                   Part II
                            Scope of Regulations


    9. General

    Subject to regulation 10 and  11  (and  to  regulations  24(1),  25(1),
    26(1), 28 and 33) these Regulations apply solely to EEA  nationals  and
    their family members."


    10. Dependants and members of the household of EEA nationals

    (1)    If a person satisfies any of the conditions  in  paragraph  (4),
          and if in all the circumstances it appears to  the  decision-maker
          appropriate to do so, the decision-maker may issue to that  person
          an EEA family permit, a residence permit or a  residence  document
          (as the case may be).

    (2)    Where a permit or document has been issued under paragraph  (1),
          these Regulations apply to the holder of the permit or document as
          if he were the family member of an EEA national and the permit  or
          document had been issued to him under regulation 13 or 15.

    (3)    Without prejudice to regulation 22, a decision-maker may  revoke
          (or refuse to renew) a permit or document issued  under  paragraph
          (1) if he decides that the holder no longer satisfies any  of  the
          conditions in paragraph (4).

    (4)    The conditions are that the person  is  a  relative  of  an  EEA
          national or his spouse and -
          (a)     is dependent on the EEA national or his spouse;
          (b)     is living as part of the EEA national's household  outside
              the United Kingdom; or
          (c)     was living as part of the EEA national's household  before
              the EEA national came to the United Kingdom.

    (5)    However, for those purposes 'EEA national' does not include -
          (a)     an EEA national who is in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-
              sufficient person, a retired person or a student;
          (b)     an EEA national who, when he is  in  the  United  Kingdom,
              will be a person referred to in sub-paragraph (a).

....

                                   Part IV
                       Residence Permits and Documents

    15. Issue of residence permits and residence documents

    (1)    Subject to regulations 16 and 22(1), the Secretary of State must
          issue a residence permit to a qualified person on application  and
          production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA  State;
              and
          (b)     proof that he is a qualified person.

    (2)    Subject to regulation 22(1), the Secretary of State must issue a
          residence permit to a family member of  a  qualified  person  (or,
          where the family member  is  not  an  EEA  national,  a  residence
          document) on application and production of -
          (a)     a valid identity card issued by an EEA State  or  a  valid
              passport;
          (b)     in the case of a family member who required an EEA  family
              permit for admission to the United Kingdom,  such  a  permit;
              and
          (c)     in the case of a person not falling  within  sub-paragraph
              (b), proof that he is a family member of a qualified person.

    (3)    In the case of a worker, confirmation of the worker's engagement
          from his employer or a certificate  of  employment  is  sufficient
          proof for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b).

....

                                  Part VII
                       Appeals Under These Regulations

....

      Scope of Part VII

    28.      This Part applies to persons who have, or who claim  to  have,
          rights under these Regulations or under Regulation 1251/170.




    Appeal rights

    29(1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) to (4),  a  person  may  appeal  under
          these Regulations against an EEA decision.

    (2)    If a person claims to be an EEA  national,  he  may  not  appeal
          under these Regulations unless he produces -
          (a)     a valid national identity card; or
          (b)     a valid passport, issued by an EEA State.

    (3)    If a person claims to be the family member of another person, he
          may not appeal under these Regulations unless he produces -
          (a)     an EEA family permit; or
          (b)     other proof that he is related as claimed  to  that  other
              person.

    (4)    For the purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3), a document -
          (a)     is to be regarded as being what it purports to be provided
              that this is reasonably apparent; and
          (b)     is to be regarded as relating to the person  producing  it
              unless it is reasonably apparent that it relates  to  another
              person.

    (5)    A person may not rely on a  ground  in  an  appeal  under  these
          Regulations if the Secretary of State or  an  immigration  officer
          certifies that the ground was  considered  in  a  previous  appeal
          brought by that person under these Regulations  or  under  section
          82(1) of the 2002 Act.

    (6)    Except where an appeal lies to the Commission, an  appeal  under
          these Regulations lies to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.

    (7)    The sections of the 2002 Act set out in Schedule  2  shall  have
          effect for the purposes of appeals under these Regulations to  the
          Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in accordance with that Schedule."

