








      |Heard at Field House                                                      |
|On 27 June 2019                                                           |




R (on the application of Bajracharya) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (para. 34 - variation - validity) [2019] UKUT 00417 (IAC)



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                               MR BAJRACHARYA
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Before the Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton (sitting as a Judge of the Upper
                                  Tribunal)




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Dr Russell Wilcox, Counsel instructed by Chancery
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms Katie Ayres, Counsel instructed by Government
                    Legal Department

   1) Paragraph 34 [A-F] of the Immigration Rules is to be construed by  the
      application of the  ordinary  principles  of  statutory  construction,
      which start from the natural meaning of the words in their context.



   2) Paragraph 34 requires applicants to make an application for  leave  to
      remain in accordance with the provisions of 34.


   3) If a second application is submitted when  the  first  application  is
      outstanding, the second application will be treated as a variation  of
      the first application [34BB(2)].


   4) If the variation does not comply with the requirements in paragraph 34
      "the variation will be invalid and will not be considered"  (paragraph
      34E).  Invalidity does not extend to the original application.



      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

Introduction



   1. The Applicant, Mr Bajracharya, challenges  the  Respondent's  decision
      dated 20 August 2018, by which the Respondent rejected his application
      for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  invalid  for
      failure to supply biometric information and stated that the  Applicant
      had  become  an  overstayer  liable  to  removal  from  the  UK  ("the
      Decision").




   2. The backdrop to the Decision was  three  successive  applications  for
      leave to remain by the Applicant. He had applied for further leave  to
      remain on human rights grounds in November 2017. He made a  subsequent
      application in March 2018 on family  and  private  life  grounds.  His
      third application, which gave rise to the Decision was an  application
      for indefinite leave to remain, made in May 2018.



   3. The Applicant accepts that the Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
      reject his May 2018 application for indefinite leave to remain because
      he failed to provide the necessary biometric  information.    However,
      on behalf of the Applicant, Dr Wilcox contends that in  then  treating
      the Applicant as an overstayer, the Respondent misconstrued  paragraph
      34E of the Immigration  Rules.   Correctly  construed,  paragraph  34E
      required the Respondent to treat the third application as  an  invalid
      variation of his previous (second) application  which  was  valid  and
      therefore required determination.




   4. The Respondent contends that paragraph 34 must be interpreted in light
      of Lord Carnwath's analysis in the Supreme Court decision of  Mirza  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  UKSC  63  and  the
      Court of Appeal's decision in R (Singh) v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1669.   Accordingly   the   third
      application was valid on submission and a 'valid variation of a  leave
      to remain application',  pursuant  to  paragraph  34F  of  the  rules,
      thereby  effectively  subsuming  the   previous   application.   Under
      paragraph  34F  the  'valid  variation'  fell  to  be  determined   in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules and it failed for  want  of  the
      necessary biometric information.

   5. Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal to judicially review  the
      Decision on the following basis:
             "... We grant permission on ground 2 as expanded upon  in  the
             hearing. That concerns the inclusion  in  the  Decision  of  a
             section 10 notice, informing the  applicant  that  he  was  an
             overstayer and could be removed.  The argument is pleaded ....
             as  follows.  The  Applicant  says  he  did  not  receive  the
             curtailment notice sent on 17 July 2017.  He  says  that  this
             was sent his partners email address and the  relationship  had
             by then broken down.  He  does  not  mention  the  curtailment
             notice in the grounds he says he was unaware of  it  until  he
             received the Respondent's AOS. He  says  the  curtailment  was
             therefore ineffective and his leave continued to  15  November
             2017. On 13 November 2017, he applied for further  leave.  The
             Applicant accepts that this application was varied by a second
             application on 15 March 2018.  He points to evidence  that  he
             enrolled his biometrics in relation to that application  on  8
             May 2018. He says therefore that this second  application  was
             valid. He submits that the subsequent application to vary made
             on 4 May 2018 which was declared invalid by the  Decision  did
             not render invalid  the  15  March  2018  application  because
             having regard to rules 39 and 39E, only  a  valid  application
             can operate to vary an earlier  application.   Accordingly  he
             says that this application remains pending...
             ...it is arguable that his leave would continue by  the  valid
             application on 15 March 2018 which, if  he  is  right  on  his
             variation argument would then mean that he had leave as of the
             date of the Decision and thereafter  further  leave  when  the
             application was again varied on 2 September  2018...."  (Upper
             Tribunal Judge Smith)
           (reference above to paragraph 39 is assumed to be  reference  to
           paragraph 34 of the Immigration Rules)



   6. Accordingly the issue that arises before this Tribunal is  the  proper
      construction of  paragraphs  34  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
      implications of the analysis in Mirza v SSHD [2016] and Singh  v  SSHD
      [2018].



Factual Background and Chronology


   7. The Applicant is a national of Nepal  born  on  27  October  1984.  He
      entered the United Kingdom on 10 October 2009 with leave to enter as a
      Tier 4 (Gen) student dependent partner,  valid  from  1  October  2009
      until  21  May  2011.  The  Applicant  then  made  several  subsequent
      applications for further leave on the basis of his  relationship  with
      his spouse which tracked the changing basis upon which she was granted
      extension to her stay. The last of  these  applications  afforded  the
      Applicant leave to remain, valid until 15 November 2017.




   8. It appears that the Secretary of State attempted to send notice to the
      Applicant on 17 July 2017 curtailing his leave  to  remain  so  as  to
      expire on 15 September 2017.  The  Applicant  contends  that  he  only
      became aware of the  curtailment  notice  after  the  issue  of  these
      proceedings and the notice was not properly  served.  This  issue  was
      excluded by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith as falling for determination in
      this application and accordingly I do not consider the point further.



   9. On 13 November 2017, the Applicant applied for further leave to remain
      on human rights grounds. It is common  ground  that  this  application
      satisfied the requirements of paragraph 34 of  the  Immigration  Rules
      and was validly made.  On 15 November 2017, his leave expired.  It  is
      also common ground that the Applicant made a  subsequent  application,
      on 15 March 2018, for leave to remain, this time on grounds of  family
      and  private  life.  On  04  May  2018  the  Applicant  made  a  third
      application - this time for indefinite leave  to  remain  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. The necessary biometric  information  was  provided
      for the second application (family and private life) on 08  May  2018.
      Biometric information was not however  provided  in  relation  to  the
      third application (indefinite leave to remain) despite the  Respondent
      writing to the Applicant on 12 June  2018  requesting  his  biometrics
      within 15 working days:

      "Even if you have had your biometrics taken for a previous application
      you still need to do it again for this application, to enable the Home
      Office to confirm your identity".




  10. On 12 July 2018, the Respondent sent the  Applicant  a  second  letter
      requesting his biometrics within  10  working  days  or  a  reasonable
      explanation for why this could not be done:

      "If you fail to enrol within 10 working days and  do  not  contact  us
      with a valid reason your application may be rejected as invalid".




  11. On 20 August 2018 the Respondent rejected the Applicant's applications
      for leave to remain as invalid:

              "You have attempted to  make  an  application  for  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom. We wrote to you on 12 June  2018
             and requested that you enrol your biometrics initially  within
             15 working days. We wrote  you  again  on  12  July  2018  and
             provided you with a further 10 working days. As  we  have  not
             received any correspondence from you and we can see  that  you
             have still not enrolled your biometrics within the  stipulated
             timeframe, we have rejected your application. We are therefore
             returning your application and documents received from you."
  12. The letter went on to state:
             "Persons who require but no longer  have  leave  to  enter  or
             remain are liable to removal from  the  United  Kingdom  under
             section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (as  amended
             by the Immigration Act 2014.)
             You may be detained or placed on reporting conditions."

  13. On 2 September 2018 the Applicant made an application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules  based  on  his  private
      life in the UK, compassionate grounds and his fear of  persecution  on
      his return to Nepal.


The Submissions of the parties

  14. On behalf of the Applicant Dr Wilcox accepted that the application  of
      4 May 2018 for indefinite leave to remain was rendered invalid by  the
      Applicant's failure to provide the  necessary  biometric  information.
      However he submitted that the previous application for leave to remain
      on grounds of family and private life remained  valid,  the  biometric
      information having been provided on 08 May 2018. It  is  apparent,  he
      said, from the  statutory  regime;  the  rules  and  the  Respondent's
      guidance that there is a clear distinction between an application  for
      leave to remain and  the  variation  of  any  such  application.  More
      specifically the natural reading of paragraph 34E is that any  defects
      in an attempt to vary an application  do  not  infect  the  underlying
      application. Lord Carnwath's analysis in Mirza v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 63 is  not  apt  when  applied  to
      variations.


  15. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Ayres submitted that,  as  per
      the analysis of Lord Carnwath in Mirza,  the  Applicant's  application
      for indefinite leave to remain was valid on submission on 04 May  2018
      because it complied with the  requirements  of  paragraph  34  of  the
      Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 34BB of the Rules  provides  that  there
      can  only  be  one  outstanding  application  for  leave  to   remain.
      Accordingly the valid  variation  effectively  subsumed  the  previous
      application and fell to be determined under paragraph 34F (as a  valid
      variation).  As the Applicant had  failed  to  provide  the  necessary
      biometric information his application failed. There was by this  point
      no previous application in existence for him to fall back on.

The Legal framework

  16. Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 provides for  the  continuation
      of leave pending a decision on an application to vary the leave:

             "Continuation of leave pending variation decision


             (1) This section applies if -
                 (a) a person who has limited leave to enter  or  remain  in
                 the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary  of  State  for
                 variation of the leave,
                 (b) the application for variation is made before the  leave
                 expires, and
                 (c) the leave expires without the application  having  been
                 decided.
             (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
             period -
                 (a) the application for variation is  neither  decided  nor
                 withdrawn,
             ...
             (4) A person may not make an application for variation of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section.
             (5) But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a)."


  17. Section 50 of the Immigration Nationality and Asylum Act 2006  enabled
      the  Secretary  of  State  to  lay  down  in  the  immigration   rules
      requirements for the procedure for applications, including the use  of
      specified forms, and to make provision for the consequences of failure
      to apply.


  18. The version of paragraph 34 in force between 06 April 2018 to 05  July
      2018 when the Applicant's application was decided provides, so far  as
      relevant to the issues arising, as follows:

             "How to make a valid application for leave to remain in the UK


             34. An application  for  leave  to  remain  must  be  made  in
             accordance with sub-paragraphs (1) to (10) below.
             ...
             (3) Where the applicant is required to pay  a  fee,  this  fee
             must be paid in full in accordance with the process set out in
             the application form.
                   ...
             (10)  Where  the  applicant  is  required  to  provide   their
             biometric information, this must  be  provided  in  accordance
             with the process set out in the biometric enrolment letter and
             any subsequent warning letter issued in  accordance  with  the
             Code of Practice about the sanctions for  non-compliance  with
             the biometric registration regulations.


             34A. Subject to paragraph 34B, where an application for  leave
             to remain does not meet the requirements of paragraph  34,  it
             is invalid and will not be considered.





             Multiple Applications





             34BB  (1)  An  applicant  may  only   have   one   outstanding
             application for leave to remain at a time.
             (2) If an application for leave  to  remain  is  submitted  in
             circumstances where a previous application for leave to remain
             has not been decided, it will be treated as a variation of the
             previous application.
             ...

             Variation of Applications or Claims for Leave to Remain





             34E. If a person wishes to vary the purpose of an  application
             for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, the variation  must
             comply with the requirements of paragraph 34 (as they apply at
             the date the variation is made) as if the variation were a new
             application. If it does not, subject  to  paragraph  34B,  the
             variation will be invalid and will not be considered.


             34F. Any valid variation of a leave to remain application will
             be decided in accordance with the immigration rules  in  force
             at the date such variation is made."


  19. The power to require biometric information is derived from regulations
      made  under  section  5  of  the  UK  Borders  Act.   The  Immigration
      (Biometric Registration) Regulations 2008 (2008/3048) provide  that  a
      person subject to immigration control "must apply for the issue  of  a
      biometric  immigration  document"  where   certain   conditions   were
      satisfied (Regulation 3).


  20. Regulation 23 provides that on failure to  comply,  the  Secretary  of
      State "may" take any of the actions specified in paragraph (2):

          "(2) The actions specified are to -
             a) refuse an application for biometric immigration document;
             (b) treat the person's application  for  leave  to  remain  as
             invalid..."
              (c)refuse the person's application for leave to remain; and
             d) cancel or vary leave to enter or remain."

  21. Home Office Guidance on 'Application for leave to remain;  validation,
      variation and withdrawal' states at [153-178]:


             "Varying an application for leave to remain


             An applicant can vary the purpose of  an  application  at  any
             time before a decision  on  the  application  is  served.  Any
             application submitted where a previous application has not yet
             been decided is a variation of that previous application -  an
             applicant can only have one application outstanding at any one
             time....


             Deemed date of service of a decision is as follows, if served:
               - by post, 2 days after the date the letter is posted
               - by email, on the date the email is sent
               - in person, on the date it is served

              If  the  applicant  wishes  to  vary  the  purpose  of   their
              application, they must complete the specified  form  and  meet
              all the requirements of paragraph 34 of the Immigration  Rules
              for the variation to be valid.


              ...


              A valid variation of purpose will look like a new application.
              You must check CID to see if  an  earlier  application  exists
              which has not yet been decided. This will tell you whether the
              new application is a variation of an existing application or a
              fresh application. If it  is  a  fresh  application  you  must
              consider whether it can be made. Guidance on applications made
              while a person is on  section  3C  can  be  found  in  the  3C
              guidance.


              ...


              Date of application: application to vary


              Where an application is varied, the application  date  remains
              the date of the original  application.  This  is  relevant  to
              whether an applicant has, or will have, 3C leave....
              However, for PBS applications, where a  variation  application
              is made in  accordance  with  paragraph  34E,  then,  for  the
              purposes of assessment against the rules, the  date  on  which
              the variation is made should be treated as  the  date  of  the
              application."


  22. In R (Mirza, Iqbal and Ehsan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2016] UKSC 63 (at [179-193]), the Supreme Court considered
      how  section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  applies  where   an
      application to vary the period of leave  was  made  in  time  but  was
      procedurally defective for some reason.   Lord Carnwath  distinguished
      the cases of Mirza and Iqbal (non-payment of fees) from that of  Ehsan
      (failure to provide biometrics).  The  failure  to  provide  biometric
      information could not be treated as  retrospectively  invalidating  an
      application from the outset.  It would invalidate the application from
      the time of the  failure  to  submit  biometric  information  and  not
      before, thus meaning the application was valid at the outset.

             "36. ....there is  a  potentially  important  difference.  The
             obligation  to  pay  the  fee  arises  at  the  time  of   the
             application. There is no conceptual  difficulty  in  providing
             that an application unaccompanied by a fee is invalid from the
             outset. The requirement to  apply  for  biometric  information
             arises only at a later stage, on receipt of a notice from  the
             Secretary of State. Thus in Ms Ehsan's  case  the  application
             was made in December 2011, but it was not until the  following
             February that she was required to make  an  appointment.  Even
             then  it  was  accepted  that  there  might  be  a  reasonable
             explanation justifying further delay.


             37. It is difficult to see any reason why a  failure  at  that
             stage should be treated as  retrospectively  invalidating  the
             application from the outset, and so  nullifying  the  previous
             extension under section 3C  of  her  leave  to  remain.  There
             appears to be nothing in section 7 of the 2007 Act to  support
             such retrospective effect.
             .......
             In any  event  there  is  no  reason  to  read  it  as  having
             retrospective effect. The natural reading, which is consistent
             with the statutory purpose, is to give power to invalidate the
             application as from the time of the decision, but not before."


  23. In R (Singh) v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
      EWCA Civ 1669 (at  [194  -  206])  Lord  Justice  Irwin  adopted  Lord
      Carnwath's analysis in relation to the provision of a passport:


             "26. Just as in the case of Ms Ehsan, this Appellant  made  an
             application in proper form. There was nothing further  he  was
             obliged to do at that point. I fail to grasp how that was  not
             a valid application at that time. The  subsequent  failure  to
             provide documentation properly led to the application becoming
             "invalidated", but I can  see  no  basis  on  which  it  could
             properly be invalidated retrospectively from the beginning, so
             that there never was a valid application. That is  clearly  to
             be distinguished from a case where the necessary steps  for  a
             valid application at  the  outset  (such  as  payment  of  the
             relevant fee) had never been taken. If that is  correct,  then
             there was indeed a valid application on 22 October  2014,  and
             time ran accordingly".


Discussion

  24. Paragraph 34 [A-F] of the Immigration Rules is to be construed by  the
      application of the  ordinary  principles  of  statutory  construction,
      which start from the natural meaning of the  words  in  their  context
      (Lord Carnwath in Mirza v SSHD at [33]).


  25. It seems to me that the natural meaning of paragraph 34, as it was  at
      the relevant time, is as follows:


        a. Paragraph 34 requires applicants  to  make  an  application  for
           leave to remain in accordance with the provisions of  [34].  The
           relevant fee must be paid in full [34(3)]. Biometric information
           must be provided in accordance with the process to be set out in
           a biometric enrolment letter from the Respondent [34(10)].
        b. If an application does not meet the requirements of paragraph 34
           it will be invalid and will not be considered [34A].
        c. An applicant cannot have more than one  application  outstanding
           at a time [34BB(1)].
        d. If a second application is submitted when the first  application
           is outstanding, the second application  will  be  treated  as  a
           variation of the first application [34BB(2)].
        e. A variation must comply with the requirements of 34,  as  if  it
           were a new application [34E].  If the variation does not  comply
           with paragraph 34, then (subject to 34B) the variation  will  be
           invalid and will not be considered [34E].
        f. Any 'valid variation' of a leave to remain application  will  be
           decided in accordance with the rules [34F].


  26. The wording in 34 (application) and 34E (variation of an  application)
      is different.  An application 'must be made in  accordance  with'  the
      requirements of paragraph 34. A  variation  of  an  application  'must
      comply' with the requirements of paragraph 34.  Paragraph 34  includes
      the requirement for biometric information which  is  forward  looking.
      Compliance cannot take place, it seems  to  me,  until  the  applicant
      receives the  biometric  enrolment  letter  from  the  Respondent  and
      follows the process set out in the letter.     That does  not  however
      make the application invalid at this juncture given the requirement to
      comply has yet to be triggered by the receipt of the enrolment  letter
      so as to set the biometric clock starts ticking.   The variation is in
      a state of pending  compliance.      Once  the  Respondent  sends  the
      biometric letter the clock starts ticking  and  the  application  will
      become invalid if the applicant does not submit the  data  within  the
      requisite timescale.

  27. To support her  interpretation  that  the  May  2018  application  for
      indefinite leave was valid from the outset, Ms Ayres' relied  on  Lord
      Carnwath's obiter analysis in Mirza,  where  his  Lordship  considered
      that the failure to provide biometric information could not be treated
      as retrospectively invalidating an application  from  the  outset.  He
      considered the appropriate position was that a failure to provide  the
      information would invalidate the application  from  the  time  of  the
      failure to  submit  biometric  information  and  not  before,  meaning
      therefore that the application was valid at the outset.

  28. However, Lord Carnwath was considering an  application  for  leave  to
      remain under section 3C.  He was not considering the variation of  any
      such application.  My assessment of the natural meaning  of  paragraph
      34 is founded on the words of paragraph 34E which provides  that  "the
      variation must comply with the requirements of paragraph 34" (emphasis
      added).

  29. Moreover, it is important to look at the version  of  the  rules  that
      Lord Carnwath was considering in his analysis. Counsel did not have  a
      copy of the relevant version at the hearing.   After the hearing I was
      provided with a copy of the version of paragraph 34 in force as at the
      date of the determination of Ms Ehsan's claim in 23 December 2011.  In
      the version supplied by Ms Ayres the requirement to  supply  biometric
      information is not one of the conditions listed  as  necessary  for  a
      valid application under paragraph 34.   At the time of Lord Carnwath's
      analysis the requirement  to  supply  the  biometric  information  was
      derived from the Biometric Regulations and not from  paragraph  34  of
      the Immigration Rules.    This  then  may  be  the  context  for  Lord
      Carnwath's distinction between the  requirement  for  a  fee  and  the
      requirement for the biometric information:

             ".....  The obligation to pay the fee arises at  the  time  of
             the  application.  There  is  no  conceptual   difficulty   in
             providing that  an  application  unaccompanied  by  a  fee  is
             invalid  from  the  outset.  The  requirement  to  apply   for
             biometric information arises only at a later stage, on receipt
             of a notice from the Secretary of State.

  30. The case of Singh v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1669 concerned an application
      for leave to remain.  The applicant failed to supply a passport within
      the requisite timescale and his application was rejected  as  invalid.
      He challenged the decision on the basis that the decision to treat the
      application as invalid was  an  error  because  he  has  supplied  the
      passport, albeit  it  late.       Irwin  LJ  applied  Lord  Carnwath's
      analysis to the  provision  of  passport  photos.    He  analysed  the
      position as follows:


           "Just as in the  case  of  Ms  Ehsan,  this  Appellant  made  an
           application in the proper form.  There was  nothing  further  he
           was obliged to do at that point.   I fail to grasp how that  was
           not a valid application at that time.  The subsequent failure to
           provide documentation properly led to the  application  becoming
           'invalidated' but I can see no basis on which it could  properly
           be invalidated retrospectively from the beginning so that  there
           was never a valid application" [26]


  31. I accept that a requirement to supply a passport within 15 days  is  a
      forward looking obligation, as are the biometric requirements in  this
      case.   However, the version of the Rules in  force  at  the  time  of
      Irwin LJ's analysis differs from the version applied to the  Applicant
      in this case.  Nor, as  I  understand,  was  Irwin  LJ  considering  a
      variation to an application, as here.  The judgment does not therefore
      refer to the equivalent paragraph to 34E in  this  case  (variations).
      As noted above, my analysis of paragraph 34 is based on the wording of
      the paragraph in force at the time the application in  this  case  was
      determined.


  32. As she  accepted,  properly  in  my  view,  Ms  Ayres'  interpretation
      required her to collapse the distinction between  an  application  for
      leave to remain and an variation of that application.   It is apparent
      from the wording of section 3C(4) & (5)  Immigration  Act  that  there
      the statutory regime makes a conceptual distinction between the two:


           (4) A person may not make an application for  variation  of  his
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that  leave
           is extended by virtue of this section.


           (5) But subsection (4) does not prevent  the  variation  of  the
           application mentioned in subsection (1)(a)."

  33. From a plain reading of paragraph 34E I do not see how the distinction
      can be collapsed in the way Ms Ayres sought to do, given  the  wording
      of paragraph  34E.    If  the  variation  does  not  comply  with  the
      requirements in paragraph 34 "the variation will be invalid  and  will
      not be considered" (paragraph 34E).  Invalidity does not extend to the
      original application.

  34. Accordingly, I am of the view that the analysis of  Lord  Carnwath  in
      Iqbal and the decision in Singh can be distinguished.

  35.  Ms Ayres  contended  that  Dr  Wilcox's  interpretation  would  cause
      administrative difficulties and confusion.  I  am  not  convinced  the
      administrative  difficulties  are  so  great.    The   timetable   for
      compliance with the requirement of biometric information is within the
      control of the Respondent.  Moreover the default  position  is  clear.
      Unless  and  until  the  variation   complies   with   the   requisite
      requirements,  the  original  application  remains   the   application
      eligible for determination.

Conclusion

  36. For the reasons given  above,  the  application  for  judicial  review
      succeeds.


  37. The Secretary of State's decision of 20 August 2018 was  based  on  an
      erroneous construction of paragraph 34 of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
      force at the relevant time.


  38.  The Applicant's variation of his application for leave to remain  was
      invalid once he failed to supply the necessary  biometric  information
      within the requisite timescale. However  his  second  application  had
      complied with requirements. It was therefore valid  and  eligible  for
      determination by the Secretary of State.

Order


  39. I therefore make an Order quashing the Secretary of State for the Home
      Department's decision dated 20 August 2018.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

      1. I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  because  the
         case does not raise an important point  of  principle  or  practise
         there is no other compelling reason for the Court of Appeal to hear
         it.


Costs

      2. The Secretary of State shall pay the Applicant reasonable costs  of
         this judicial review application, to be subject to  be  subject  to
         detailed assessment if not agreed.








            Signed:


                                The Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton




        Dated:    29/10/2019



