
[pic]
AI

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                    Bhanushali (re-using same CAS: new rules) India [2011]
UKUT 00411(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MANOJ KARSANDAS BHANUSHALI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H. Makkar, Solicitor, of Malik & Malik Solicitors


(1) In the fast-changing world of the points-based system, it  is  important
(a) to ascertain  the  precise  basis  on  which  an  application  has  been
refused; (b) to identify the relevant provisions of the  Immigration  Rules;
and (c) to check the relevant commencement provisions.

(2)  Thus, where an applicant had  been  refused  for  not  having  a  valid
Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies, because  the  reference  number  for
that Confirmation had already been used, the Immigration Judge  should  have
ascertained what the Immigration Rules  required  in  that  regard,  in  the
circumstances of the applicant's case. Had she done so, she would have  seen
that  the  reason  for  the  refusal  was  unsound,  having  regard  to  the
commencement provisions of HC 908.

(3)  Pankina and others [2010] EWCA Civ  719;  [2010]  Imm  AR  689  is  not
authority  for  any  general  proposition  that  the  requirements  of   the
Immigration Rules are to  be  disregarded,  merely  because  an  Immigration
Judge considers that their application  to  a  particular  person  would  be
"unfair".


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The respondent (hereafter claimant) is a citizen of Indian born on  12
    July 1975 who first arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 July 2009, with
    leave to enter as  a  student  until  19  February  2011.   Within  the
    currency of that leave, the claimant applied for a variation of it,  in
    order to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-
    based system.

2.    On 4  April  2011  the  claimant's  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  and  the  claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  1  June  2011,
    Immigration Judge McIntosh allowed the claimant's  appeal.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given to the Secretary of State  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 4 July 2011.

3.    The reason the claimant's application was refused by the Secretary  of
    State concerned the document known as the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies (CAS).  The Secretary of State's letter  of  refusal  of  4
    April 2011 told the claimant that he had  been  awarded  no  points  in
    respect of the 30 points claimed under Appendix A  to  the  Immigration
    Rules for a valid CAS because "the CAS reference number ... has already
    been  used  with  your  previous  application"  and,  accordingly,  the
    Secretary of State "is not satisfied that you have a valid  CAS".   The
    claimant was told that he "must have a new  CAS  for  each  application
    that is submitted".

4.    Paragraph  245ZX  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  so  far  as  relevant,
    provides:-

         "To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under
         this rule, an applicant must meet the  requirements  listed  below.
         If the applicant meets these requirements, leave to remain will  be
         granted.  If the applicant does not meet  these  requirements,  the
         applicant will be refused.


         Requirements:


         ...


         (c)      The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  30  points  under
             paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A."

5.    At the date of decision, paragraphs 113 to 120 of Appendix A  provided
    as follows:-

         "Attributes for Tier 4 (General) Students:


         113.     An applicant applying for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
             remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student must score 30 points  for
             attributes.


         114.     Available points are shown in Table 16 below.


         115.     Notes to accompany Table 16 appear below that table.


         Table 16
|Criterion                                           |Points awarded        |
|Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies              |30                    |


         116.     A Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  will  only  be
             considered to be valid if:
             (a)       it was issued no  more  than  6  months  before  the
                  application is made,


             (b)       the application for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
                  remain is made no more than 3 months before the start date
                  of the course of study as stated on  the  Confirmation  of
                  Acceptance for Studies,


             (c)       the Sponsor has not withdrawn the  offer  since  the
                  Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies was issued,


             (d)       it was issued  by  an  institution  with  a  Tier  4
                  (General) Student Sponsor Licence,


             (e)       the institution must still hold such  a  licence  at
                  the time the application for entry clearance or  leave  to
                  remain is determined, and


             (f)       it contains such  information  as  is  specified  as
                  mandatory in guidance  published  by  the  United  Kingdom
                  Border Agency.


         117.     A Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies reference  number
             will only be considered to be valid if:


             (a)       the number  supplied  links  to  a  Confirmation  of
                  Acceptance for Studies Checking Service entry  that  names
                  the applicant as the migrant and confirms that the Sponsor
                  is sponsoring him in the Tier 4 category indicated by  the
                  migrant in his application for leave to remain  (that  is,
                  as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  or  a  Tier  4  (Child)
                  Student), and


             (b)       that reference number must not have  been  withdrawn
                  or cancelled by the Sponsor or the UK Border Agency  since
                  it was assigned.


         118.     In order to  be  awarded  points  for  a  Confirmation  of
             Acceptance for Studies, the applicant must supply, as evidence
             of  previous  qualifications,  specified  documents  that  the
             applicant used to obtain the offer of a place on a course from
             the sponsor.


         119.     If the applicant is re-sitting examinations or repeating a
             module of a course, the applicant must not previously have re-
             sat the same examination or repeated the same module more than
             once, unless the Sponsor is a Highly Trusted Sponsor. If  this
             requirement is not met then no points will be awarded for  the
             Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies, unless the Sponsor  is
             a Highly Trusted Sponsor.


         120.      Points  will  only  be  awarded  for  a  Confirmation  of
             Acceptance for Studies assigned on or  before  20  April  2011
             (even if all the above requirements are met) if the course  in
             respect of which it is issued  meets  each  of  the  following
             requirements:


             (a)       The course  must  meet  the  United  Kingdom  Border
                  Agency's minimum academic  requirements,  as  set  out  in
                  sponsor guidance published by the  United  Kingdom  Border
                  Agency and the level of course that a  Sponsor  may  offer
                  will depend on whether the sponsor  is  a  Highly  Trusted
                  Sponsor.


             (b)       The course must,  except  in  the  case  of  a  pre-
                  sessional course, lead to  an  approved  qualification  as
                  defined  in  sponsor  guidance  published  by  the  United
                  Kingdom Border Agency.


             (c)       Other than when the applicant is actually on a  work
                  placement, all study that forms part of  the  course  must
                  take place on the premises of the  sponsoring  educational
                  institution.


             (d)        The  course  must  meet  one   of   the   following
                  requirements:


                  (i)  be a full time course  of  degree  level  study  that
                      leads to an approved qualification as defined in UKBA
                      guidance;


                  (ii)       be an overseas course  of  degree  level  study
                      that is recognised as being equivalent to a UK Higher
                      Education course and is being provided by an overseas
                      Higher Education Institution,


                  (iii)      be a full time  course  of  study  involving  a
                      minimum of 15 hours per week organised daytime  study
                      and, except in the case of  a  pre-sessional  course,
                      lead to an  approved  qualification,  below  bachelor
                      degree level as defined in paragraph 120(a).


             (e)        If  the  course  contains  a  course-related   work
                  placement, any period that the applicant will be  spending
                  on that placement must not exceed half of the total length
                  of the course spent in the United Kingdom except where  it
                  is  a  United  Kingdom  statutory  requirement  that   the
                  placement should exceed  half  the  total  length  of  the
                  course. Where the student is following a course  of  study
                  below degree level study (excluding  a  foundation  degree
                  course), the course  can  only  be  offered  by  a  Highly
                  Trusted Sponsor."

6.    At paragraphs 3 to 5  of  the  determination,  the  Immigration  Judge
    recorded the evidence of the claimant, who said that he had enrolled at
    the Britannia College of Excellence and had been issued with a  CAS  by
    them.  This was deemed acceptable and had enabled the  claimant  to  be
    given his initial leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The claimant told
    the Immigration Judge  that  when  he  made  his  current  application,
    Britannia College had advised him that the same CAS reference could  be
    used.  The claimant followed that  advice.   He  told  the  Immigration
    Judge he considered this would be appropriate as he  was  at  the  same
    college, the course details were the same and his circumstances had not
    changed.

7.    At some point, however, the claimant appears to have formed  the  view
    that the Secretary of  State  required  a  new  CAS  and  the  claimant
    accordingly approached the college but was advised by them  "that  they
    did not have any CAS left on their computer system" (paragraph 3).  The
    college  did,  however,  send  the  Secretary  of  State  a  letter  of
    explanation, confirming that the  claimant  was  a  student  with  them
    pursuing an ACCA course and that "unfortunately at the present time the
    college has run out of CAS and we are unable to issue students  with  a
    replacement CAS" (paragraph 4).  The  Immigration  Judge  was  informed
    that the claimant's ACCA course commenced on 3 January 2011 and was due
    to end on 2 January 2014.  The claimant provided  documentary  material
    to confirm that he had an 84% attendance up to 16  May  2011  and  also
    that he had more than adequate funds for the period of 28 days prior to
    the application.

8.    At paragraph 7, the Immigration Judge recorded the submission  of  the
    Presenting Officer that "the guidance is clear that the CAS may only be
    used once".  The claimant's representative submitted that the  claimant
    had used his best endeavours to obtain a CAS.

9.    At paragraph 10, the Immigration Judge appeared  to  accept  that  the
    claimant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The
    Immigration Judge was, nevertheless, satisfied that the claimant was  a
    genuine student pursuing  an  ACCA  course  and  that  he  "would  have
    produced a CAS if this were available to the college".

10.   At this point, the Immigration Judge apparently  considered  that  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in Pankina v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 719;  [2010]
    Imm AR 689 meant that she was free to do whatever was necessary in  her
    view to achieve a "fair" result.  Thus:-

         "11.     Having regard to the principles of Pankina I find that  it
             would be unfair in the circumstances to  deny  the  [claimant]
             the right to continue his studies on the basis of a CAS issued
             with the  permission  of  the  college,  which  could  not  be
             replaced administratively.


         12.      For the reasons I outline herein I allow this appeal."

11.   It is unclear what  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  Immigration
    Judge was referring to, when speaking of a "guidance note".  The letter
    of refusal of 4 April makes no reference to any guidance.   The  thrust
    of that letter is simply that, because  the  claimant's  CAS  reference
    number had already been used, the claimant failed to show that he had a
    valid CAS and thus failed under the Immigration Rules (paragraph  245ZX
    and Appendix A).

12.   Instead of looking at those Rules, as at  the  date  of  decision,  in
    order to decide whether the claimant met them,  the  Immigration  Judge
    apparently decided that  compliance  with  the  Rules  was  effectively
    irrelevant, if she found that it would be "unfair" to stop the claimant
    continuing his studies in the United Kingdom.

13.   Nowhere in Pankina is there authority for such  an  approach;  and  Mr
    Makkar did not seek to defend the determination.  On the  contrary,  he
    conceded that it should be set aside for error of law and the  decision
    in the appeal re-made.

14.   For the Secretary of State, Mr Saunders made it clear that he  was  at
    a loss to understand why the claimant's application had  been  refused,
    having regard to the terms of Appendix A as at the  date  of  decision.
    The CAS had been issued on 16 December 2010, which was  not  more  than
    six months before the application was made (paragraph  116(a)).   There
    was no suggestion that any of the other provisions of paragraph 116  or
    paragraphs 117 to 120 were not satisfied, in the circumstances  of  the
    present case.

15.   An explanation for  the  refusal  might  lie  with  the  Statement  of
    Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  (HC  908),  which  were  laid   before
    Parliament on 31 March 2011.  Amongst the extensive changes made to  HC
    395, we find this at paragraph 50:-

         "50.     In Appendix A, after paragraph 116(e) insert:


             ........


             (ea)      the migrant must not  previously  have  applied  for
                  entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to  remain  using
                  the same Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  reference
                  number where  that  application  was  either  approved  or
                  refused  (not  rejected  as  an  invalid  application   or
                  withdrawn."

16.   The changes made by HC 908, however, took  effect  only  on  21  April
    2011.  Even then, "if an applicant has made an  application  for  leave
    before 21 April 2011 and the application has not  been  decided  before
    that date, it will be decided in accordance with the rules in force  on
    20 April 2011" (page 3).

17.   The only explanation for the Secretary  of  State's  decision  in  the
    present case is that the official who took it on 4 April 2011 did so by
    reference to HC 908, on the mistaken assumption that the  amendment  to
    paragraph 116, to which I have just referred, had  already  been  made,
    and, moreover, was applicable to the claimant.  Neither assumption  was
    correct.

18.   Mr Makkar informed me that he was aware of  a  significant  number  of
    cases of a similar kind, where applicants had been refused on the basis
    of the same incorrect application of  HC  908.   Mr  Saunders  did  not
    demur.  Be that as it may, what this case shows is that it is important
    in the fast-changing world of the points-based system (a) to  ascertain
    the precise basis on which an application  has  been  refused;  (b)  to
    identify the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules; and  (c)  to
    check the relevant commencement provisions.

Decision

19.   The determination of the Immigration Judge contains an  error  of  law
    and I have decided to set it aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing
    the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.


                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge P R Lane
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
