






  R (on the application of Bilal Mahmood) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (candour/reassessment duties; ETS :alternative remedy) IJR
                           [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC)

                            In the Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber




             In the matter of an application for judicial review




                The Queen on the application of Bilal Mahmood


                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department



  Duty of candour and misuse of process


     1) The lodgement of permission  and/or  interim  relief  papers  in  a
        judicial review application is a beginning, not an end.


     2) If an application for permission is overtaken by supervening events
        or is otherwise rendered moot, there is a duty on  the  Applicant's
        solicitors to take appropriate and  immediate  action.   This  will
        include  proactively  communicating  with  this  Chamber  and   the
        Respondent's representatives.

     3) From the inception of the proceedings and in  particular  following
        receipt of the Respondent's Acknowledgement of Service, there is  a
        duty on every Applicant's legal representatives to  conscientiously
        reassess the viability and propriety of their client's  application
        for judicial review and to consider whether any further  procedural
        step is required. If the Acknowledgement  of  Service  renders  the
        challenge  unsustainable,  appropriate  withdrawal  steps  must  be
        initiated promptly.

     4) Unjustifiable delays in the finalising and  execution  of  proposed
        consent orders and lack of communication with the Upper Tribunal in
        this context are unacceptable.




Judicial review and alternative remedy

  (5)     A person whose  leave  is  invalidated  on  the  basis  that  the
        Secretary of State considers deception has been used  in  connection
        with an application for leave will, at present, normally have an out
        of country right of appeal.


     6) The availability  of  that  right  is,  presumptively,  an  adequate
        alternative remedy to be pursued  by  the  person  concerned.  As  a
        result, a judicial review challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
        decision will fail, in the absence of evidence  showing  special  or
        exceptional circumstances.







           Application for permission to bring judicial review proceedings


      Following consideration of the documents lodged by the  Applicant  and
      the Respondent's Acknowledgment of Service


       Decision of The President, the Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey


              The application for permission is hereby refused.




      The Challenge


        1. This is another of the currently plentiful  crop  of  soi-disant
           "ETS" judicial review cases.  These have  gained  much  currency
           during recent months, stimulated by action taken  on  behalf  of
           the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the  Secretary
           of State"), the Respondent  herein,  in  the  wake  of  the  BBC
           "Panorama" programme  broadcast  on  10  February  2014.   "ETS"
           denotes Educational Testing Services, a global agency contracted
           to provide certain educational testing and  assessment  services
           to the Secretary of State.  In order to secure leave  to  remain
           in the United Kingdom, by virtue of the relevant  provisions  of
           the Immigration Rules it  was  incumbent  on  the  Applicant  to
           provide evidence that  he  had  obtained  a  specified  type  of
           English language qualification.  The action taken on  behalf  of
           the Secretary of State, which the Applicant challenges by  these
           proceedings,  was  based  on  an  assessment  that  the  English
           language certificate on which he relied  had  been  procured  by
           deception.


        2. The Applicant challenges  the  Secretary  of  State's  threefold
           inter-related decisions dated  08  May  2014  and  12  May  2014
           respectively, to refuse him leave to remain, to remove him  from
           the United Kingdom and  to  give  directions  for  his  removal.
           These  decisions are expressed to be based  on  the  Applicant's
           alleged deception:


                 "You are specifically considered a person  who  has  sought
                 leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  deception.
                 Following information  provided  to  us  by  .......    ETS
                 .........   that on 23 October 2013 an  anomaly  with  your
                 speaking test  indicated  the  presence  of  a  proxy  test
                 taker".


            On 16 May 2014, the Applicant was granted interim relief in  the
           form of  an  order  restraining  the  Secretary  of  State  from
           removing him from the United Kingdom.  At that  stage,  none  of
           the Respondent's evidence was available. A substantial volume of
           additional material evidence  has  now  been  provided  via  the
           Respondent's Acknowledgement of Service.


      Arguable Merits


        3. The Applicant's case is, firstly, that, as a matter of fact, the
           Respondent provided him with 60 days leave within which to  make
           a further application (presumably for leave to remain) and  that
           such application  was  duly  made,  with  the  result  that  the
           impugned  decisions  are  "unfair  and  unlawful  in   all   the
           circumstances".  No particulars of  the  alleged  unfairness  or
           illegality are provided.  Secondly, it  is  contended  that  the
           failure to afford the Applicant a period of 60 days within which
           to obtain a new CAS from a different sponsor  and  to  have  his
           leave varied  is  at  variance  with  the  Respondent's  policy.
           Thirdly, there is  a  complaint  that  deception  has  not  been
           established  by  the  Respondent  to  the  requisite   standard:
           notably, this ground  is  based  on  the  non-provision  of  the
           supporting  evidence.    Finally,   there   is   a   brief   and
           unparticularised complaint that  the  Applicant's  rights  under
           Article 8 ECHR have been violated.


        4. The Respondent's evidence is to the effect that the  Applicant's
           English language qualification was secured as a  result  of  the
           relevant test having been attended and taken by a  person  other
           than the Applicant, described in  this  series  of  cases  as  a
           "proxy",  with  the  result  that  the  Applicant  secured   the
           certificate  by   deception.    This   evidence   contains   the
           outworkings of the case made  summarily  in  the  texts  of  the
           impugned decisions.  A period of some six weeks elapsed  between
           the initiation of these proceedings and  the  provision  of  the
           Acknowledgement of Service.  A  further  period  of  around  ten
           weeks has elapsed since the latter event.  Nothing  further  has
           been received from the Applicant's legal representatives


        5. In this particular case, a significant feature of the  conjoined
           applications  for  permission  and  interim   relief   was   the
           Applicant's professed inability, due to (it was said)  being  in
           custody, to provide certain material documents, in particular an
           alleged  letter  from  the  Respondent  of  February  2014   (of
           unspecified   date)   to   the   effect   that   the   Applicant
           ".........would be given 60 days to submit a fresh  application"
           and the "fresh application" allegedly made by the  Applicant  in
           March 2014.  It was stated in Form T480, the  Claim  Form,  that
           these materials would be forthcoming.  However, some four months
           later, they have not been provided. On the working assumption  -
           which is rebuttable - that the Respondent's  Acknowledgement  of
           Service and  attachments  are  accurate  and  comprehensive,  it
           appears that these materials do  not  exist.   Applications  for
           permission  are  determined  on  evidence,  both   visible   and
           reasonably inferred.  There is a clear onus on the Applicant  to
           provide all material documents in  his  possession,  custody  or
           power.  I determine this  application  on  the  basis  that  the
           materials alleged by him in his application to exist are  either
           non-existent or irrelevant.

        6. The analysis immediately above operates to dispose of the  first
           of the Applicant's grounds.  At this remove,  some  four  months
           after the initiation of these  proceedings,  the  Applicant  has
           failed  to  provide  the  documents  underpinning  his  two  key
           assertions. Furthermore, they do not form part of the  materials
           lodged by the Respondent with the  Acknowledgement  of  Service.
           There  is  no  basis  for  inferring,  even  to  the  level   of
           arguability, that these documents exist.  Thus the first  ground
           has no substance.  It has no merit in any event having regard to
           the statutory framework  within  which  the  key  decision,  the
           first, was made.  This was a decision to refuse the  Applicant's
           application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
           ground that he had practised deception, under paragraph 322 (1A)
           of the Immigration Rules, which states unequivocally that  where
           this has occurred, leave to remain is to be refused. I  consider
           that, in tandem, the existence of this power and the decision to
           exercise it on the basis of the evidence  proffered  constitute,
           by some measure, the most important legal consideration  in  the
           matrix under scrutiny.


        7. The second of the Applicant's grounds falls in tandem  with  the
           first, since it is based on the existence of alleged documentary
           evidence which has not been provided: see my analysis in [5] and
           my assessment of the first ground in [6]. I  consider  that  the
           policy invoked has no function in a deception case of this kind.
           Furthermore, and in any event, there is nothing  in  the  policy
           document which purports to relax or  dilute  the  operation  and
           exercise of the legal rule in play viz paragraph 322(1A) of  the
           Immigration Rules  (supra).  I  repeat:  this  is  the  dominant
           ingredient in the framework under consideration.

        8. The third of the Applicant's grounds, being a complaint that his
           private life rights under Article 8 ECHR  have  been  infringed,
           is, in my estimation, nothing more than a makeweight.  It  is  a
           paradigm  example  of  pure  assertion  devoid  of  accompanying
           particulars and without a shred  of  supporting  evidence.   All
           that is disclosed in the grounds is  that  the  Applicant  is  a
           citizen of Pakistan, now aged 27 years,  who  has  been  in  the
           United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student since 14 December  2011.   To
           describe the evidential basis for  the  private  life  which  he
           asserts as threadbare is generous.  I consider  that  this  bare
           and  evidentially  impoverished  ground  is  distant  from   the
           threshold of arguability.  Furthermore, it withers to the  point
           of extinction in the wake of the recent decision of the  Supreme
           Court in Patel v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
           [2013] UKSC 72:

                 "It is important to  remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a
                 general dispensing power.  It is to be  distinguished  from
                 the Secretary of  State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to
                 remain outside the Rules, which may  be  unrelated  to  any
                 protected human right ....


                 One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's  call  in  Pankina  for
                 'common sense' in the application of the Rules to graduates
                 who have been studying  in  the  UK  for  some  years  ....
                 However, such considerations do not, by themselves, provide
                 grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
                 private  or  family  life,  not  education  as  such.   The
                 opportunity for a promising student to complete his  course
                 in this country, however desirable in general terms, is not
                 in itself a right protected under Article 8."

                 [My emphasis.]

            Per Lord Carnwath, at [57].




        9. The evidence is entirely one-sided, in the Respondent's  favour.
           Considered in its totality, I conclude that the Applicant  fails
           to  establish  an  arguable  case.   He  has  failed  to  engage
           meaningfully with the key  passage  in  the  impugned  decisions
           (cited above) and has sought to rely on  phantom  evidence.  His
           diffuse and inadequately  particularised  grounds  of  challenge
           airbrush  the  statutory  framework  and  are   unsupported   by
           evidence. This challenge fall measurably short of the  threshold
           of arguability.

      Alternative Remedy

       10. There is a more fundamental obstacle confronting the Applicant's
           judicial review challenge.  This reposes in  the  long  standing
           principle that judicial review is a remedy of last resort.  This
           has a particular resonance in  the  field  of  immigration  law,
           where specified decisions can be challenged  by  appeal  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  ("FtT").
           The pursuit of some of these appeals is restricted  to  "out  of
           country".   All  of  this  is  governed  by  legislation.    The
           operation of the  "last  resort"  principle  in  the  sphere  of
           immigration law has been affirmed in  resounding  terms  in  the
           binding decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in  R  (Lim)  v  SSHD
           [2007] EWCA 773, at [24] especially and RK (Nepal) v SSHD [2009]
           EWCA Civ 359, at [33] especially.  The  most  recent  noteworthy
           contributions  to  this  stream  of  jurisprudence  include  the
           decision of the Administrative Court in R (Khan) v Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 2494 and that  of  the
           UTIAC in Mohammad Bilal Jan v SSHD [2014] UKUT 265 (IAC).


       11. The effect of the decisions mentioned above  is  to  affirm  the
           application to the field of immigration law, in its full vigour,
           of a venerable principle of  public  law.   This  principle  was
           articulated in uncompromising language by Sir John Donaldson  MR
           in R  v  Epping  and  Harlow  General  Commissioners,  ex  parte
           Goldstraw [1983] 3 All ER 257, at 262:


                 ".....  It is a cardinal principle that, save in  the  most
                 exceptional  circumstances,   jurisdiction   [in   judicial
                 review] will not be exercised  where  other  remedies  were
                 available and have not been used".

            Soon  afterwards,  the  House  of  Lords  promulgated  the  same
           principle, in equally strong terms:


                 "Judicial review is a collateral challenge; it  is  not  an
                 appeal.  Where Parliament has provided  by  statute  appeal
                 procedures, as in the taxing statutes, it will only be very
                 rarely that the Courts will allow the collateral process of
                 judicial  review  to  be  used  to  attack  an   appealable
                 decision."


           See Preston v IRC [1985] AC 835, at 852 per  Lord  Scarman.   It
           has been observed that during the two  decades  which  followed,
           the trend of modern authority reflected a greater  readiness  to
           consider  the  balance  of  cost  and  convenience  between   an
           application for judicial review and  resort  to  an  alternative
           remedy: see  the  discussion  in  Re  Ballyedmond's  Application
           [2000] NI 174, at 178H, per Carswell LCJ.  However, in  Lim  and
           the other decisions noted above, the pendulum  appears  to  have
           swung firmly in favour of the potent formulations  of  principle
           contained  in  Goldstraw   and   Preston.   This   trend   seems
           attributable to  the  detectable  shifts  in  modern  litigation
           culture which have occurred during recent years, the  associated
           procedural  reforms  and  the  increasing  prominence   of   the
           overriding   objective.    These    more    recent    decisions,
           notwithstanding,  remain  faithful  to  the  dogma   which   has
           consistently underpinned the availability of judicial review  as
           a remedy  for  the  misuse  of  public  power.  They  do  so  by
           acknowledging the  further,  sister  principle  that  while  the
           remedy of judicial review is still available, in principle, even
           where a statutory right of appeal is provided, this is  so  only
           where the test of "special or exceptional factors" is satisfied


       12. Under section 82 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
           2002 (the "2002 Act"), a right of appeal to the FtT lies against
           an "immigration decision", as defined. As regards the  decisions
           which the Applicant seeks to challenge in these proceedings,  my
           analysis is as follows:


              i)  The  first  of  the  impugned   decisions,   whereby   the
                 Applicant's application for leave to remain in  the  United
                 Kingdom was refused, does not attract a statutory right  of
                 appeal.


                 It is worth noting that in this type of case a decision  to
                 invalidate the subject's leave to remain, under section  10
                 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (the "1999 Act"), is
                 another  possibility.  Pursuant  to  this   provision,   an
                 Immigration Officer is empowered to give directions for the
                 removal of a person who is not a British citizen  from  the
                 United Kingdom if, inter alia, the  subject  ".......  uses
                 deception in seeking (whether successfully or not) leave to
                 remain".  Section 10(8) provides:


                       "When a person is notified that a decision  has  been
                       made to remove him in accordance with  this  section,
                       the notification invalidates any leave  to  enter  or
                       remain in the  United  Kingdom  previously  given  to
                       him".


                 [Inserted by the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
                 2006, section 48].  An  invalidation  of  leave  to  remain
                 notification under section 10 of the 1999  Act  is  not  an
                 appealable immigration decision under  section  82  of  the
                 2002 Act


           (ii)   The  Applicant  challenges,  secondly,  the  Respondent's
                 decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.  By  virtue
                 of section 82(2) (g) of  the  2002  Act,  this  species  of
                 removal decision is appealable.  However, by reason of  the
                 dichotomy of "in country"  and  "out  of  country"  appeals
                 established by section 92, this appeal may not  be  pursued
                 while the person is in the  United  Kingdom.   Accordingly,
                 for this Applicant, the remedy provided by statute is a so-
                 called "out of country" appeal to the FtT.

           (iii) There is a clear  distinction  in  section  82  between  a
                 decision to remove a person from the United Kingdom and the
                 consequential, or linked,  making  of  removal  directions.
                 The effect of this distinction is that  removal  directions
                 do not attract a right of  appeal.   This  applies  to  the
                 third limb of the Applicant's challenge (supra).

                 Accordingly, to summarise, the Applicant has  available  to
                 him the statutory remedy of an out of country appeal to the
                 FtT against the Respondent's decision to  remove  him  from
                 the United Kingdom.


       13. The above analysis and the conclusion it yields, namely that the
           Applicant can pursue an out  of  country  appeal,  do  not  lead
           inexorably to the conclusion that permission  must  be  refused.
           This is so because, as acknowledged above,  the  effect  of  the
           relevant jurisprudence  is  that  an  application  for  judicial
           review of an appealable immigration decision lies where the test
           of special or  exceptional  factors  is  satisfied.   The  Upper
           Tribunal is required by the doctrine of precedent to give effect
           to the binding authority of the Court of Appeal decisions  noted
           above.  Thus the out of county appeal available to the Applicant
           is,  presumptively,  an   adequate   alternative   remedy.   The
           displacement of  this  presumption  will,  in  any  given  case,
           require suitable evidence.  There is none in the  instant  case.
           No special or exceptional factors have been identified. Thus the
           operation of  this  strong  general  principle  in  the  present
           context points unmistakably to a refusal of permission.


       14. For completeness, I would add that section 1 of the  Immigration
           Act 2014, not yet in operation, will substitute  section  10  of
           the 1999 Act, without preserving section 10(8). The latter  will
           be rendered otiose by a combination of paragraphs 322 and 323 of
           the Immigration Rules, as amended, when these  come  fully  into
           operation, which will occur when section 1 of the  2014  Act  is
           commenced. The current position is that paragraph 323(ia) is not
           yet operative. The remainder of paragraphs 322 and 323 came into
           operation on 06 April 2014.


      Duty of Candour and Misuse of Process


       15. In the contemporary era, which is  characterised  by  voluminous
           judicial workloads, the overriding objective  and  the  constant
           battle against the unholy trinity of avoidable delay,  excessive
           cost  and  unnecessary  complexity,  a  hallowed  principle   is
           sometimes overlooked.   This  principle  takes  the  form  of  a
           requirement of long  standing  that  in  every  application  for
           judicial review there is a duty of  candour  on  the  Applicant.
           While  this  applies  throughout  the  proceedings,  it  is   of
           particular  importance  at  the  permission  stage.    Formerly,
           permission applications were made ex  parte.   As  a  result  of
           modern reforms, they  now  proceed  on  an  inter-partes  basis,
           according to a procedure which should normally ensure  that  the
           Court is alerted to the substance of the Respondent's  case  and
           the most important documentary evidence.  It may be  that  these
           procedural reforms have resulted in decreasing emphasis on,  and
           attention, to the Applicant's duty of candour, which is owed  to
           the  Court  or  Tribunal  concerned.   However,  I   take   this
           opportunity to emphasise that this duty continues to apply  with
           full vigour at all stages of judicial review proceedings in  the
           Upper  Tribunal   (Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber).    All
           practitioners providing professional services in this field must
           familiarise themselves with the existence and  content  of  this
           duty and give full effect thereto.


       16. In R (I) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2007]
           EWHC 3103 (Admin), a renewed claim for judicial review,  Collins
           J observed, at [8]:


                 "....... it was not until the  Acknowledgement  of  Service
                 that the full history was disclosed.  It is essential  that
                 those who bring judicial review proceedings appreciate that
                 there is a duty of candour.  That means that they must  put
                 before the Judge all relevant material  and  in  particular
                 any material which may be adverse,  or  may  appear  to  be
                 adverse.  They must not leave the situation that the  Judge
                 does not have  the  full  picture  in  order  to  make  the
                 relevant decision"


           [My emphasis.]


           His  Lordship  added  the  following  stern  warning,  which   I
      gratefully adopt in full, at [10]:


                 "I make it  clear  that  there  is  ample  authority  which
                 indicates that the  Court  is  entitled  to,  and  will  in
                 certain cases, refuse permission purely  on  the  basis  of
                 such a breach. Whether or not there might  be  an  arguable
                 claim,  .......   [this]  can  result  in  a   refusal   of
                 permission."


           And at [11]:


            "Furthermore, it is a breach of the obligation of the solicitors
                 and Counsel if there has been a failure to include material
                 which is relevant and particularly if that material  is  or
                 may be adverse to the claimant.  If such a  breach  occurs,
                 it is open to  the  Court,  and  the  Court  will  have  no
                 hesitation  in  so  doing,  to  make  an  order  that   the
                 solicitors in question, and possibly Counsel if Counsel  is
                 also shown to have been in breach  of  his  duty,  pay  the
                 costs incurred by the Secretary of State  in  producing  an
                 Acknowledgement   of   Service   personally   and   .......
                 possibly the oral renewal as well."


           Practitioners should take note that this approach applies  fully
           in judicial review proceedings in this Chamber.


       17. The exalted importance of every litigant's duty  of  candour  to
           the Court or Tribunal concerned is properly appreciated when the
           duty is juxtaposed with the concept of abuse of the  process  of
           the Court or Tribunal.  I consider that,  properly  analysed,  a
           breach of this duty will normally be tantamount to a  misuse  of
           the Tribunal's process.  It is appropriate to add that the  duty
           is not, of course, unilateral.   It  is,  rather,  bilateral  in
           nature, applying fully to all parties to  the  proceedings.   As
           regards Respondents, this has been  long  recognised.   In  R  v
           Lancashire County Court, ex parte Huddelston [1986]   2  All  ER
           941, Sir John Donaldson MR observed,  at  p 4:


                 "Certainly it is for the applicant to satisfy the Court  of
                 his entitlement to  judicial  review  and  it  is  for  the
                 respondent to resist his application, if it considers it to
                 be unjustified.  But it is a  process  which  falls  to  be
                 conducted with all the cards face upwards on the table  and
                 the  vast  majority  of  the  cards  will  start   in   the
                 authority's hands."


            [Emphasis added.]


           The duty imposed  upon  judicial  review  Respondents  has  been
           recognised at the highest judicial levels.  A  single  quotation
           suffices:


           "And it is a well established principle that once permission  to
           bring  a  claim  for  judicial  review  has  been  given  public
           authorities are under a duty of candour to lay before the  Court
           all the relevant facts and  reasoning  underlying  the  decision
           under challenge."


           See Tweed v Parades Commission (Northern  Ireland)  [2006]  UKHL
           33, at [54]. I add,  with  due  deference  to  Lord  Brown,  the
           qualification that this duty applies fully at the Acknowledgment
           of Service stage also.


       18. The procedural regime applicable to judicial review  proceedings
           in this Chamber is contained in the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the 2008 Rules"), as amended.  Given  the
           issues  addressed  in   this   decision,   Parties   and   their
           representatives should be cognisant of the following  provisions
           in particular:


           (a)   The overriding objective: it is no coincidence  that  this
                 occupies a position of supremity at the apex of the regime,
                 in rule 2.




           (b)   The Upper Tribunal's case management powers, enshrined  in
                 rule 5.   These  include  powers  to  extend  time  and  to
                 require a party to provide documents, information, evidence
                 or submissions.


           (c)   The procedure for  applying  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
                 directions and the Tribunal's power to make a direction  on
                 its own initiative, contained in rule 6.


           (d)   The powers available to the Upper Tribunal in the event of
                 a party failing to comply with a requirement of the  Rules,
                 a  Practice  Direction  or  a  specific   case   management
                 direction.  These include ordering the relevant failure  to
                 be remedied and striking out a party's case:  see  rules  7
                 and 8.


           (e)    The  specific  requirements  governing  applications  for
                 permission to bring judicial review proceedings,  enshrined
                 in  rule  28.   These  include,  per  rule  28(4)  (g),   a
                 requirement to lay out the facts.  This means all  material
                 facts.  There is a further specific requirement to  include
                 with the application copies of the decision under challenge
                 and any other documents in the  Applicant's  possession  or
                 control on which he intends to rely: per rule 28(6).


            The provisions of the 2008 Rules  highlighted  above  contain  a
           variety of mechanisms which can be invoked to  remedy  omissions
           or shortcomings in papers lodged by a judicial review  applicant
           at the interim relief or permission stage. Furthermore, none  of
           these provisions, in particular Rule 28,  should  be  viewed  as
           diminishing in any way the Applicant's duty  of  candor  to  the
           Tribunal.


       19. True it is that there is no  specific  provision  requiring  the
           inclusion of a witness statement of the Applicant or  any  other
           person.  Prior to the introduction of the Civil Procedure Rules,
           it was the practice for  every  judicial  review  Applicant,  or
           Claimant, to swear an affidavit  or  make  a  witness  statement
           which would be included with the  permission  papers.   However,
           this is no longer required  in  the  Administrative  Court:  see
           Practice  Direction  54A,  paragraph  5.7.  whereof  lists   the
           documents which must accompany the  Claim  Form.   It  has  been
           suggested that these do  not  include  a  witness  statement  or
           affidavit on the part of the Applicant because  the  Claim  Form
           was amended to  include  a  statement  of  truth:  see  Judicial
           Review, A Practical Guide (Southey), second edition,  page  148.
           Unsurprisingly, the authors acknowledge that a witness statement
           or affidavit will be necessary in certain  cases.  However,  the
           reality of practice in this  jurisdiction  during  recent  years
           appears to be that a witness statement,  or  affidavit,  of  the
           Applicant has become something of a rarity. This is unfortunate,
           as I consider it indispensable in certain  cases.   Furthermore,
           it is to  be  lamented  that  the  salutary  discipline  of  the
           Applicant having to swear an  affidavit  or  execute  a  witness
           statement seems to be responsible for some laxity  in  standards
           in certain cases. At this remove, some may question  the  wisdom
           of this discrete reform.


       20. Undeniably, a comprehensive witness  statement,  addressing  all
           material issues and attaching all available relevant  documents,
           signed by the Applicant, will be required  in  certain  judicial
           review cases in UTIAC. The need for this will be dictated  by  a
           combination of the particular context, the Applicant's  duty  of
           candour to the Upper Tribunal, good practice and the  overriding
           objective. In  practice,  the  reality  is  that  the  completed
           Judicial Review Form, supporting grounds  and  any  accompanying
           documentary materials frequently fail to set forth all  material
           facts and omit relevant documentary evidence..  Furthermore,  at
           the initial stage of the proceedings,  there  is  no  scope  for
           facts to be agreed inter partes.  It is not possible to  attempt
           any exhaustive prescription.  However, it is self  evident  that
           where the Applicant's case relies on alleged facts which are not
           documented in the papers - such as  conversations  or  dates  of
           receipt of documents or verbal assurances or promises  allegedly
           given, or facts which  have  previously  been  disputed  by  the
           Respondent -  these  will  have  to  be  fully  addressed  in  a
           carefully composed witness statement.  In  the  examples  given,
           the evidence will be incomplete  and  the  Applicant's  duty  of
           candour owed to the Tribunal will not  be  fulfilled  without  a
           thorough  and  candid  witness  statement.  Observance  of  this
           discipline in those cases where it is appropriate  will  further
           the ends of justice and, if the statement is truthful,  accurate
           and comprehensive, will avoid misusing the process of the  Upper
           Tribunal. This requirement, where it arises, is not dependent on
           any procedural rule or judicial case management direction.


       21. There is no specific rule dealing with the provision of  witness
           statements  or  supplementary  documentary  evidence   following
           lodgement  of  the  permission  and/or  interim  relief  papers.
           However,  as  highlighted  above,  the  2008  Rules  make  ample
           provision for rectifying initial shortcomings and  omissions  of
           this genre.   While  recourse  to  these  particular  provisions
           should be  the  exception,  rather  than  the  rule,  the  Upper
           Tribunal recognises that, in a small number of cases, there  may
           be  legitimate  reasons  for  initiating  proceedings   by   the
           lodgement of papers  which  omit  necessary  witness  statements
           and/or relevant documentary materials.


       22. I consider the present case to be a clear illustration of one in
           which the Upper Tribunal should have  received  a  comprehensive
           witness statement  from  the  Applicant  at  the  permission  or
           interim relief stage or, if  genuinely  not  feasible,  as  soon
           thereafter as possible. I would have expected the Applicant,  at
           the permission  or  interim  relief  stage,  to  have  addressed
           comprehensively in a witness statement two  key  factual  issues
           which the papers lodged do not address.  The  first  relates  to
           the taking of the English language test.   The  second  concerns
           the important documents allegedly in his custody which,  it  was
           said, could not be included with the interim relief/  permission
           papers as the Applicant, being in detention,  could  not  access
           them.  In the abstract, there was much to be  said  on  both  of
           these issues and the only mechanism for doing so was a  thorough
           witness statement.  I consider that in the circumstances of this
           case, this was dictated by the all pervasive duty of candour and
           elementary good practice. I repeat that this requirement was not
           dependent on any rule of procedure or judicial  case  management
           direction.


       23. Generally, in every case the Applicant's  legal  representatives
           must act proactively at every stage.  Thus where, for legitimate
           reasons, it is not possible to include with  the  permission  or
           interim relief papers such a witness statement or,  indeed,  any
           relevant material, this  should  be  proactively  addressed  and
           adequately explained. There can be no excuse for failing  to  do
           so since the Judicial Review Claim Form makes explicit provision
           for this, in section 9. Since the duty of candour  endures  from
           the beginning  to  the  end  of  the  proceedings,  any  genuine
           inability to provide such a witness statement  or  any  relevant
           information  or  any  material  documents  must  be  continually
           addressed,  assessed  and  reassessed  by  the   representatives
           concerned.   Taking  into  account  normal  timescales,  it   is
           difficult to conceive of any case where a continuing failure  of
           this nature which endures beyond  receipt  of  the  Respondent's
           Acknowledgement of Service will be justifiable.  Resort  to  the
           mechanisms  provided  by  the  provisions  of  the  2008   Rules
           highlighted in [15] above must be had where necessary.


       24. Where there is a failure to discharge the  Applicant's  duty  of
           candour to the Upper Tribunal,  the  consequences  may  include,
           inexhaustively, the following:


              a) A refusal to grant permission.


              b) Linked to (a), a conclusion that the process of  the  Upper
                 Tribunal has been misused.


              c)  Adverse  costs  implications,  which  may  extend  to  the
                 practitioners concerned.


              d) The convening  of  a  "Hamid"  hearing:  see  R  (Hamid)  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2012] EWCH Civ
                 3070 (Admin).


              e)  The  referral  of   practitioners   to   the   appropriate
                 professional body.


           Practitioners must also be alert to the recent decision  of  the
           Upper Tribunal in Okondu & Abdussalam v Secretary of  State  for
           the Home Department  [2014]  UKUT  371  (IAC).   This  cautions,
           firstly, that the Upper Tribunal is  empowered  to  make  wasted
           costs orders and, secondly, that this Tribunal will make reports
           to  the  Solicitors  Regulation   Authority   where   considered
           appropriate.  Thirdly, this decision underlines the precept that
           the overriding duty of all representatives is owed to the  Court
           or Tribunal concerned and not the client.  I would add that  the
           solemn nature of this duty cannot be over - emphasised.


       25. In the present case, the following signal failings occurred:


           (a)   In the application for permission, it was represented that
                 certain important documents were in existence but could not
                 be  provided  at  that  time.   These  were  not   provided
                 subsequently at any  stage  and  no  attempt  was  made  to
                 furnish an explanation for this failure.


           (b)   No statement of evidence of the Applicant was provided  at
                 the permission stage or at any  stage  subsequently.   This
                 issue has not been addressed, proactively or at all and  no
                 explanation  has  been   proffered   by   the   Applicant's
                 representatives.


              c) The provision of the Acknowledgement  of  Service  has  not
                 stimulated any attempt to rectify the above failings, which
                 are now of some four months vintage.


              d) There was  a  failure  by  the  Applicant's  solicitors  to
                 rectify  these  shortcomings  by  resort  to  the  relevant
                 provisions of the 2008 Rules.


           In the particular circumstances of this case, I  consider  these
           failings, individually and collectively,  unacceptable,  subject
           to some compelling explanation or justification.  Steps will  be
           taken to require the  representatives  concerned  to  provide  a
           detailed explanation and a Hamid  hearing  may  be  convened  in
           early course.


       26. Finally, I take the opportunity to emphasise the following:


           (a)   The lodgement of permission and/or interim  relief  papers
                 is a beginning, not an end.


           (b)    If  an  application  for  permission  is   overtaken   by
                 supervening events or is otherwise rendered moot, there  is
                 a duty on the Applicant's solicitors  to  take  appropriate
                 and  immediate  action.   This  will  include   proactively
                 communicating  with  this  Chamber  and  the   Respondent's
                 representatives.


              c) From the inception of the  proceedings  and  in  particular
                 following receipt of the  Respondent's  Acknowledgement  of
                 Service,  there  is  a  duty  on  every  Applicant's  legal
                 representatives to conscientiously reassess  the  viability
                 and propriety of their client's  application  for  judicial
                 review and to consider whether any further procedural  step
                 is required. If the Acknowledgement of Service renders  the
                 challenge unsustainable, appropriate withdrawal steps  must
                 be initiated promptly.


              d)       Unjustifiable delays in the finalising and  execution
                 of proposed consent orders and lack of  communication  with
                 the Upper Tribunal in this context are unacceptable.


            I sincerely trust that, henceforth, the impression that in  many
           cases  the  Respondent's  Acknowledgement  of  Service  is   not
           considered,  properly  or  at  all,  by  the  Applicant's  legal
           representatives will be quickly dispelled.


      Order


      27.      I order as follows:


              I. For the reasons  elaborated  above,  this  application  for
                 permission is refused.


             II.  The interim relief order  dated  16  May  2014  is  hereby
                 discharged.


            III. Any request under rule 30 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
                 Tribunal) Rules 2008 for this decision to  be  reconsidered
                 at a hearing will be made within seven  days  of  the  date
                 this decision is sent


             IV. The making of any such request will  not,  without  further
                 order, operate as a bar to removal of  the  Applicant  from
                 the United Kingdom.

      Costs


      28.    I  have  derived  much   assistance   from   the   Respondent's
           Acknowledgement of Service and  am  minded  to  order  that  the
           Applicant pay the Respondent's claimed costs of �320.00, subject
           to any representations in writing to be received within ten days
           of the date of sending hereof.


      Direction


    29. The Applicant's solicitors will address the concerns expressed  and
        failures identified in this judgment in writing, within seven  days
        of the  date  of  sending  this  order.   Their  response  will  be
        addressed to the President of the Upper Tribunal,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Chamber and copied to the Respondent's legal representative.














Signed:
                 [pic]
                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber


Footnote

Following consideration of the explanation directed, no further  action  was
taken.




