
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                             Oppong (visitor - length of stay) Ghana [2011]
UKUT 00431 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2011                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                ELIZA OPPONG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Sebastians
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraph 41(i) of HC 395 requires a  person  seeking  leave  to  enter  the
United Kingdom as a general visitor (other than to  accompany  an  academic
visitor) to show that he "is genuinely seeking entry as a  general  visitor
for a limited period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months".

An application  for  a  visit  visa  which,  if  granted,  could  result  in
permission to spend more than 6 of  12  months  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
likely to be scrutinised rigorously but it is wrong to refuse someone  entry
clearance as a general visitor just because they have spent more  than six
of the last twelve months in the United Kingdom. In certain circumstances a
person can utilise paragraph 41 in order to  visit  the  United  Kingdom  to
provide temporary care for a person present here.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She was born on 31 May 1954  and
      so is now 57 years old.  She appeals  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent on
      2 November 2009 refusing her entry clearance as a family visitor.


   2. It is an accepted fact in this  case  that  the  appellant  has  close
      relatives who are lawfully resident in the United Kingdom.  A  brother
      suffered a stroke and needs long term  care.   His  family  have  been
      providing that care and this appellant has spent a lot of time in  the
      United Kingdom to assist that end.  The final paragraph of the  Notice
      of Immigration Decision dated 2 November 2009 is apposite and  we  set
      it out below:


             "You have stated you wish to visit the UK  for  six  months  to
             provide care for your brother Jacob Oppong. You have  submitted
             evidence and stated at interview he suffered a stroke and  that
             Doctor's report shows that this occurred in August  2007.   You
             stated your role in his care is to cook for him, wash and  iron
             his clothes and administer insulin  and  assist  his  carer  in
             washing and dressing him and checking his blood  sugar  levels.
             Home Office records indicate you have travelled to the  UK  for
             the same reason in October 2007, July 2008  and  February  2009
             each time for a period of six  months.  You  have  stated  your
             brother  Jacob  also  has  two  other  brothers,  Theodore  and
             Cornelius, in the UK and that Cornelius is  living  with  Jacob
             during your absence. You have  stated  Theodore  has  power  of
             attorney over your brother Jacob and deals with  the  financial
             matters of your ill brother. Whilst I accept you have family in
             the UK and you have been providing care for  them  on  previous
             visits, you have been [in] the UK since October 2007  for  this
             purpose leaving the UK after almost six months and returning to
             the UK shortly after leaving for a further six  months  period.
             Your passport and your statement at Gatwick to the  Immigration
             Officer demonstrate you have been in the UK between 6 July 2008
             and 4 January 2009 and between 22 February 2009 and  22  August
             2009.  Since July 2008 you have been in the  UK  for  two  days
             short of twelve months. The  duration  and  frequency  of  your
             previous travel to the UK and the reliance  upon  you  of  your
             other brothers to provide care for your ill brother mean  I  am
             not satisfied that you are genuinely seeking entry as a visitor
             or intend to leave the UK upon completion of a visit to the UK.
              I am satisfied that your ill brother has other family  members
             in the UK to provide for him in your absence and therefore I am
             not satisfied your case carries  a  sufficient,  compelling  or
             compassionate reason to travel.  I am therefore  not  satisfied
             that you meet the requirements of Paragraph 41(i) and  (ii)  of
             the UK Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended)."


   3. In short, the respondent decided that the appellant was not  genuinely
      seeking entry as a general visitor for a limited period as  stated  by
      her not exceeding six months and that  she  had  not  shown  that  she
      intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period  of  the
      visit as stated by her.


   4. After the notice of appeal had been sent the case was reviewed  by  an
      Entry Clearance Manager who said at paragraph 3.4:


             "However, I note from our own records and from the  appellant's
             own admission that between October 2007 and October  2009,  the
             appellant spent a total of about sixteen months in the UK.   In
             light of this I consider that the appellant has  been  residing
             in the UK whilst having  been  granted  leave  to  enter  as  a
             visitor only."


   5. The immigration judge in the First-tier Tribunal  disagreed  with  the
      respondent.  He found that the appellant did intend to return to Ghana
      in accordance with the leave which she sought  but  he  dismissed  the
      appeal solely with reference  to  paragraph  41(i)  of  HC  395.   The
      Immigration Judge expressed his sympathy for the appellant's difficult
      family circumstances but said at paragraph 14 of his determination:

             "I find that [the appellant] cannot use the visit visa rules in
             order to provide ongoing long-term care of her brother even  if
             it results in the appellant returning to Ghana on each occasion
             before the expiry of her stay. The level of  and  frequency  of
             her visits leads her not  to  be  a  "genuine  visitor"  but  a
             "resident"."


   6. Here the First-tier  Tribunal  echoes  the  respondent's  reasons  and
      implies that both "visitor" and "resident" are precise  terms  in  the
      Immigration Rules.  Neither the word "resident" nor the word "visitor"
      is defined in the Immigration Rules.  Various species of visitor, such
      as "business visitor", "support visitor"  and  "special  visitor"  are
      defined but the word "visitor" is not. Similarly the  word  "resident"
      or related words feature  commonly  in  the  Rules  but  there  is  no
      definition. We accept that the word "resident"  implies  a  degree  of
      permanence but this  helps  rather  than  hinders  the  appellant.  An
      essential requirement of entry clearance as a visitor is an  intention
      to leave the United  Kingdom  after  the  period  of  the  visit.  The
      proposed stay in the United Kingdom is not  permanent  but  transient,
      even if an applicant is likely to want to  make  a  fresh  application
      very soon after the proposed visit has ended. The  Rules  give  little
      opportunity for a person present in the United Kingdom as a visitor to
      switch to a different category and a visitor is not  admitted  to  the
      United Kingdom for a purpose leading to settlement. A person who meets
      the requirements of the Rules for admission to the United  Kingdom  is
      not resident there.


   7. Mr Turner submitted that the definition of "visitor" could be  deduced
      from paragraph 41, which identified the "requirements to be met  by  a
      person seeking  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  general
      visitor".  These include intending to stay for a period of  less  than
      six months, intending to leave the United Kingdom at the end  for  the
      period stated, not intending  to  take  up  employment  or  engage  in
      providing goods or services or undertaking  a  course  of  study,  and
      being maintained and accommodated without recourse to public funds.  A
      general visitor must not intend to receive private  medical  treatment
      and must not be in transit.



   8. There is an apparent tendency towards circularity in the Rule  because
      one of the requirements for leave to enter as  a  general  visitor  is
      that the  applicant  is  seeking  entry  as  a  general  visitor  (see
      paragraph 41(i)) but this does no more than require a  person  seeking
      entry as a general visitor  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  in  that
      capacity. It does not, we find, illuminate the meaning of  the  phrase
      "general visitor".

   9. Mr Melvin argued that the appellant was not a general  visitor  but  a
      carer.  Her reasons for coming to the United Kingdom were to care  for
      her brother  and  the  rest  of  her  family.   However  laudable  the
      appellant's motives might be she was not, he submitted,  intending  to
      travel to the United Kingdom for the purpose of the visit but for  the
      purpose of being a carer and so she  was  outside  the  scope  of  the
      Rules.

  10. Mr Melvin's argument depends on the status of "general visitor"  being
      incompatible with the role of "carer".  A problem with  this  argument
      is that it is contrary to the guidance published at paragraph 17.2  of
      the IDIs. This states:

             "There is no provision in the Immigration Rules  for  leave  to
             enter to be granted solely to allow a  person  to  care  for  a
             friend or relative in the UK. Where an applicant wishes to care
             for a friend or relative for a short period,  s/he  must  first
             satisfy the requirements for the Immigration Rules relating  to
             general visitors."


  11. As it is a requirement of those Rules that a person must be  genuinely
      seeking entrance as a general visitor it is impossible to give meaning
      to the IDIs unless it is accepted that  being  a  general  visitor  is
      compatible with being a carer.  This  is  not  a  surprising  finding.
      Whilst a person intent on simply metabolising in  the  United  Kingdom
      might come within the definition of "general  visitor"  most  visitors
      are likely to have a more specific purpose, typically the pursuit of a
      certain kind of leisure. There is nothing about intending to care  for
      a relative that is inherently incompatible with admission as a general
      visitor.


  12. We agree with Mr Turner. If, in fact, a person who applies  for  entry
      clearance as a general visitor meets the requirements for admission as
      a general visitor then, that  person  is  a  general  visitor  and  is
      entitled to entry clearance as a general visitor.

  13. It may well be that a person who spends little time in his country  of
      nationality  will  find  it  hard  to  prove  that  he  satisfies  the
      requirements of the Rules for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as
      a visitor. Certainly such a person should expect his application to be
      subject to rigorous scrutiny and a person who does not  have  a  clear
      reason for wanting to make frequent visits  may  well  find  that  his
      claims about the duration and purpose of the visit and  his  intention
      to return are not believed; but there is  nothing  about  a  prolonged
      stay in the United Kingdom punctuated by return trips to  the  country
      of origin followed soon by a further application for  entry  clearance
      as a visitor which in itself  as  a  matter  of  law  disqualifies  an
      applicant from being a visitor.

  14. We have seen policy guidance entitled "General visitors Frequency  and
      duration of visits" suggesting that "a  visitor  should  not  normally
      spend more than six out of any 12 months in the UK unless they have  a
      good reason, such as receiving private medical  treatment".  No  doubt
      this is useful guidance but it does not state the law and it would  be
      wrong to refuse someone entry clearance  as  a  general  visitor  just
      because they have spent rather more than six of the last twelve months
      in the United Kingdom.

  15. We are aware that Entry Clearance Officers can, in some circumstances,
      issue multiple entry visit visas. These are issued in accordance  with
      policies that are not part of the Rules and, we understand, include  a
      requirement that a person with a multiple entry visit  visa  does  not
      spend more than 180 days of  any  one  year  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Nothing that we say here impacts on that practice.

  16. It follows from this that the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that  the
      appellant is not a general visitor is perverse.  She  can  be  both  a
      carer and a general visitor. She has shown that she satisfies each  of
      the requirements of paragraph 41 of the  Rules  and  is,  accordingly,
      entitled to entry clearance under the Immigration Rules.

  17. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute  a
      decision allowing the appeal.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins
Immigration and Asylum Chamber






