
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

               Hayat (nature of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT
00444 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2011                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                                LORD MENZIES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE

                                   Between

                                KHIZAR HAYAT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Chaudhry, Solicitor, instructed by A M Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The significance of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40  is  to  make  it  plain
that, in appeals where the only matter weighing on the respondent's side  of
an Article 8 proportionality balance is the public policy  of  requiring  an
application to be  made  under  the  immigration  rules  from  abroad,  that
legitimate objective will usually be outweighed by factors  resting  on  the
appellant's side of the balance. The Chikwamba principle is not confined  to
cases where children  are  involved  or  where  the  person  with  whom  the
appellant is seeking to remain has settled status in the United Kingdom.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  12  November  1984,
    entered the United Kingdom on 23 January 2007, with entry clearance  as
    a student.  Within the currency of his leave the appellant applied  for
    a variation, as a Tier  1  Post-Study  Worker  until  3  October  2010.
    Before the end of that period of leave, he applied for a variation,  as
    the partner of a female citizen of Pakistan, who  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in October 2009 with leave as a student.  The  appellant
    and his partner had  been  living  together  in  a  relationship  since
    November 2009.  The parties applied for a certificate of  approval  for
    marriage and were, in fact, married on 14 October 2010.

2.     The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  because  she
    considered that the appellant failed to  show  that  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules  for  leave  to
    remain as the Partner of a Relevant Points Based  System  migrant.   By
    reason of paragraph 319C(h), an applicant applying for  such  leave  to
    remain "must have, or have last been granted, leave:

         (i)      as the Partner of a Relevant Points Based System migrant,


         (ii)     as the spouse or  civil  partner,  unmarried  or  same-sex
             partner of a person with leave under another category of these
             Rules who has since been granted, or is,  at  the  same  time,
             being granted leave to remain as a Relevant Point Based System
             migrant ..."


3.    As has already been indicated, the appellant's  last  grant  of  leave
    was under Tier 1 and it is, in fact, common ground between the  parties
    that the appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules.   However,  at
    the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  followed   the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    leave, his representative advanced  the  ground  that  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights  to
    require him to leave the United Kingdom, pursuant  to  the  refusal  to
    vary leave to remain.

4.    Immigration Judge Herlihy heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and
    his wife, which was not subject to challenge by the  respondent  (since
    no Presenting Officer was present) and  was  not  the  subject  of  any
    adverse credibility finding by  the  Immigration  Judge.   As  well  as
    confirming the history to  which  we  have  just  made  reference,  the
    appellant's wife told  the  Immigration  Judge  that  their  respective
    families had not consented to the marriage and that the wife no  longer
    spoke with her family.  The appellant's family  were  said  to  be  "no
    longer living"; but, once the wife had finished her course, "they  will
    return to Pakistan as her husband has his own  home  there"  (paragraph
    6.6 of the determination).  It is necessary to note at this point  that
    the appellant's wife is studying for a  ACCA  qualification  and  that,
    although one of the courses relating to this was due to end in November
    2011, she has subsequently been granted a variation of leave to  remain
    until 31 May 2014, in order to complete the ACCA qualification.

5.    The appellant and his wife also told the  Immigration  Judge  that  he
    had "done everything" for  his  wife  "such  as  picking  her  up  from
    college, doing the shopping and giving her moral support and that  they
    depend upon one another very much and it would be very hard for her  to
    be alone in the United Kingdom.  [The wife] says that she has no  other
    relatives in the United  Kingdom"  (paragraph  6.5).   The  appellant's
    written statement described him as "supporting my wife  psychologically
    and [I] have been encouraging her to study.   We  have  become  heavily
    dependent on each  other,  and  find  it  unthinkable  to  live  apart"
    (paragraph 9).

6.    Applying the five-stage test set out by the House of Lords  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27, the Immigration Judge concluded that it would not be  a
    disproportionate interference with the rights of the appellant and  his
    wife to require  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Immigration Judge noted that in MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; "private  life")
    Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037, it was held that a student in  the  United
    Kingdom on a temporary basis had no expectation of a right to remain in
    order to further social ties and relationships, where the  criteria  of
    the Points-Based System were not met  and  that  the  character  of  an
    individual's private life was by its very  nature  of  the  type  which
    could be  formed  elsewhere,  albeit  through  different  social  ties.
    Although the Court of Appeal in OA (Nigeria) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  82  had
    held that the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  had  been  entitled  to
    conclude that a student's Article 8 rights would  be  violated  if  she
    were removed from the United Kingdom in the middle of an academic year,
    the Tribunal in MM concluded that the prospects for bringing  "a  right
    to study case within  Article  8  are  bleak".   In  this  regard,  the
    Tribunal in MM noted the judgment of Laws LJ in LL (China) [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 617, that "the appellant has on the facts effectively no Article  8
    case unless her desire to complete the ACCA course of  itself  provides
    her with one, but I do not see that Article 8 can fulfil that function,
    at least on the facts of this case".

7.    The Immigration Judge observed that in CDS (PBS: "available":  Article
    8) Brazil [2010] UKUT  000305  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that
    Article 8 did not give an Immigration Judge a freestanding  liberty  to
    depart from the Immigration Rules and it was  unlikely  that  a  person
    would be able to show an Article  8  right  by  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom for temporary purposes. On the other  hand,  a  person  already
    admitted to follow a course may have  built  up  a  private  life  that
    deserved respect and the public interest in removal before the  end  of
    the course might be reduced where there were ample financial  resources
    available.

8.    At paragraph 9.7, the Immigration Judge in the  present  case  rightly
    reminded herself of the fact that, in the light  of  the  judgments  in
    Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39, she had to consider not only the Article  8
    rights of the appellant but also those of others with whom  his  family
    life was enjoyed.

9.     At  paragraph  9.8,  the  Immigration  Judge   concluded   that   the
    appellant's family  life  with  his  wife  "can  continue  in  Pakistan
    although I acknowledge that the  appellant's  wife  will  not  wish  to
    return whilst her course is ongoing".  The Immigration Judge,  however,
    also considered an alternative scenario:-

         "I do  not  find  that  there  are  any  obstacles  preventing  the
         appellant's wife remaining in the United Kingdom  to  conclude  her
         studies whilst the appellant returns to Pakistan for a short period
         of time until she returns to join him or whilst the appellant seeks
         entry clearance to return to the United Kingdom  to  join  her.   I
         have also taken into account Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  and
         appreciate that it  is  not  necessarily  unlawful  to  require  an
         appellant who relied on a human rights ground to  return  to  their
         country of origin to make an application for entry clearance.   The
         rationale behind the Home  Office  policy  of  routinely  requiring
         appellants to apply from abroad was to deter others  from  entering
         without entry clearance.  This could be a legitimate objective  and
         in certain cases could be the right course of action, but only when
         relevant considerations in the particular case made it so.   In  an
         Article 8 family case the prospective length and degree  of  family
         disruption  involved  in  going  abroad  for  an  entry   clearance
         certificate  will  always  be  a  highly  relevant  factor  in  the
         assessment of proportionality".


10.    The Immigration Judge's conclusion on the proportionality  issue  was
    as follows:-

    "9.9    I find that the appellant and his wife have only  been  in  the
         United Kingdom on a temporary basis and  they  could  have  had  no
         expectation of a right to remain in order to further  their  family
         life, ties and relationships.  Unlike the  applicant  in  Chikwamba
         the appellant is not seeking leave to settle in the United  Kingdom
         as a spouse and I find that the decision is proportionate  in  that
         it serves a public end.  I find that the decision of the respondent
         is not sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of rights of  the
         appellant under Article 8".


11.   Accordingly, the Immigration Judge dismissed the  appeal,  both  under
    the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds.   Permission  to
    appeal against the determination of the Immigration Judge was sought on
    two grounds.  The second of those related to an alleged failure on  the
    part of the Immigration Judge to consider a policy,  described  as  the
    "recently published 'casework instructions' dated 7  August  2008",  in
    which the Secretary of  State  gave  guidance  to  caseworkers  on  the
    assessment of proportionality in the light  of  Chikwamba.  Since  this
    document's existence, let alone relevance, was  not  mentioned  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or in the submissions  and
    written materials submitted by the appellant  in  connection  with  the
    hearing, ground 2 was and is hopeless.  At the hearing on 29  September
    Mr Chaudhry, accordingly, wisely confined himself to ground 1.

12.   The essence of this ground is that the Immigration Judge,  in  effect,
    failed properly to distinguish the judgments of the House of  Lords  in
    Chikwamba  and,  accordingly,  failed   properly   to   undertake   the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

13.   In order to understand this  criticism,  it  is  necessary  to  remind
    ourselves of what  the  House  of  Lords  decided  in  Chikwamba.   The
    appellant in that case was a female Zimbabwean, who had  unsuccessfully
    sought asylum in the United Kingdom and, whilst  here,  had  married  a
    Zimbabwean national, who had been granted refugee status.   The  couple
    had a daughter, aged 4 at the date of the House of Lords hearings.

14.   The question for the  House  of  Lords  was  whether  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights  to
    expect her to return to Zimbabwe,  there  to  make  an  application  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules for entry into the United Kingdom
    as the spouse of a person present and settled here.  The House of Lords
    held unanimously that it  would  be  a  violation  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights to require her to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Lord
    Brown gave the leading judgment, of which the  following  extracts  are
    relevant:-

    "40.   As we have seen, there is reference in  some  of  the  cases  to
         jumping the queue, not having 'to wait in the entry clearance queue
         like everyone else.'  It is not suggested, of course,  that  others
         are thereby put back in the queue and  thus  delayed  in  obtaining
         entry clearance.  On the contrary, the very fact that those  within
         the policy do not apply for entry clearance  shortens  rather  than
         lengthens the queue.  What is suggested, however,  is  that  it  is
         unfair to steal a march on those in the entry  clearance  queue  by
         gaining entry to  the  UK  by  other  means  and  then  taking  the
         opportunity to marry someone settled here and remain on that basis.
          But is it really to be said that others  would  feel  a  sense  of
         unfairness unless those like the appellant  are  required  to  make
         their claims to remain from abroad?


    41     Is not the real rationale for  the  policy  perhaps  the  rather
         different one of deterring people from coming to  this  country  in
         the first place without having obtained entry clearance and  to  do
         so by  subjecting  those  who  do  come  to  the  very  substantial
         disruption of their lives involved in returning them abroad?


    42.    Now I would certainly not say  that  such  an  objective  is  in
         itself necessarily objectionable. Sometimes, I accept, it  will  be
         reasonable and proportionate to take that course.   Indeed,  Ekinci
         still  seems to me just such a case,  the  appellant's  immigration
         history was appalling and  he  was  being  required  to  travel  no
         further than to Germany and to wait for no longer than a month  for
         a  decision  on   his   application.   Other   obviously   relevant
         considerations will be whether,  for  example,  the  applicant  has
         arrived in this country illegally (say, concealed in the back of  a
         lorry) for good reason or ill.  To advance a genuine  asylum  claim
         would, of course, be a good reason.  To enrol as  a  student  would
         not.  Also relevant would be for how long the  Secretary  of  State
         has delayed in dealing with the  case  -  see  in  this  regard  EB
         (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL
         41.  In an article 8 family case the prospective length and  degree
         of family  disruption  involved  in  going  abroad  for  any  entry
         clearance certificate will always be highly relevant. And there may
         be good reason to apply the policy if  the  ECO  abroad  is  better
         placed than the immigration authorities  here  to  investigate  the
         claim,  perhaps  as  to  the  genuineness  of  a  marriage   or   a
         relationship claimed between family members, less  good  reason  if
         the policy may ultimately result in a second section 65 appeal here
         with the  appellant  abroad  and  unable  therefore  to  give  live
         evidence.


      .........


    44.    I am far from suggesting that  the  Secretary  of  State  should
         routinely apply this policy in all but exceptional  cases.   Rather
         it seems to me that only comparatively rarely, certainly in  family
         cases involving children, should an article 8 appeal  be  dismissed
         on the basis that it would be proportionate  and  more  appropriate
         for the appellant to apply for  leave  from  abroad.   Besides  the
         considerations already mentioned, it should be borne in  mind  that
         the 1999 Act introduced one-stop appeals.   The  article  8  policy
         instruction is not easily reconcilable  with  the  new  streamlined
         approach.  Where a single appeal combines (as often it does) claims
         both for asylum and for leave to remain under article 3  or article
         8, the appellate authorities  would  necessarily  have  to  dispose
         substantively of the asylum and article  3  claims.   Suppose  that
         these fail.  Should the article 8 claim then be dismissed  so  that
         it can be advanced abroad, with the prospect  of  a  later,  second
         section 65 appeal if the claim  fails  before  the  ECO  (with  the
         disadvantage of the appellant  then  being  out  of  the  country)?
         Better surely that in most cases the article  8  claim  be  decided
         once and for all at the initial stage. If it is well-founded, leave
         should be granted.  If not, it should be refused.


    45.    Your Lordships have been made aware too of recent changes to the
         immigration rules which appear  to  involve  substantial  mandatory
         periods of exclusion following refusal of entry clearance or  leave
         to enter  in  respect  of  those  who  have  entered  illegally  or
         overstayed.  Inevitably these changes will have an  impact  on  the
         future application of the policy in article 8 family cases.


    46.    Let me now return to  the  facts  of  the  present  case.   This
         appellant came to the UK to seek asylum, met  an  old  friend  from
         Zimbabwe, married him and had a child.  He is now settled here as a
         refugee and cannot return.  No one apparently doubts that,  in  the
         longer term, this family will have to be allowed to  live  together
         here.  Is it really to be said that effective  immigration  control
         requires that the appellant and her child must  first  travel  back
         (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense) to Zimbabwe, a country to which
         the enforced return of failed asylum-seekers remained suspended for
         more than two  years  after  the  appellant's  marriage  and  where
         conditions are "harsh and unpalatable", and remain there  for  some
         months obtaining entry clearance, before finally she can return (at
         her own expense) to the UK to resume her family life which meantime
         will have been gravely disrupted?  Surely one has only to  ask  the
         question to recognise the right answer."


15.   In TG (Central African Republic) [2008] EWCA  Civ  997,  decided  less
    that three weeks after the judgments in Chikwamba had been handed down,
    the Court of Appeal assessed the significance of the  House  of  Lords'
    judgments.  In TG, the appellant's partner was HIV positive and it  was
    accepted she could not be expected  to  move  to  the  Central  African
    Republic.  The couple also had a child.  It was submitted that, in  the
    light of Chikwamba, the appellant's appeal should be allowed  outright,
    as opposed to being remitted to the AIT.

16.    Keene LJ rejected that submission:-

         "These are fact-sensitive issues and inevitably there  are  factual
         difficulties between this case  and  Chikwamba,  not  all  to  this
         appellant's advantage.  For example, just to take two matters,  Mrs
         Chikwamba had married at a time  when  removals  to  Zimbabwe  were
         suspended.  This appellant, during some of the  time  when  he  has
         been living with  his  partner  in  this  country,  seems  to  have
         disappeared  from  the  official  radar  screen  for  a  period  of
         something around  two  years.   Such  matters  as  the  immigration
         history of the  appellant  are  clearly  relevant,  as  Lord  Brown
         indicated himself at paragraph 42.   Then  Mrs Chikwamba,  it  was
         accepted, could not realistically leave her child behind  in  order
         to seek entry clearance from Zimbabwe, so in that case there  would
         have been an impact on the child who had a right to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom.  It has not been  said  that  the  appellant's  son
         could not be left in this country with his mother during  any  such
         time.  So there is a difference there. ... No fact-finding Tribunal
         has yet applied its mind properly to the issue  of  proportionality
         with the correct legal principles in  mind,  and  it  ought  to  be
         allowed to do so" (paragraph 3).


17.   Buxton LJ agreed, concluding that:-

         "... I by no means find it self-evident that the facts of this case
         are so clearly  either  similar  to,  or  more  favourable  to  the
         appellant than, those in Chikwamba so that we are obliged - that is
         what the test must be - to follow the  course  taken  in  Chikwamba
         itself of simply quashing the order for removal. ...  It  is  quite
         clear that a very strong consideration in Chikwamba  was  the  fact
         that it was the wife who  was  to  be  removed  from  the  country,
         inevitably in the companionship of her 4 year old child.  ...  that
         factor alone would in my view prevent this court  from  taking  the
         course urged on it by Mr Lams".


18.   Although it is clear from the judgments in TG that one of the  reasons
    for the Court's reluctance  to  decide  for  itself  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality was the principle of leaving that task to a  specialist
    fact-finding tribunal, it would not have done so if  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba had, in truth, been such as to operate with unwavering force,
    regardless of the circumstances of the particular case.

19.   The applicability of the Chikwamba principle  again  came  before  the
    Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953.  In that case, an
    Immigration Judge had to consider whether it would be  disproportionate
    to expect the appellant to return to Pakistan,  in  order  to  make  an
    entry clearance application to rejoin his wife in the  United  Kingdom.
    Although presented  with  Chikwamba,  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    consider the approach urged by the House of Lords in that case.

20.    At [7] Sullivan LJ said:-

             "I  realise  that  Lord  Brown  referred  to  Article  8  cases
         involving children and that there are no children involved in  this
         case, but the view that return should be insisted  upon  simply  in
         order to secure formal compliance with entry clearance rules  'only
         comparatively rarely' is not confined to cases where  children  are
         involved.  While the suggested approach  in  Chikwamba  'certainly'
         applies in such  cases,  it  also  applies  to  family  cases  more
         generally.  Depending on the facts of the case, it may  apply  with
         more  or  less  force.   But  there  is  no  suggestion   in   this
         determination  that  the  Immigration  Judge  took  the   Chikwamba
         approach into account at all."

21.   With these observations in mind, we have concluded that paragraph  9.9
    of the determination in the  present  appeal  is  legally  flawed.   In
    particular, the Immigration  Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    Chikwamba principle could be rendered inapplicable to the facts of  the
    case before her, on the basis that the appellant "is not seeking  leave
    to settle in the United Kingdom as a spouse".  More generally, there is
    no indication in paragraph 9.9 that the Immigration  Judge  brought  to
    bear those factors arising from the evidence she had heard, which  fell
    to be weighed on the appellant's side of the scales; in particular, the
    degree of practical and emotional support supplied by the appellant  to
    his wife and the wife's lack of any family in the United Kingdom.

22.   We accordingly set aside the determination of  the  Immigration  Judge
    and proceeded to re-make the decision in the  appellant's  appeal.   Mr
    Hopkin made no challenge to the veracity of the evidence given  to  the
    Immigration Judge, which we accordingly  adopt.   Mr  Hopkin,  for  the
    respondent, acknowledged that the issue in  re-making  the  appeal  was
    whether the decision to remove was a disproportionate interference with
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant and his wife.  In addressing that
    question, we have had regard to all the  relevant  evidence.   We  have
    also  had  regard  to  the  entitlement  of  the  respondent  to   make
    Immigration  Rules,  such  as  paragraph  319C,  which   restrict   the
    circumstances in which a person who has  secured  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom in one capacity may obtain a variation of that leave  in
    another capacity.  Allied to this is the legitimacy of the  consequence
    of  such  Immigration  Rules,  whereby  those  failing  to  meet  their
    requirements may legitimately be required to leave the United  Kingdom,
    if only to make an application to enter this country in accordance with
    the Rules.

23.   The significance of Chikwamba, however, is to make plain  that,  where
    the only matter weighing on the respondent's side of the balance is the
    public policy of requiring a person  to  apply  under  the  rules  from
    abroad, that legitimate objective will usually be outweighed by factors
    resting on the appellant's side of the balance.

24.   Viewed correctly,  the  Chikwamba  principle  does  not,  accordingly,
    automatically trump anything on  the  State's  side,  such  as  a  poor
    immigration  history.   Conversely,  the  principle  cannot  be  simply
    "switched off" on mechanistic grounds, such as because children are not
    involved, or that (as here) the appellant is not seeking to remain with
    a spouse who is settled in the United Kingdom.

25.   Like the absence of children,  that  last  factor  may  be  one  which
    diminishes the force of the  principle;  but  whether  it  will  do  so
    depends upon an assessment of the facts.  For example, if the  position
    disclosed by the evidence had been that the appellant's wife was due to
    finish her studies only a few weeks after the date of the hearing,  and
    was intending to return to her country of origin, and the evidence  was
    such that she did not need the appellant to be present with  her  while
    she finished her studies and prepared  to  leave,  then  the  Chikwamba
    principle would have had nothing to add to the appellant's  case.   The
    actual facts of the present case, however, were very different.  As  we
    have already seen, the appellant's wife had the best part of a year  to
    go before the end of her first tranche of the ACCA course.  She has now
    been given leave to remain until 2014 in order to complete that course.
    There is no suggestion that her practical and emotional  need  for  her
    husband to be with her has diminished in any respect.

26.   The fact that the presence in the United Kingdom  of  the  appellant's
    wife depends upon her status here as a student, and only on  that,  has
    to be acknowledged in undertaking the balancing exercise.  However,  as
    we have indicated, that  fact  alone  does  not  negate  the  Chikwamba
    principle.  She is entitled to remain and study here  until  2014.   In
    practice, if the appellant were to be removed, it is highly likely that
    she would be without his  help  and  support  for  a  very  substantial
    proportion  of  that  time.   The  evidence  is  that  she  needs   the
    appellant's help and support.  She  has  committed  no  breach  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Nor has the appellant.  There is a likelihood that,
    if the appellant were removed, his wife will  find  she  is  unable  to
    continue her studies, thus negating the rationale of requiring  him  to
    go back to Pakistan to make an entry clearance application.

27.   In short, on  a  proper  analysis  of  the  facts,  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba points plainly to the factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant
    outweighing the single factor relied on by the respondent.

Decision

28.   The determination contained an error of law and we set it  aside.   We
    re-make the decision in this appeal by  allowing  it  on  human  rights
    grounds.









                               Signed
                                                         Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge P R Lane
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

