
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SAB and others (students - serious breach of conditions - Article 8) Ghana
[2010] UKUT 441
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 November 2010                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     sab
                                     YAB
                                     SAB
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Akohene, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. The First Appellant was a  research  student  making  proper  progress
      reading for a doctorate. His leave was curtailed before his viva  voce
      examination was arranged. The immigration judge dismissed  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  There  was
      no  challenge  to  the  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      immigration  judge  was  right  to  dismiss  the  immigration  appeal,
      although it  was  a  significant  interference  with  the  appellant's
      private and family life to prevent him from completing  his  doctorate
      whilst in the United Kingdom, but concluded that it  was  an  entirely
      proportionate  response  to  a  person  who  totally  disregarded  his
      obligations under the Immigration Rules by working for hours excessive
      of those permitted, over a prolonged period.


   2. The restriction on working hours  imposed  on  students  are  hard  to
      police and other things being equal a person who chooses to ignore the
      Rules should not expect to find it easy to persuade the Tribunal  that
      he is entitled to remain on human rights grounds until his  degree  is
      finished. Any other result would seriously undermine  the  requirement
      that students take only limited employment and it would be  unfair  to
      those students who might wish to work longer hours than are allowed.


   3. Pankina v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 719 and CDS (PBS: "available":  Article
      8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC) do not support the argument that  a
      serious breach of the Immigration Rules can be  overlooked.  They  are
      examples of how a person guilty of a technical or minor breach of  the
      Rules towards the end  of  his  studies,  might,  dependent  upon  the
      particular circumstances of  the  case,  successfully  rely  on  human
      rights grounds to be allowed to complete them. They are not cases that
      provide an easy licence for those that choose not to comply  with  the
      Immigration Rules.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellants are citizens  of  Ghana.   The  first  Appellant  ("the
    Appellant") was born on 20 December 1970 and  his  wife  and  son  (the
    second and third-named Appellants) are dependants to his appeal.

2.    The Appellant's application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant was refused on 22 April  2010.   On  that
    date, a decision was in fact made to curtail the  leave  of  all  three
    Appellants to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  ground  that  the
    Appellant had failed to comply with  the  conditions  attached  to  the
    grant of his leave to remain.  Therefore a decision was  made  to  vary
    the Appellant's and his dependants'  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom so that he and his  dependants  had  no  leave  remaining  with
    reference to paragraph 323(ii) of HC 395 (as amended).

3.    The Appellant's appeal was heard before Immigration Judge  Prior  who,
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 2 September 2010  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    immigration and human rights (Article 8 of the ECHR) grounds.

4.    The Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  however
    granted by Senior Immigration Judge Poole who noting that  the  grounds
    of application simply referred to the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights,
    considered that the Immigration Judge had failed to properly deal  with
    those rights in relation to which it was noted that grounds  cited  the
    guidance of the Upper Tribunal in CDS  (PBS:  'available':  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305.

5.    SIJ Poole continued that an examination  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination did show that the  IJ  had  dealt  with  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 appeal but that it was "arguable  that  he  first  failed  to
    properly deal with the Appellant's private life and the issue regarding
    the Appellant completing his course".

6.     The  Respondent  responded  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  under   the
    provisions of Rule 24 in a  letter  dated  20  October  2010.   It  was
    considered  that  the   Immigration   Judge   had   "directed   himself
    appropriately".  He had made clear findings on the Appellant's  Article
    8 appeal.  There was in particular a finding  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination that it was not necessary for the Appellant to remain  in
    the United Kingdom to complete his PhD as it might be possible for  him
    to "utilise the various forms  of  highly  effective  modern  means  of
    communication" for contact with the Director of Studies.

7.    The letter continued that it was also significant  to  note  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made a finding that the Appellant made a "serious
    and long-term breach" of the conditions attached to his visa.

8.    Further at paragraph 9 of  his  determination  the  Immigration  Judge
    found "in some weeks of the term time the Appellant had  worked  hugely
    in the excess of twenty hours per week".   It  was  therefore  arguable
    whether the Appellant's desire to remain in the United Kingdom  was  to
    complete the purpose of  his  studies  or  whether  to  take  full-time
    employment in the United Kingdom contrary  to  the  conditions  of  his
    visa.

9.    The grounds of application that the  Respondent  challenged  contended
    that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  erred  in  his  treatment  of   the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights.  Reference was made to Huang [2007]  UKHL
    11 where the House of Lords had indicated that an applicant in  certain
    cases might fail to qualify under the Immigration Rules and  yet  might
    have a valid claim by virtue of Article 8.  It was that Article 8 claim
    that it  was  contended  the  Immigration  Judge  "failed  to  properly
    evaluate".

10.   Reference  was  made  to  paragraph  11  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination where he concluded that the Appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom aged 34 and that he had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  only
    five and a half years and therefore it would not be disproportionate to
    remove him and his family from the United Kingdom for lack  of  private
    life rights.  It was submitted that the Immigration  Judge  had  erred.
    In CDS the Upper Tribunal had concluded at paragraph 19 that:

           "... people who had been admitted on a  course  of  study  at  a
        recognised UK institution for a higher  education,  are  likely  to
        build up a relevant connection with the course, the institution, an
        educational sequence for the  ultimate  professional  qualification
        sought, as  well  as  social  ties  during  the  period  of  study.
        Cumulatively this may amount to private life that deserves  respect
        because the person has been admitted for this purpose, the  purpose
        remains unfulfilled...".


11.   It was submitted in the Appellant's case, he had submitted his  thesis
    and was waiting to defend it.  To  require  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom at this stage when he was almost at the end of a  long  journey
    to obtain his professional recognition would amount to a breach of  his
    private life rights.  That error had prejudiced the Appellant.

12.   The first issue before me was whether the  Immigration  Judge  made  a
    material error of law that being an error  of  law  that  affected  his
    decision on the appeal.

13.   Having  heard  the  respective  parties'  submissions  I  reserved  my
    determination.

14.   I have concluded that the Immigration Judge did not materially err  in
    law.

15.   No challenge has been raised to the Immigration  Judge's  reasons  for
    concluding that the Appellant's immigration appeal should be dismissed.

16.   In that regard it was the Appellant's evidence that he had  worked  as
    a specialist bio-medical scientist at  the  Haematology  Department  at
    Northwick Park Hospital since May 2007 and had  undertaken  inter  alia
    the testing and analysis of blood samples.  The Appellant  had  entered
    into a contract of employment committed to the  standard  twenty  hours
    per week.

17.   The Immigration Judge noted the appellant's evidence that the work  he
    had undertaken was "demand led" and as a result of the level of  demand
    and periodic shortages in staff resources the Appellant had  worked  in
    excess of twenty hours a week.  The Appellant could not recall when  he
    first began to do so, but admitted that his  payslips  for  the  period
    February 2009 to January 2010 were not inaccurate in the  picture  they
    presented of excessive hours of employment.

18.   At paragraph 8 of his determination the Immigration Judge had this  to
    say:

        "In his testimony as to the precise, accurate, interpretation to be
        made of the details of those payslips and as to the need for him to
        be in the United Kingdom to complete his PhD had you  finished  the
        research necessary for the writing of his thesis, I found the First
        Appellant to be evasive and obfuscatory".


19.   The Immigration Judge continued at paragraph 9:

        "The first Appellant suggested  that  his  payslips  should  be  so
        interpreted as to adjust downward the figure for the  hours  worked
        recorded excess the standard twenty hour per week, since  they  had
        been overstated to account for the fact that the additional rate of
        pay attributable to them for unsocial hours had not been taken into
        account.  This interpretation was not, in my view, correct since it
        did not take into account the further pay awarded, at the  standard
        rate, for hours - no doubt additional hours - undertaken during the
        night, Saturday or Sunday.  It was very clear that in some weeks of
        the term time the Appellant had worked hugely in excess  of  twenty
        hours.  The first Appellant maintained that he needed to remain  in
        the United Kingdom in order to be  in  physical  contact  with  his
        Director of Studies while he wrote up his  thesis.   I  found  that
        unqualified claim to be highly implausible suggesting  as  it  did,
        complete inflexibility on the part of the Director of Studies and a
        refusal to utilise the various forms  of  highly  effective  modern
        means of communication.  I did accept, on the other hand, that  the
        first Appellant might need to be in  the  United  Kingdom  for  his
        viva, however I considered it unlikely, if that was indeed so, that
        he would be denied a visitor's visa".


20.   At paragraph 10 of the determination the Immigration Judge continued:

        "10.     I found that the first  Appellant  had  been  in  knowing,
             serious and long-term breach of the conditions subject to which
             his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student had been
             granted.   I  formed  the  strong  impression  from  the  first
             Appellant's conduct and testimony that it was his  remunerative
             employment in the United  Kingdom  that  drove  his  desire  to
             remain in the country".


21.   I would pause there because Mr  Akohene  took  issue  with  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 9 in which the Immigration Judge had opined  were
    it necessary for the first Appellant to be in the  United  Kingdom  for
    his viva, he considered it unlikely that the Appellant would be  denied
    a visitor's visa.  He submitted that such an opinion was based on  pure
    speculation.  Further it was Mr Akohene's  instructions  the  Appellant
    would have to be in the United Kingdom to receive his viva  in  person.
    In any event, contrary to the Immigration  Judge's  view  it  would  be
    highly unlikely that the Appellant would be granted a visitor's visa.

22.   It was notable that neither in the grounds of application nor  in  his
    submissions before me did Mr Akohene challenge the Immigration  Judge's
    reasoned conclusions set out  at  paragraph  10  of  his  determination
    (above).

23.   The Immigration Judge continued at paragraph 11 as follows:

        "The first Appellant  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  no
        expectation to remain in the  country  beyond  the  period  of  his
        studies.  The first Appellant came to the United Kingdom at the age
        of 34 and therefore his private life outside the United Kingdom had
        been conducted very much longer than that concluded in  the  United
        Kingdom over a period of five and a half years.  I  concluded  that
        it would not be a disproportionate interference  with  his  private
        life for the first Appellant,  together  with  his  family,  to  be
        removed from the United Kingdom in pursuit of the  public  interest
        in immigration control."


24.   Mr Akohene took issue with that reasoning.

25.   He placed reliance on the guidance of the Tribunal in  CDS.   Although
    he appreciated and accepted that neither the representatives before the
    Immigration Judge had drawn this decision to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    attention it was a decision  that  predated  the  promulgation  of  the
    determination in the present case and was in  the  public  realm.   The
    Immigration Judge should have been aware of its promulgation and of the
    Tribunal's guidance therein.

26.   Mr Akohene referred me to paragraph 16 of CDS in which  reference  was
    made to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Pankina [2010] EWCA  Civ
    719 and in particular paragraphs 45, 46 and 47 which Sedley LJ gave the
    leading judgment recognised:

        "45.     There appears to me in this situation to be no escape from
             the proposition that in exercising her powers,  whether  within
             or outside the rules of practice for the time being  in  force,
             the  Home  Secretary  must  have  regard  and  give  effect  to
             applicants' Convention rights.  This will mean  in  most  cases
             evaluating the extent and quality of their family  and  private
             life in the United Kingdom and the implications, both for  them
             and for the United Kingdom, of truncating their careers here.


        46.       That  in  turn  will   require   consideration   of   the
             significance of the criteria by  which  their  eligibility  has
             been gauged and found wanting.  It is one thing  to  expect  an
             applicant  to  have  the  necessary  academic  and   linguistic
             qualifications: here a miss is likely to be as good as a  mile.
             It  is  in  order  for  an  applicant  to  fall  marginally  or
             momentarily short of a financial criterion which in itself  has
             no meaning: its significance is as a rough and ready measure of
             the applicant's ability to continue to live without reliance on
             public funds.  Having �800  in  the  bank,  whether  for  three
             continuous months or simply at the date of application,  is  no
             doubt some indication of this; but people who are able to  meet
             the test may fall on  hard  times  after  obtaining  indefinite
             leave to remain, and others who fail it would,  if  allowed  to
             remain, never become a charge on public funds.  The Home Office
             has to exercise some commonsense about this if  it  is  not  to
             make decisions which disproportionately deny  respect  for  the
             private and family lives of graduates who  by  definition  have
             been settled here for some years and are otherwise eligible for
             Tier 1 entry.  If the Home Secretary wishes  the  Rules  to  be
             black letter law, she needs to achieve this by  an  established
             legislative route.


        47.      So long as the Rules are what  the  Immigration  Act  1971
             says they  are,  they  must  in  my  judgment  be  operated  in
             conformity with s.6 of the Human Rights Act".


27.   I was also referred to paragraph 19 of CDS:

        "19.     Nevertheless people who have been admitted on a course  of
             study at a recognised UK institution for higher education,  are
             likely to build up a relevant connection with the  course,  the
             institution,  an  educational   sequence   for   the   ultimate
             professional qualification  sought,  as  well  as  social  ties
             during the period of study.  Cumulatively this  may  amount  to
             private life but deserves respect because the person  has  been
             admitted for this purpose, the purpose  remains  unfilled,  and
             discretionary factors such as  mis-representation  or  criminal
             conduct had not provided grounds for refusal  of  extension  or
             curtailment of stay".


28.   Having been  referred  to  those  passages  I  drew  to  Mr  Akohene's
    attention paragraphs 17 and 18 of CDS:

        "17.     It is apparent from these principles that Article  8  does
             not provide a general discretion in the  IJ  to  dispense  with
             requirements of the Immigration Rules merely  because  the  way
             that they impact in an individual case may appear to be  unduly
             harsh.  The present context is not in respect  of  family  life
             that can in  certain  circumstances  require  admission  to  or
             extension of stay within the United Kingdom of those who do not
             comply with the general Immigration Rules.  It is difficult  to
             imagine how the private life of someone with no prior nexus  to
             the United Kingdom would require admission  outside  the  Rules
             for the purpose of study.  There is no human right to  come  to
             the United Kingdom for education or other purposes through  the
             voluntary migration.


        18.      However the Appellant has been admitted to the UK for  the
             purpose of higher education  and  has  made  progress  enabling
             extension of stay in that capacity since her admission in 2007.
              We acknowledge that that gives  no  right  of  expectation  of
             extension  of  stay  irrespective  of  the  provisions  of  the
             Immigration Rules at the  time  of  the  relevant  decision  on
             extension".


29.   I also drew to Mr Akohene's attention paragraph 20 of CDS:

        "20.     In the present case a  change  in  the  sponsorship  rules
             during the course of a period of study has had a serious effect
             on the ability of the  Appellant  to  conclude  her  course  of
             study.   Some  requirements  of  the   Immigration   Rules   or
             applicable public policy scheme may be of such importance  that
             a miss is as good as a mile, but this is not always the case".


30.   I observed that the Tribunal had gone on to consider the aims  of  the
    points-based system and at paragraph 21 continued:

        "If we are wrong on our first conclusion, we shall here assume that
        it may also set strict criteria as to how such availability of such
        funds is to be demonstrated and whose accounts the  funds  may  be.
        Where the Appellant establishes by  evidence  that  she  has  funds
        available to support her if needed,  the  strength  of  the  public
        interest in  refusing her an extension based on somewhat  arbitrary
        provisions of guidance attached to an Appendix to the Rules, is  in
        our judgment somewhat less  than  the  failure  to  meet  essential
        requirement of the Rules".


31.   The Tribunal continued at paragraph 22:

        "But  even  central  requirements  are  not  determinative  if  the
        countervailing claim is of sufficient weight.  Mrs Huang could  not
        meet the dependent relative Rules because she had not  reached  the
        minimum age required, but nevertheless the particular circumstances
        of her history required the strength of her family life to be taken
        into account.  Sedley LJ in Pankina contemplated that some  points-
        based claimants may not meet the minimum funding requirement for  a
        short period due to unforeseen circumstances".


32.   The Tribunal in CDS noted that the same Sponsors who ensured that  the
    Appellant had sufficient funds at the  beginning  of  her  course  were
    available with ample financial support  to  ensure  that  she  met  the
    substantive requirements of Appendix C in order to  continue  with  her
    studies.  The Tribunal continued:

             "If minds had been applied to the problem the  necessary  funds
             could have been transferred to her account so both  the  letter
             and the purpose of the Policy Guidance was met.


        24.   In our judgment, the application of  this  Appellant  to  the
             Policy Guidance that prevented her from obtaining the extension
             at the time and in the  circumstances  set  out  above,  was  a
             disproportionate interference with private life  that  deserved
             respect as long as she continued to meet the other requirements
             of the Rules and make appropriate progress  in  her  course  of
             studies here".


33.   It was on that basis that the Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  "on  this
    basis as well".

34.   I asked Mr Akohene having placed the case law on which  we  relied  in
    its proper context, that it was not clear that in both Pankina and  CDS
    the court had in mind those who technically  infringe  the  Immigration
    Rules but that in terms of their private life and the extent  of  their
    studies, demonstrated that it would be disproportionate to remove them.
     However in the present case and as found for the unchallenged  reasons
    given by the Immigration Judge, there was  a  flagrant  breach  of  the
    Rules.

35.   To this, Mr Akohene responded "I say  there  is  no  distinction".  Mr
    Akohene continued Pankina had considered the ties that had  been  built
    up as in the case of the Appellant in the present case and the possible
    consequences and the  potential  consequences  of  not  being  able  to
    complete the course that the Appellant had envisaged from the start.

36.   Mr Akohene told me that he was unsure  whether  a  visa  be  completed
    outside of the jurisdiction and submitted that  the  Immigration  Judge
    should have considered whether if the Appellant was  removed  to  Ghana
    there was any realistic likelihood of  his  being  able  to  return  to
    complete his viva.

37.   It was said Mr Akohene "a balancing act".  The Immigration  Judge  had
    speculated about the Appellant's chances  of  success  in  obtaining  a
    visitor's visa.

38.   At this stage  in  the  hearing  the  Appellant  suddenly  produced  a
    purported letter from his university dated 22 November  2010  (the  day
    before the hearing before me) from a Professor J Inal  confirming  that
    the Appellant was in the final  year  of  his  PhD  studies  under  his
    supervision and that the Appellant had completed his oratory work,  and
    handed in his thesis and was currently awaiting his viva voce.  It  was
    envisaged that after the viva the Appellant  would  be  asked  to  make
    corrections.  A three month period was  given  to  submit  a  corrected
    thesis.

39.   I pointed out to Mr Akohene and  he  accepted  that  this  letter  was
    obviously  not  before  the  Immigration  Judge   in   time   for   his
    consideration.  If such evidence was considered relevant to the  appeal
    before the Immigration Judge then it should have been produced  at  the
    time.  Further  an  Immigration  Judge's  failure  to  consider  future
    evidence could not constitute  a  material  error  of  law.   This  was
    accepted by Mr Akohene.

40.   CDS and Pankina are cases concerning those who have  not  flouted  the
    Immigration Rules.  Indeed in CDS the Tribunal were clear Article 8 did
    not give an Immigration Judge a free-standing liberty  to  depart  from
    the Immigration Rules and that it was unlikely that a person  would  be
    able to show an Article 8 right by coming to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    temporary purposes.  A person who was admitted to follow a course  that
    has not yet ended might build up a private life that deserve respect in
    which case the public interest in removal before the end of the  course
    might "be reduced" in circumstances where  there  are  ample  financial
    resources available.  Such was the case of the  Appellant  in  CDS  and
    also in  Pankina.   These  were  Appellants  whose  Article  8  appeals
    succeeded in private life terms because their breaches of the  relevant
    Immigration Rules were technical (e.g.  failure  to  meet  the  minimum
    funding  requirements  for   a   short   period   due   to   unforeseen
    circumstances) such that  to  prevent  such  persons  completing  their
    courses would amount to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
    private life that deserve respect as long as they continue to meet  the
    other requirements of the Rules and made appropriate progress in  their
    course of studies in the United Kingdom.

41.   However the circumstances of the present case  are  far  removed  from
    some minor technical infringement of the Rules.  I do not agree with Mr
    Akohene that the guidance in those cases drew no distinction  in  minor
    technical infringements and serious breaches of the Immigration  Rules.
    Indeed if there were no such distinction it would seriously impact upon
    the public  interest  which  is  part  of  the  balancing  exercise  in
    determining the proportionality of removal.

42.   In that regard I would agree with  Mr  Gulvin  who  rightly  submitted
    that where there was only a technical  breach  nothing  that  seriously
    offended the Immigration Rules then the public interest, not a  fixity,
    was not a stronger consideration as it otherwise might be, but that  in
    a case like this  the  public  interest  was  considerable,  not  least
    because this Appellant had committed a serious and long-term breach.

43.   Indeed I would observe that at paragraph 10 of his  determination  the
    Immigration Judge had "formed the  strong  impression  from  the  first
    Appellant's  conduct  and  testimony  that  it  was  his   remunerative
    employment in the United Kingdom that drove his desire to remain in the
    country".  This was an observation not challenged by the  Appellant  in
    his present grounds of application.

44.   The maintenance of immigration control is an extremely  strong  public
    interest  so  that  the  respect  that  quite  properly  the   Tribunal
    considered in CDS was  stressed  to  be  an  important  factor  in  the
    necessary balancing exercise to  be  conducted.  In  the  case  of  the
    Appellant  in  CDS  the  infringement  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    technical and minor although the public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    removal before he had completed his course was to be  reduced.   It  is
    however my finding that the public interest  was  not  reduced  in  the
    circumstances of the present case and that the weight to attach to  the
    public interest was to the contrary, increased as a consequence of  the
    conduct of the Appellant.

45.   The Immigration Judge had by no means ignored the  Article  8  private
    life issues raised in this appeal.   Indeed  at  paragraph  11  of  his
    determination it was clear he had considered the positive  elements  of
    the Appellant's private life within  the  balancing  exercise  that  he
    conducted.  In so doing the Immigration Judge noted the  Appellant  had
    come to the United Kingdom at the age of 34  and  that  "therefore  his
    private life outside the United Kingdom had been  conducted  very  much
    longer than that conducted in the United Kingdom over a period of  five
    and a half years".

46.   Unlike the Appellant in CDS there was  contemplation  of  the  reduced
    public interest, that  interest  carrying  significant  weight  in  the
    circumstances, here the Appellant "had been  in  knowing,  serious  and
    long-term breach of the conditions subject to which his leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom as a student had been granted".

47.   Although I would agree with Mr  Akohene  that  the  last  sentence  at
    paragraph  9  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination  was  purely
    speculative and in error, it was not material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and could not be regarded as nullifying the proper reasoning  of
    the Immigration Judge in  terms  of  the  balancing  exercise  that  he
    conducted.  It cannot  be  said  that  such  speculation  affected  the
    Immigration Judge's overall reasoning at least, where as here there was
    a  strong  public  interest  to  be  properly  balanced   against   the
    Appellant's private life rights.  This was not a private life built  up
    in the expectation that the Appellant would be able to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. However, indeed their Lordships in Huang in the passage
    to which the Tribunal referred  in  CDS  pointed  out  with  particular
    reference to the justification of  removal  under  Article  8(2)  there
    would in almost any case be certain general considerations to  bear  in
    mind that included "the general administrative desirability of applying
    known Rules if a system of  immigration  control  is  to  be  workable,
    predictable, consistent and fair as between one applicant and  another;
    the damage to good administration and effective control if a system  is
    perceived  by  applicants  internationally   to   be   unduly   porous,
    unpredictable or perfunctory...".  But in  such  matters  an  important
    consideration even where an applicant who might fail to  qualify  under
    the Rules might have a valid claim by virtue of Article 8.

48.   I find that it cannot even  arguably  be  said  that  the  Immigration
    Judge failed to  take  relevant  material  into  account  or  that  his
    decision was perverse or irrational in the Wednesbury sense.

Decision

49.   The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  no  error
    on a point of law and I order that it shall stand.








Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


