

                                    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


    HD (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 18th, 19th and 20th July 2016             |                            |
|                                             |............................|
|                                             |...........                 |




                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between




                                     HD
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:


    For the Appellant:         Ms K. Cronin with Mr M. Moriarty and  Mr  B.
                      Hashi, counsel instructed  by  Luqmani  Thompson  and
                      Partners, solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr  S.  Singh  instructed  by  Government  Legal
    Department




   1. The guidance set out in PO (trafficked  women)  Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT
      00046 at paragraphs 191-192 should no longer be followed.

   2.  Although the Government of Nigeria recognises that the trafficking of
      women, both internally and transnationally, is a  significant  problem
      to be addressed, it is not established by the evidence that for  women
      in general in Nigeria there is a real risk of being trafficked.

   3. For a woman returning to Nigeria, after having been trafficked to  the
      United Kingdom, there is in general no real risk of retribution or  of
      being trafficked afresh by her original traffickers.

   4. Whether a woman returning to Nigeria having previously been trafficked
      to the United Kingdom faces on return a real risk of being  trafficked
      afresh will require  a  detailed  assessment  of  her  particular  and
      individual characteristics. Factors that  will  indicate  an  enhanced
      risk of being trafficked include, but are not limited to:

        a.   The absence of a supportive family willing to  take  her  back
           into the family unit;


        b.   Visible or discernible characteristics of vulnerability,  such
           as having no social support network to assist her, no or  little
           education or vocational skills, mental health conditions,  which
           may  well  have  been  caused  by  experiences  of  abuse   when
           originally trafficked, material and financial  deprivation  such
           as to mean that she will be living in poverty or  in  conditions
           of destitution;


        c.   The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is  likely  to
           mean that she was then identified by the traffickers as  someone
           disclosing characteristics of vulnerability such as to give rise
           to a real risk of being trafficked. On returning to Nigeria,  it
           is probable that those characteristics of vulnerability will  be
           enhanced  further  in  the  absence  of  factors  that   suggest
           otherwise.


   5. Factors that indicate a lower risk of being  trafficked  include,  but
      are not limited to:


        a.   The availability of a supportive family willing  to  take  the
           woman back into the family unit;


        b.   The fact that the woman has acquired  skills  and  experiences
           since leaving Nigeria that better equip her to have access to  a
           livelihood on return to Nigeria, thus enabling  her  to  provide
           for herself.

   6. There will be little risk of  being  trafficked  if  received  into  a
      NAPTIP shelter or a shelter provided by an NGO for the time  that  she
      is there, but that support is likely to  be  temporary,  possibly  for
      just a few weeks, and there will need to be a  careful  assessment  of
      the position of the woman when she leaves the shelter.

   7. For a woman who does face a real  risk  of  being  trafficked  if  she
      returns to her home area, the question of whether internal  relocation
      will be available as a safe and reasonable alternative that  will  not
      be unduly harsh will require a detailed assessment of  her  particular
      circumstances. For  a  woman  who  discloses  the  characteristics  of
      vulnerability described above that are indicative of a  real  risk  of
      being trafficked, internal relocation  is  unlikely  to  be  a  viable
      alternative.






    TABLE OF CONTENTS
|Glossary                                              |Page 3            |
|                                                      |                  |
|                                                      |Paragraph number  |
|Introduction                                          |1                 |
|Asylum                                                |9                 |
|What is trafficking?                                  |12                |
|What are the characteristics of trafficking in a      |23                |
|Nigerian context?                                     |                  |
|Victim profiles and indicators of risk                |62                |
|The legal test relating to assessment of risk on      |64                |
|return                                                |                  |
|Risk on return                                        |83                |
|Conclusions on the provision of protection            |137               |
|Internal relocation                                   |178               |
|Country Guidance                                      |187               |
|Appellant's case                                      |194               |
|                                                      |Page number       |
|Annex 1 - The expert witnesses                        |75                |
|Annex 2 - Submissions                                 |80                |
|Annex 3 - The elements of trafficking                 |84                |
|Annex 4 - Trafficking and Investigation               |99                |
|Annex 5 - USA statute extract and 2016 TIP report -   |103               |
|Nigeria                                               |                  |
|Appendix A - Error of Law decision                    |113               |
|Appendix B - Schedule of Background Evidence          |121               |





    GLOSSARY


    Anti-trafficking Convention     The Council  of  Europe  Convention  on
                               Action against Trafficking in  Human  Beings
                               (2005)


    ATLeP                      OSCE/ODIHR 2011 delegation




    AVRR           IOM  Assisted   Voluntary   Return   and   Reintegration
                               programmes.



    AWEG                       African Women's Empowerment Guild


    Campana       The Structure of Human Trafficking: Lifting the Bonnet on
                               a Nigerian Transnational  Network  by  Paola
                               Campana (2016)

    CARE -        Coordinated Approach for the reintegration of victims  of
                               trafficking


    Cherti - IPPR -        Beyond Borders: Human Trafficking  from  Nigeria
                               to the UK by M Cherti, J  Pennington  and  P
                               Grant (January 2013)


    CORI          Country of Origin Research  and  Information  -  Thematic
                               Report Nigeria: Gender and Age December 2012




    COSUDOW                    Committee for the Support of the Dignity  of
women,


    Danish Report                   The Danish Immigration Service Report
                               The Protection of Victims of Trafficking  in
                               Nigeria: a Fact Finding  Mission  to  Lagos,
                               Benin City and Abuja,  9/26  September  2007
                               (April 2008)


    EASO Report 2015  European Asylum  Support  Office  Country  of  Origin
                                Information   Report    -    Nigeria:    sex
                                trafficking of women dated October 2015.

    Europol 2016  Report         Situation  Report:  Trafficking  in  Human
                               Beings In Eastern Europe


    Finnish Report 2015             Finnish Immigration Service Report
                               Trafficking Women to Europe (March 2015)

    Freedom  House               Freedom  in  the  World   2016:   Nigeria,
27/01/2016


    GPI  Girls' Power Initiative,


    ILO                             International Labour Organization


    IOM 2006 Report        Migration, human smuggling and trafficking  from
                               Nigeria to Europe by Jorgen Carling


     IOM 2015 Report   International Organization for  Migration:  Enhancing
                               the Safety and Sustainability of the  Return
                               and Reintegration of Victims of Trafficking;
                               Lessons  learnt  from  the  CARE  and   TACT
                               projects 2015.


    IPPR                       Institute for Public Policy Research


    IRRAG         International Reproductive Rights Research Action Group



     NAPTIP        The National Agency for the  Prohibition  of  Traffic  in
                               Persons  -  is  the  principal  organisation
                               created by the Nigerian government to combat
                               trafficking.  The  Trafficking  in   Persons
                               (Prohibition) Law Enforcement Administration
                               Act, 2003 established NAPTIP and was enacted
                               as a direct result  of  Nigeria  wishing  to
                               fulfill its international obligations  under
                               the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
                               Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
                               Children.


     NRM  National referral Mechanism


    OCG                        Organised Criminal Group
    OCN                    Organised Criminal Network


    OSCE/ODIHR 2011        Organisation for Security  and  Co-operation  in
                               Europe/Office  for  Democratic  Institutions
                               and Human Rights fact finding report 2011


    Palermo  Protocol   The  Protocol  to  Prevent  Suppress   and   Punish
                               Trafficking in Persons Especially Women  and
                               Children supplementing  the  United  Nations
                               Convention against  Transnational  Organised
                               Crime (2003)


    Shelley report    Trafficking in Women:  the  Business  Model  Approach
                               (2003)


    TACT          Transnational Action - safe and  sustainable  return  and
                               reintegration for victims of trafficking


    TIP           Trafficking in Persons - reports produced by the US State
                               Department


    Trafficking Directive           Directive 2011/36/EU on Preventing  and
                               Combating Trafficking in  Human  Beings  and
                               Protecting its Victims


    UNODC 2013        United National  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  Issue
                               paper:  Abuse of a position of vulnerability
                               and other means  within  the  definition  of
                               trafficking in persons 2013


    UNODC 2011        The Role of Corruption in Trafficking in Persons 2011


    USDOS    US Department of State

    WOCON                      Women's Consortium of Nigeria,

    WOTCLEF       Women Trafficking & Child Labour Eradication Foundation,





















                            DECISION AND REASONS


       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we make an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original  Appellant  in  this  determination
       identified as HD. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
       parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise
       to contempt of court proceedings




Introduction



      1. In this  judgment,  to  which  both  members  of  the  panel  have
         contributed, the Upper Tribunal addresses the current situation in
         Nigeria for victims of  trafficking  in  order  to  determine  the
         appeal of HD and to  give  guidance  on  the  risk  of  proscribed
         treatment for a Nigerian victim of  trafficking.  The  matters  in
         dispute between the parties are  whether  and  to  what  extent  a
         victim of trafficking returning  to  Nigeria  is  able  to  access
         sufficiency of protection and the consequential issue of  internal
         relocation. The evidence concerning the trafficking process in the
         Nigerian context either goes unchallenged or is  acknowledged  not
         to be in dispute.


      2. This means that we can set out  a  relatively  brief  overview  of
         matters not in dispute[1] between the parties before moving on  to
         a consideration of the evidence that is  in  dispute  between  the
         parties, which requires a detailed examination, in particular,  of
         the significance of the NAPTIP evidence and the  extent  to  which
         that evidence informs assessment of risk on return for  women  who
         have been  trafficked  to  the  UK  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
         exploitation or for the purpose of domestic servitude.

      3.  Although victims of trafficking from Nigeria are male and female,
         adults and children, this judgment is specifically concerned  with
         adult women, who may have been trafficked as children, but are, at
         the date of their adverse decision/appeal, adults. That is not  to
         say that the guidance we provide is not relevant to girls, boys or
         men, but the focus of this decision is adult women  and,  in  this
         particular case, a woman trafficked whilst a child.  We  therefore
         refer in this decision to victims of trafficking as "her". We also
         observe that the majority of human beings trafficked  both  within
         and transnationally from Nigeria are girls and women.

      4. PO (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2009] UKAIT 00046  is  the  last
         country guidance case promulgated in the Upper Tribunal addressing
         the issues considered in this appeal. This  was  appealed  to  the
         Court of Appeal (PO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA  Civ  132;  22nd
         February 2011). Carnwath LJ [58] held that the general findings on
         the two main issues in PO (Nigeria) UKAIT should stand as  interim
         guidance pending further consideration by the Tribunal  in  either
         that case or another case. Those issues were set out in paragraphs
         191 and 192:


             "Ability and Willingness of the Nigerian Authorities to  offer
             Protection to Victims of Trafficking


             191. Our consideration of  the  background  materials  clearly
                  demonstrates to us  that  in  general  the  government  of
                  Nigeria is both able and willing to discharge its own duty
                  to protect its own nationals from people  traffickers.  In
                  particular:


                  (a) The Danish Information Service Report: The  Protection
                  of Victims of  Trafficking  in  Nigeria:  a  Fact  Finding
                  Mission to Lagos, Benin City  and  Abuja,  9/26  September
                  2007 (April  2008)  points  out  that  the  government  of
                  Nigeria have recognised the problem  of  traffickers  and,
                  since 2003, the legal  and  institutional  foundation  for
                  combating trafficking and, equally important, support  for
                  victims of trafficking, have been in place in Nigeria.


                  (b) The National Agency for the Prohibition of Traffic  in
                  Persons  and  other  related  matters  (NAPTIP)   is   the
                  principal organisation created by the Nigerian  government
                  to  combat  trafficking.  The   Trafficking   in   Persons
                  (Prohibition) Law  Enforcement  Administration  Act,  2003
                  established NAPTIP and was enacted as a direct  result  of
                  Nigeria wishing to fulfil  its  international  obligations
                  under  the  Protocol  to  Prevent,  Suppress  and   Punish
                  Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.


                  (c) NAPTIP's own Legal  and  Prosecution  Department  were
                  said in the April 2008 report, to have concluded six cases
                  and another five were said to be pending.  58  victims  of
                  trafficking have been rehabilitated, while another 24 were
                  waiting rehabilitation. We accept that  with  more  funds,
                  NAPTIP could do more to help victims, but the  same  could
                  be said of any government agency with a finite budget.


                  (d) The US State Department Report  suggests  that  whilst
                  Nigeria is not complying with  minimum  standards,  it  is
                  "making  significant   efforts"   to   do   so   and   has
                  "demonstrated   a   solid   commitment   to    eradicating
                  trafficking". It also spoke of NAPTIP making solid efforts
                  to investigate and prosecute trafficking  cases,  although
                  the numbers of convicted traffickers remained  low.  There
                  are clearly several reasons for  that,  but  not,  on  the
                  evidence before us, any lack  of  governmental  effort  or
                  desire.


                  Risk to Victims of Trafficking in being  Re-trafficked  on
                  Return to Nigeria


             192. It must be born in mind, however,  that  a  claimant  may
                  still have a well-founded fear of persecution if  she  can
                  show that the Nigerian authorities know or ought  to  know
                  of circumstances particular to her case giving rise to his
                  fear,  but  are  unlikely  to   provide   the   additional
                  protection   her   particular   circumstances   reasonably
                  require. To that end:


                  (a) A very careful examination  of  the  circumstances  in
                  which the victim was first trafficked must  be  undertaken
                  and careful findings made. If a victim has been told  that
                  she is required to earn a particular sum of money ("target
                  earnings") for the trafficker or gang, before  being  free
                  of any obligation to the trafficker or gang, then, if  the
                  victim should escape before earning the target sums, there
                  may well be a risk to the victim that on return to Nigeria
                  she may be re-trafficked if found. The extent of the  risk
                  of  the  trafficking  will  very  much   depend   on   the
                  circumstances  in  which   the   victim   was   originally
                  trafficked.


                  (b) It must always be remembered that within Nigeria there
                  are gangs of people  traffickers  operating  who  generate
                  enormous sums of money from their activities. The evidence
                  seems to us to be clear that where a  victim  escapes  the
                  clutches of her  traffickers  before  earning  the  target
                  earnings, then the traffickers are very likely  to  go  to
                  extreme lengths in order to locate the victim  or  members
                  of the victim's family, to seek reprisals.


                  (c) In the absence of evidence that  a  trafficked  victim
                  has been trafficked by an individual, it should  be  borne
                  in mind that it is likely that the trafficking  will  have
                  been carried out by a collection of individuals,  many  of
                  whom may not have had personal contact  with  the  victim.
                  Within  trafficking  gangs,  individual  members   perform
                  different roles. One might, for example, be a photographer
                  who takes the photograph which is used within the victim's
                  passport, whether or not the passport is  a  genuine  one.
                  One gang member may, for  example,  be  a  forger  who  is
                  involved in the preparation of false  passports  or  other
                  documents for use by the victim; one might  be  a  corrupt
                  police official, or a  border  guard,  whose  role  is  to
                  assist in facilitating the victim's passage in  some  way.
                  Gang members may perform any number of different roles but
                  it is essential to bear in mind that if a victim has  been
                  trafficked by a gang  of  traffickers,  as  opposed  to  a
                  single trafficker, then the risk of re-trafficking may  be
                  greater for someone who escapes before earning the  target
                  earnings set by the  trafficker,  because  the  individual
                  gang members will have expected to receive a share of  the
                  target sum and will, therefore, be anxious to ensure  that
                  they do receive that share or seek retribution if they  do
                  not."

      5. This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal because  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal was found to  disclose  material  legal
         error and the decision  set  aside.  The  decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal identifying the error of law is attached as Appendix A.


      6. The Appellant, HD, applied for asylum on  2nd  January  2013.  Her
         asylum claim was recorded as determined and refused on 29  October
         2014. She was granted leave to remain until 29 October  2015.  The
         appellant appealed the refusal  of  asylum  under  S83(2)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  Her  appeal  is
         limited to asylum grounds.


      7.  HD's case was considered by a Competent  Authority  and  for  the
         reasons set out in the  Conclusive  Grounds  Consideration  Minute
         dated 20  October  2014,  it  was  concluded  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that she had been trafficked and she is therefore  a
         victim  of  trafficking  as  defined  by  the  Council  of  Europe
         Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings.


      8.  HD attended the first day of the hearing. She was not required to
         give oral evidence, the factual matrix of her claim being  broadly
         accepted by the respondent - as to which  see  below.  Her  mental
         health was not, in any event, such that it was likely  that  there
         could be oral evidence that would be of assistance  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.



Asylum



      9.  The respondent in the applicant's letter  refusing  to  recognise
         her as a refugee, accepts that former victims of  trafficking  are
         seen  as  a  distinct  group  within  Nigerian  society   and   no
         distinction is made with regard to  the  type  of  exploitation  a
         former trafficked victim was subjected to. The respondent  accepts
         that as a former victim of trafficking her claim for asylum  falls
         for consideration under the Refugee Convention as a  member  of  a
         particular social group.


     10.  For the reasons set out below some  young  women  who  have  been
         previously trafficked will face a real risk of  serious  harm  and
         being trafficked again from their home area.

     11.   The  two  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
         relocation are pertinent to determine whether such  an  individual
         will be at real risk of being persecuted.


What is trafficking?


     12.  Human trafficking is defined as:


              "... the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or
              receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or
              other forms of coercion, of abduction of fraud, of deception,
              of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of
              the giving or receiving of payments or  benefits  to  achieve
              the consent of the person having control over another person,
              for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall  include,
              at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of  others
              or other forms  of  sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or
              services, slavery or practices similar to slavery,  servitude
              or the removal of organs.[2]"

     13. It is uncontroversial that the essence of trafficking is that  the
         victim is coerced or deceived into a situation in which  they  are
         exploited. There are 3 elements[3]:

               a) an action - the person has been  subject  to  the  act  of
                  recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,   harbouring   or
                  receipt - which is achieved by
               b) a means - the threat or use of force  or  other  forms  of
                  coercion, abduction, fraud,  deception,  abuse  of  power,
                  abuse of a position of  vulnerability,  or  of  giving  or
                  receiving of payments or benefits to achieve  the  consent
                  of a person having control over another person -  for  the
                  purpose of
               c) exploitation  -  sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or
                  services,  slavery  or  practices  similar   to   slavery,
                  servitude, forced criminality or the removal of organs.

     14. The UNODC 2013 Paper 'Abuse of a  position  of  vulnerability  and
         other "means" within the definition  of  trafficking  in  persons'
         2013 states that:
    .  The concept of trafficking does not just  refer  to  the  process  by
      which an individual is moved into  a  situation  of  exploitation.  It
      extends to include the maintenance of that person in  a  situation  of
      exploitation.
    .  Trafficking can take place within as well as between  countries,  and
      for a range of exploitative purposes including,  but  not  limited  to
      sexual exploitation and exploitative labour.


     15. Abuse of a position of  vulnerability  is  cited  in  the  Palermo
         protocol in the list of means through  which  individuals  can  be
         subjected to a range of various actions for exploitation. There is
         a distinction between vulnerability as susceptibility to or "abuse
         of  a   person's   vulnerability"   trafficking   and   abuse   of
         vulnerability as a means by which trafficking occurs  or  is  made
         possible. The UNODC  2013  paper  considers  trafficking  and  the
         concept of vulnerability:


              ".....  vulnerability  is  central  to  how  trafficking   is
              understood......In    the     context     of     trafficking,
              "vulnerability" is typically used to refer to those inherent,
              environmental  or  contextual  factors  that   increase   the
              susceptibility of an individual or group to being trafficked.
              These factors are generally agreed to  include  human  rights
              violations such as poverty,  inequality,  discrimination  and
              gender-based violence - all of which contribute  to  creating
              economic  deprivation  and  social  conditions   that   limit
              individual choice and make  it  easier  for  traffickers  and
              exploiters  to  operate.   More  specific  factors  that  are
              commonly cited as relevant  to  individual  vulnerability  to
              trafficking  (and  occasionally  extrapolated  as   potential
              indicators of trafficking),  include gender, membership of  a
              minority group, and lack of legal status.....


              "2.1.2 A distinct but related concept: abuse of vulnerability
              as a means of trafficking.
              ....This distinction is important..."


     16. The UNODC 2013 paper refers to the Commentary to  the  Council  of
         Europe  Convention  against  Trafficking  in  Human  Beings   2005
         ("European  Trafficking  Convention")  and  the   EU   Trafficking
         Directive  2011/36/EU   which   explains   the   term   abuse   of
         vulnerability:


              ".. the vulnerability may be of any kind,  whether  physical,
              psychological, emotional, family-related, social or economic.
              The situation  might,  for  example,  involve  insecurity  or
              illegality  of  the  victim's  immigration  status,  economic
              dependence or fragile health. In short the situation  can  be
              any state of hardship in which a human being is  impelled  to
              accept being exploited.  Persons  abusing  such  a  situation
              flagrantly infringe human rights and  violate  human  dignity
              and integrity, which no-one can validly renounce."


     17. The IOM 2015 Report Enhancing the Safety and Sustainability of the
         Return of Victims of  Trafficking   draws  together  a  number  of
         statistical estimates from various international bodies  including
         the International Labour Organization which estimated in a  report
         published in 2012  that  the  numbers  of  forced  labour  victims
         worldwide was as many as 20.9 million at any given point  of  time
         during the period 2002 to 2011, 90% were exploited in the  private
         sector and the remaining 2.2 million  by  States  or  rebel  armed
         forces. The ILO identified forced labour as being the most  common
         form of trafficking (68%) followed by forced  sexual  exploitation
         (22%). The United States Department of Security July  2015  report
         identified 44,462 victims of trafficking in 2014. According to the
         Eurostat 2015 working paper on Trafficking  in  Human  Beings  (in
         Europe), 30,146 victims were registered over the three year period
         2010 -2012 of whom over 80% were women and girls. 35% of the total
         were non EU nationals who came mainly from Nigeria, Brazil, China,
         Vietnam, The Dominican Republic, Ukraine, Morocco and to a  lesser
         extent Albania. The report stresses that the  size  and  scope  of
         trafficking is still a "matter of  estimation"  and  that  greater
         efforts are required  to  establish  a  standardised  global  data
         collection system. The Cherti Report records that Nigeria "is  now
         ranked as the top sending country  to  the  UK  according  to  NRM
         data."


     18. A 2003 paper by Louise  Shelley,  the  director  of  Transnational
         Crime  and  Corruption  Centre,  on  'Trafficking  in  Women:  the
         Business  Model  Approach'  refers  to  the   growth   of   sexual
         trafficking in the previous decade and, on the basis  of  analysis
         of government reports, interviews with law  enforcement  personnel
         and academic sources,  she  identified  six  different  models  of
         business operating in the trafficking area.  Each of these  models
         was associated with a different national group  and,  she  states,
         reflects deep historical influences,  geographical  realities  and
         the market forces that drive the trade.  She does not  claim  that
         the models fit every crime group  from  a  particular  region  but
         identifies them as a means to categorise  the  business  of  human
         smuggling and trafficking.


     19. The Europol 2016 report also refers to the  wide  range  of  other
         offences  carried  out  by  organised  crime  groups   where   the
         trafficking process is the core activity. These are not merely the
         offences which support the exploitation but  for  example  include
         drug production, property crimes, benefit fraud. According to  the
         Europol  2016  Report  the  most   commonly   reported   type   of
         exploitative situation across Europe (not just Nigerians), is  for
         sexual exploitation followed by labour exploitation. During  2013-
         2014 Europol records that 90% of all  communications  from  Member
         States received by them were  for  sexual  exploitation  and  5.6%
         concerned labour exploitation.  The  remainder  were  forced  sham
         marriages and forced criminality; the majority  were  women;  1.9%
         were underage.


     20. As stated in the Europol 2016 Report, although human smuggling and
         human trafficking share similar patterns, they are  differentiated
         by precise legal definitions. A crucial legal distinction  between
         the two offences revolves around the issue of consent: a victim of
         human trafficking might have consented to their transportation  to
         a  new  destination  but  this  initial  consent  becomes  legally
         irrelevant as the trafficker  starts  to  use  threats,  coercion,
         deception or fraud in order to exploit the victim.


     21. The UNHCR has published Guidelines on International Protection  (7
         April 2006) on the  application  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the  1951
         Convention and 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees to
         victims of trafficking and persons at risk  of  being  trafficked.
         The Tribunal was referred in particular to the  following  lengthy
         extract from those  guidelines,  which  we  reproduce  because  we
         consider them to be of significance, although of course aware that
         they are not determinative[4]:


              "10.  An  important  aspect  of   this   definition   is   an
              understanding of trafficking as a process comprising a number
              of interrelated actions rather than a single act at  a  given
              point in time. Once initial control is secured,  victims  are
              generally moved to a place where there is a market for  their
              services, often where they lack  language  skills  and  other
              basic knowledge that would enable them to  seek  help.  While
              these  actions  can  all  take  place  within  one  country's
              borders, they can also take place  across  borders  with  the
              recruitment taking place  in  one  country  and  the  act  of
              receiving the victim and the  exploitation  taking  place  in
              another. Whether or not an international border  is  crossed,
              the intention to exploit the individual  concerned  underpins
              the entire process.
              .....


              16. In cases where the trafficking experience of  the  asylum
              applicant is determined to  be  a  one-off  past  experience,
              which  is  not  likely  to  be  repeated,  it  may  still  be
              appropriate  to  recognize  the  individual  concerned  as  a
              refugee if  there  are  compelling  reasons  arising  out  of
              previous  persecution,  provided   the   other   interrelated
              elements of the refugee definition are fulfilled. This  would
              include situations where the persecution suffered during  the
              trafficking  experience,  even  if  past,  was   particularly
              atrocious  and  the  individual   is   experiencing   ongoing
              traumatic psychological effects which would render return  to
              the country of origin intolerable. In other words, the impact
              on the individual of the previous persecution continues. ...


              17. Apart from the persecution experienced by individuals  in
              the course of  being  trafficked,  they  may  face  reprisals
              and/or possible re-trafficking should they be returned to the
              territory from which they have fled or from which  they  have
              been trafficked.  Reprisals at the hands of traffickers could
              amount to persecution depending on whether  the  acts  feared
              involve serious human rights violations or other serious harm
              or intolerable predicament and  on  an  evaluation  of  their
              impact on the individual concerned. Reprisals by  traffickers
              could also be inflicted on the victim's family members, which
              could render a fear of persecution on the part of the  victim
              well-founded, even if  she  or  he  has  not  been  subjected
              directly to such reprisals. In  view  of  the  serious  human
              rights violations often involved, as described  in  paragraph
              15 above, re-trafficking would usually amount to persecution.
              In  addition,   the   victim   may   also   fear   ostracism,
              discrimination or punishment by the family and/or  the  local
              community or, in some  instances,  by  the  authorities  upon
              return. Such treatment is particularly relevant in  the  case
              of those trafficked  into  prostitution.  In  the  individual
              case, severe ostracism, discrimination or punishment may rise
              to the level of persecution, in particular if  aggravated  by
              the  trauma  suffered  during,  and  as  a  result  of,   the
              trafficking  process.  Where  the   individual   fears   such
              treatment, her or his fear of persecution is  distinct  from,
              but no less valid than, the  fear  of  persecution  resulting
              from the continued  exposure  to  the  violence  involved  in
              trafficking  scenarios.  Even  if  the  ostracism  from,   or
              punishment by, family or community members does not  rise  to
              the level of persecution, such rejection  by,  and  isolation
              from, social support networks may in fact heighten  the  risk
              of being retrafficked or of  being  exposed  to  retaliation,
              which could  then  give  rise  to  a  well  founded  fear  of
              persecution.
              ...
              21. There is scope within the refugee definition to recognize
              both State  and  non-  State  agents  of  persecution.  While
              persecution is often perpetrated  by  the  authorities  of  a
              country, it can also be perpetrated  by  individuals  if  the
              persecutory acts are "knowingly tolerated by the  authorities
              or if the  authorities  refuse,  or  prove  unable  to  offer
              effective protection". In most situations  involving  victims
              or potential victims of  trafficking,  the  persecutory  acts
              emanate from individuals, that is,  traffickers  or  criminal
              enterprises or,  in  some  situations,  family  or  community
              members. Under these circumstances, it is also  necessary  to
              examine whether the authorities of the country of origin  are
              able and willing to protect the victim  or  potential  victim
              upon return.


              22. Whether the authorities in the country of origin are able
              to protect victims or potential victims of  trafficking  will
              depend on whether legislative and  administrative  mechanisms
              have been put in place to prevent and combat trafficking,  as
              well as to protect and assist  the  victims  and  on  whether
              these mechanisms are effectively implemented in practice...


              23. Many States have not adopted or implemented  sufficiently
              stringent measures to criminalize and prevent trafficking  or
              to meet the needs of victims. Where a  State  fails  to  take
              such reasonable steps as are within its competence to prevent
              trafficking and provide effective protection  and  assistance
              to victims, the fear of  persecution  of  the  individual  is
              likely to be  well-founded.  The  mere  existence  of  a  law
              prohibiting trafficking in persons  will  not  of  itself  be
              sufficient to exclude the possibility of persecution. If  the
              law  exists  but  is  not  effectively  implemented,  or   if
              administrative mechanisms are in place to provide  protection
              and assistance to victims, but the  individual  concerned  is
              unable to gain access to such mechanisms, the  State  may  be
              deemed  unable  to  extend  protection  to  the  victim,   or
              potential victim, of trafficking.
              ...


              27. The circumstances in the applicant's country of origin or
              habitual residence are the main point  of  reference  against
              which to determine the existence of a well  founded  fear  of
              persecution.  Nevertheless,  even  where   the   exploitation
              experienced by a victim of trafficking occurs mainly  outside
              the country of origin, this does not preclude  the  existence
              of a well-founded fear of persecution in the individual's own
              country. The trafficking of individuals across  international
              borders gives rise to a complex situation  which  requires  a
              broad analysis taking into account the various forms of  harm
              that have occurred at different points along the  trafficking
              route. The continuous and interconnected nature of the  range
              of persecutory acts involved in the context of  transnational
              trafficking should be given due  consideration.  Furthermore,
              trafficking involves a chain of actors, starting  with  those
              responsible for recruitment in the country of origin, through
              to those who organize and facilitate the transport,  transfer
              and/or sale of victims, through  to  the  final  "purchaser".
              Each of these actors has a vested interest in the trafficking
              enterprise and could  pose  a  real  threat  to  the  victim.
              Depending on the  sophistication  of  the  trafficking  rings
              involved, applicants may thus have experienced  and  continue
              to fear harm in a number of locations, including in countries
              through which they have transited, the  State  in  which  the
              asylum application is submitted and the country of origin. In
              such circumstances, the existence of a well-founded  fear  of
              persecution is to be evaluated in relation to the country  of
              origin of the applicant."

    22. This, in our view, is a useful  and  helpful  distillation  of  the
        characteristics and consequences of human trafficking. As we  shall
        see, there is not a single model of  the  process  of  trafficking.
        Indeed, there are endless permutations of the process, but  all  of
        those   disclose   certain   common   characteristics,    including
        recruitment, transfer, harbouring  and  receipt  in  the  place  of
        destination. That  process  is  facilitated  by  either  force  and
        coercion or deceit,  both  involving  a  lack  of  truly  voluntary
        involvement by the victim, followed by a form of exploitation.


What are the characteristics of trafficking in a Nigerian context?


     23. The IOM 2006 report identifies that early Nigerian  emigration  to
         Italy in the 1980s was not dominated by prostitution and those who
         subsequently worked as prostitutes did  so  independently.  As  it
         became more expensive financially to travel, so loans  were  taken
         out; initially from friends and family but  gradually  individuals
         became more indebted to a sponsor - thus  laying  the  foundations
         for trafficking based upon a strong pact.


     24. Essential to any reliable assessment of risk on return for victims
         of trafficking is  a  correct  understanding  of  the  nature  and
         dynamics of the trafficking process in the Nigerian  context.  The
         overview that follows is drawn from the written and oral  evidence
         of  three  expert  witnesses  and  a  large  body  of  documentary
         evidence. Those expert witnesses, the  Rev  Dr  Carrie  Pemberton-
         Ford, Dr Roxanne Agnew-Davies and Mr Andrew Desmond each responded
         in writing to questions asked of them by the respondent.  We  also
         received a written report from the late Mrs Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi.
         We have regard to that report also but also note that, unlike  the
         other witnesses, the Tribunal does not have  the  benefit  of  her
         answers to  written  questions  raised  upon  her  report  by  the
         respondent nor, of course, the benefit of receiving oral  evidence
         from her. None of those who gave oral evidence professed that they
         were "country experts". But plainly each was an  expert  in  their
         own field.  Full  details  of  their  professional  expertise  and
         experience are set out in Annex 1; no issue was  taken  concerning
         their evidence by the respondent save as set out below.


     25. The Shelley report describes Nigerian organised  crime  groups  as
         multifaceted crime groups in which the trade of women is only  one
         part of their criminal activities. She refers to female recruiters
         who conclude contracts with girls and women by manipulating voodoo
         traditions and forcing compliance through psychological as well as
         physical pressure. She  describes  Nigerian  traffickers  as  very
         effective because they combine the best of both modern  and  older
         worlds by allying sophisticated  forms  of  modern  technology  to
         tribal customs. Referencing an IOM 1996 report on the  Trafficking
         of Women to Italy  for  Sexual  Exploitation  she  identifies  the
         significant financial resources gained as seen in  the  tremendous
         rise of African trafficking, particularly  to  Europe,  since  the
         late 1990s.  She states that small  amounts  of  the  profits  are
         returned  to  the  local  operators  of  the  crime   groups   and
         occasionally to family members of the girls and women but much  of
         the profits go to other illicit activities and are laundered.

     26. It is uncontroversial, and not surprising, that the actual numbers
         of women and  girls  trafficked  into  domestic  servitude  and/or
         sexual exploitation is unknown  as  is  the  numbers  of  returned
         trafficked victims. To a large extent this reflects the nature  of
         human trafficking: the hidden criminality from the perspective  of
         the victim, her family and the traffickers. But, as referenced  in
         the CORI report   2012[5],  in  2010  the  humanitarian  news  and
         analysis  service  of  the  UN  Office  for  the  coordination  of
         Humanitarian Affairs, the Integrated Regional Information  Network
         (IRIN) referred to over 4000 (Nigerian) victims being  intercepted
         between 2004 and 2009 with the numbers rising each year  according
         to NAPTIP.

     27. Nigeria is a source, transit and destination[6] country for  women
         and children subjected to domestic servitude and  trafficking  for
         sexual exploitation.  Nigerian trafficking victims  are  recruited
         mainly from rural and to a lesser extent urban areas and that:

             "Despite the scale and volume of human trafficking originating
             from Nigeria, a significant  proportion  of  it  is  a  highly
             localised phenomena. In  particular,  research  has  indicated
             that victims who are trafficked to Europe (including  the  UK)
             disproportionately originate from the  state  of  Edo  in  the
             south central part of the country....The United Nations Office
             on Drugs and Crime and the Nigerian National  Agency  for  the
             Prohibition of Traffic in Persons  report[7]  that  well  over
             ninety per cent of victims rescued from human trafficking  for
             the purpose of sexual exploitation who are discovered  outside
             of Nigeria are from Edo State".[8]


     28. The remaining women and children are from Delta,  Kano  and  Borno
         States[9]. The IOM 2006 report  which  found  that  of  800  women
         returned to Nigeria during 1999 - 2001 from Italy  86%  came  from
         Edo State and a further 7% came  from  neighbouring  Delta  State.
         Women and girls are recruited for  domestic  servitude  or  sexual
         exploitation; they are  taken  from  Nigeria  to  other  west  and
         central African countries and to Europe. Mr Desmond investigated a
         large  Nigerian   OGN   involved   in   trafficking   for   sexual
         exploitation. He identified various different roles as follows:

    . Recruitment;
    . Performing a ritual ceremony (juju/voodoo);
    . Training in carrying out sexual acts;
    . Training of the "legend": the account to be given to  the  immigration
      authorities on arrival into the UK;
    . Instructions on what to do once accepted into the  asylum  process  in
      the UK;
    . Organising the journey/trafficking out of  Nigeria  to  the  UK  which
      according to accounts given by victims  involved  corrupt  airport  or
      immigration staff in Nigeria;
    . Reception in the UK and exploitation in the UK;
    . The reselling to another cell or trader in mainland Europe.

     29. The Europol 2016 Report, along with other primary,  secondary  and
         tertiary research documents before us with specific  reference  to
         Nigeria, generally corroborate Mr Desmond's evidence to the effect
         that, in his experience,  victims  of  trafficking  and  suspected
         traffickers generally share nationality, ethnic ties and sometimes
         kinship links. In Nigerian OCNs, women, unusually, play a  central
         role in the process of exploitation. The Freedom House, Freedom in
         the World 2016: Nigeria Report refers to  Organised  Crime  Groups
         being heavily involved in human trafficking.

    30. The Danish Report and  subsequent  reports  including  the  Finnish
        Report and Europol 2016 Report state that:




              . Cross border trafficking usually involves a  criminal  group
                and is highly organised; the degree of organisation  may  be
                dependent upon the size of the operation and the  number  of
                women an organisation is moving and managing;  by  its  very
                nature, transnational trafficking is  complex  and  requires
                many collaborators who perform different criminal acts -  it
                is  "virtually  impossible"[10]  for   one   individual   to
                singlehandedly undertake such transactions;  "...  it  needs
                careful planning, a sophisticated level of organisation  and
                the engagement of  several  individuals  (often  located  in
                different  sites   and   with   different   tasks)[11]";   "
                ...[traffickers] operate through structures and  connections
                which are entirely unique and therefore  have  none  of  the
                weakness  of  other  organized  criminal  networks;  thereby
                making them almost impossible to eliminate  completely[12]";
                "... [cross border trafficking] is highly complex, involving
                a large and diverse range of people... most trafficking  was
                undertaken  through  informal  arrangements  and   done   by
                individuals known to and, in  many  cases,  related  to  the
                trafficking victims and their life in Nigeria or  were  part
                of their immediate family (such as  a  parent  or  husband).
                Just under three-quarters (72%) of victims were recruited by
                someone they or their family knew well[13]."

              . Each element is undertaken by individuals or small groups of
                individuals able to operate  independently  while  using  an
                extensive network of personal important contacts across  the
                EU: those who recruit  or  procure;  those  responsible  for
                smuggling  and  transport;  those  providing  documentation;
                those seeking to corrupt  law  enforcement/border  controls;
                those involved in the provision, management and  control  of
                safe houses; owners of premises or properties where  victims
                are exploited (e.g. bars, hotels, etc.); those  involved  in
                the collection, delivery and distribution  of  the  profits;
                those knowingly involved in money  laundering/management  of
                assets and proceeds of crime; complicit legal  officers  and
                legal service providers.

              .  They  are  particularly  proficient  in  using   fraudulent
                educational,    business    and     tourism     visas     or
                genuine/lookalike/stolen  passports,  and  often  abuse  the
                asylum system to facilitate their victim's  entry  into  the
                EU. Nigerian women often called madams or  mamas  also  play
                important roles in the exploitation process and some of them
                supervise the entire trafficking  process.  They  engage  in
                exploitation  for  economic  gain.   They  manage   victims'
                movements,  debt  and  other  logistical  tasks,   sometimes
                supported by a male driver and/or a warder.  African victims
                often do not see  themselves  as  exploited  but  rather  as
                migrants who must repay their transportation and  harbouring
                costs; they are prone to support or form  an  alliance  with
                their  offenders.  This  often  results  in  victims   being
                reluctant  to  cooperate  with  law  enforcement.   Nigerian
                networks often involved in trafficking in human  beings  are
                usually not active in other types of crime.[14]

              .  Nigerian  organised  criminals  are  a  prime  example   of
                organising according to a network model -  although  central
                persons in Nigerian networks are persons with special skills
                who have nurtured important contacts (e.g. with  the  public
                officials), or have taken the initiative to gather  a  small
                group of people to organise criminal activities and may have
                great influence they rarely  command  a  clearly  structured
                organisation. Short-term alliances are formed  for  specific
                projects, and the network as such is in constant change. The
                loose organisational form of the Nigerian networks is  often
                very efficient and makes it more difficult for the police to
                fight crime.  Firstly, the central persons are less  visible
                than in other groups.... Secondly, the effect of putting the
                central person in a network out of action is not necessarily
                too great. While hierarchical groups may tumble like a house
                of cards, the Nigerian groups rapidly restructure  into  new
                constellations (Europol,  2003:  United  Nations  Office  on
                Drugs and Crime, 2002).  In the Netherlands,  for  instance,
                it has been observed arrests of a relatively high number  of
                traffickers have not had any visible effect on the number of
                Nigerian prostitutes in the country[15].


     31. This documentary evidence supported  Mr  Desmond's  evidence  that
         there was a difference between an Organised Criminal Group ("OCG")
         and an Organised Criminal Network ("OCN"): an OCG is  a  group  of
         individuals  who   regularly   worked   together   in   persistent
         criminality in a particular area causing significant harm  to  the
         community or of cross border concern. Each member of an OCG  would
         know who the other members of the group were. A number of separate
         OCGs are linked together by a network of communication  (OCN)  and
         only one or two members of an OCG  would  know  the  identity  and
         contact details of another OCG. This, Mr Desmond said, ensures the
         safety and security  of  each  OCG  in  the  event  of  arrest  or
         disruption by a  law  enforcement  agency.  The  loose  and  fluid
         structure of networks (as oppose to groups) was identified  by  Mr
         Desmond and corroborated by the Finnish report and referred to  by
         Campana[16] .


     32.  The  Finnish  Report  reviewed   existing   significant   country
         information  and  the  structure  of  Nigerian  human  trafficking
         networks. As with the other documentation before us[17] the report
         identified that there was considerable variation in the type, size
         and organisation of  the  groups  or  networks  and  this  may  be
         dependent upon the size of the  operation,  the  number  of  women
         being trafficked, the financial strength of  the  groups  and  how
         well-connected they were with officials.

             "Some groups operate  a  loose  network  using  mostly  family
             members to recruit victims. Others are well structured;  right
             from recruiting and  travel  agents  to  the  law  enforcement
             agencies, professional forgers, financiers and exploiters.

             Prominent  players  in  Nigerian  human  trafficking   possess
             specific  skills,  have  cultivated  important  contacts  with
             officials, for instance, or have themselves brought together a
             network organising human  trafficking.  They  may  exercise  a
             great deal of influence in the network but the network  rarely
             is  structured.  As  temporary  networks  are  formed   around
             specific    projects    and    their    composition    changes
             constantly...... A loose and flexible  structure  often  makes
             the network  very  effective  and,  at  the  same  time,  more
             difficult for the police  to  disperse.  It  may  be  hard  to
             identify the key players and their elimination from operations
             does  not  necessarily  have  a  sufficient  impact   on   the
             operational capacity of the network  as  the  networks  reform
             themselves quickly.  The  key  to  the  effectiveness  of  the
             networks is  their  ability  to  operate  independently  while
             drawing on an extensive network of personal contacts"


     33. Mr Desmond confirmed his opinion that there could be a  difference
         between OCGs concerned with trafficking  a  domestic  servant  and
         those trafficking  victims  for  sexual  exploitation  because  to
         supply a domestic servant to a family in Europe it was possible to
         send her as part of the family unit.

     34. Campana concludes that although commonly referred to as 'Nigerian'
         trafficking, in reality the ring included a  number  of  different
         nationalities and that kinship did not appear to play a key  role.
         The average age of the offenders was  relatively  high  (34  years
         old) indicating it was a business like enterprise and not a  youth
         gang and that there was no violence associated  with  interactions
         between offenders  at  the  various  trafficking  stages.  Campana
         considers the coordination of work amongst traffickers. He  argues
         that keeping transportation and  exploitation  separate  decreases
         the overall monitoring costs. The files reviewed for the  purposes
         of his research offer evidence of five distinct strategies adopted
         by madams to monitor the victims and  increase  their  compliance:
         the use of force  (limited  in  the  cases  under  scrutiny);  the
         alignment of  incentives  between  madams  and  victims'  families
         (families back home may receive a financial benefit from the  work
         of their daughter and so may have an incentive to  pressure  their
         daughter  to  comply  with  the  madam's  orders);  hostage-taking
         strategies whereby family members in Nigeria  can  be  used  as  a
         target for retaliation; voodoo rituals (contracts are often signed
         before a pastor who performs rituals  to  sanction  the  agreement
         such rituals usually being performed in Nigeria before the journey
         begins) and finally direct monitoring for example sharing the same
         house.



    Domestic exploitation


     35. The paper by Ellis T, Akpala J "Making sense of  the  relationship
         between trafficking in persons,  human  smuggling,  and  organised
         crime: the case of  Nigeria"   published  in  The  Police  Journal
         84(1), March 2011 considered the background and context  to  human
         trafficking and smuggling in general and developed a model of  the
         relationship between trafficking, smuggling and  organised  crime.
         The writer considered existing documentary evidence, contact  with
         the UK Home Office and also undertook a  small  exploratory  study
         with Nigerian law enforcement officers. The article reports that

             "According to the Home Office, domestic  servitude  is  a  key
             driver of demand in the  trafficking  of  children  and  young
             women. Any deception is based on  similar  promises  to  those
             outlined  above  [working  in  restaurants,   domestic   work,
             childminding, accountancy, promise of education  or   training
             opportunities], but, on arrival, the migrants are put to  work
             in a house and  usually never allowed out. They will  have  no
             documents   and   many   are   also   regularly    physically,
             psychologically and sexually abused,  not  paid,  and  may  be
             compelled to work long hours without rest..... There is a grey
             area between prostitution and domestic servitude, with many of
             the same types of abuse taking place. Indeed,  commodification
             and the adaptability of traffickers means that there  is  some
             fluidity between these  two  markets,  and  more  research  is
             needed into  the  forced  career  path  of  children  who  are
             initially trafficked for domestic service, but  may  later  be
             moved into prostitution."

     36. Cherti distinguishes between trafficking for domestic servitude in
         the UK and sexual exploitation.  In domestic  servitude  cases  he
         draws  attention  to  the  experiences  of  victims  of   domestic
         servitude involving a

              "challenging intersection  of  extreme  abuse  with  apparent
             normality. Exploiters in the UK may  be  apparently  respected
             members of the community, employed in a professional capacity,
             including in our sample people employed as an embassy  worker,
             social worker or teacher, locally known and with  strong  ties
             to respected institutions such as the neighbourhood church."

         He says a striking proportion of the exploiters in the  UK  appear
         to be ordinary citizens rather than  professional  criminals.   He
         refers to instances

             "where the victim was transferred  from  one  country  to  the
             other  to  be  exploited  by  the  same  family,  showing  the
             importance of mobile diaspora networks  in  the  practice.  In
             these cases, when the sender was not a parent but an  employer
             in Nigeria or a 'friend' of an orphaned victim, the nature  of
             the trafficking seemed to be a more opportunistic  transaction
             between them and the receiver in the UK, or one born out of  a
             specific economic circumstance or immediate need at that time,
             rather than a pattern of trafficking and abuse."

          And

            'Personal Traffickers' (parents, family contact or employers):

             Many  people  particularly  those  trafficked   for   domestic
             servitude were trafficked by someone intimately known to them.
             These  traffickers  appeared  not  to   be   responsible   for
             trafficking multiple victims; rather they would be involved in
             the trafficking of one person.  The mechanisms for this  could
             vary: several respondents gave accounts  of  the  relative  or
             their employer  in  Nigeria  sending  a  request  back  for  a
             domestic worker,  or  of  an  associate  visiting  the  family
             household and promising to take the victim to a better life in
             the UK.  These traffickers were mainly involved in trafficking
             for domestic servitude.

            'Personal' linking traffickers, (family friends,  relatives  or
            associates):

            In a small number of cases personal traffickers would appear to
            be involved along with others. Friends or  relatives  would  be
            involved at the stage of recruitment and migration, however the
            exploiter would be unknown to the victim. Even in  these  cases
            the number of people involved appears to be small and the  work
            of the trafficker to be opportune, taking  the  opportunity  to
            exploit a relatives need for support rather than systematic  or
            a  pattern  of  repeat  behaviour.   Among  respondents,  these
            included not only relatives but also in at least  one  instance
            old school friends, possibly former victims who had moved on to
            recruitment themselves.

     37. Mr  Desmond  also  investigated  networks/groups  associated  with
         domestic labour trafficking. There is, he said, a  greater  police
         focus on these groups now. Young girls are,  he  said,  trafficked
         into the UK as domestic workers by individual traffickers who  may
         be related to, or are the  current  employer  of,  the  trafficked
         child/young person whereas  others  are  brought  in  by  criminal
         networks.  He  said  that,  as   with   trafficking   for   sexual
         exploitation, several people would be involved in domestic  worker
         trafficking. He described the pattern as follows:


             "... the family in the UK who wish to obtain the services of a
             domestic worker would have to advertise that  fact  by  making
             contact with someone in Nigeria. The  victim  will  have  been
             identified by someone within  the  community  and  the  family
             approached by the recruiter. Some form of payment will be made
             to the family in order to encourage them to  hand  over  their
             child...the  recruiter  will  then  need   to   obtain   birth
             registration and travel documents to  facilitate  that  victim
             travelling to the UK. This may involve the services of another
             person who has the skills or connections  to  obtain  official
             documents  with  false  details  or  a   forged   or   adapted
             passport....the original recruiter may escort that victim into
             the  UK  or  it  may  involve  an  additional  person.   These
             individuals would form an OCG. Depending on the regularity and
             number of times this OCG arranged  trafficking  -  they  could
             also be characterised as an OCN."


     38. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford's evidence from a conversation  she  had
         with the director of Edo State Market  Women's  Association,  with
         victims in the UK and from what she had learnt from discussions in
         wider church circles in the UK, was that there were  people  known
         to those in the church who  could  access  cheap  labour;  it  was
         possible to obtain a  domestic  servant  in  the  UK.  Mr  Desmond
         related a conversation he had at a meeting in the House of Commons
         about domestic servitude when he was told  that  having  a  'house
         girl or boy' to do the domestic chores was


             "equal to having the latest washing machine or dishwasher.  It
             was a  'must  have'  to  enforce  one's  standing  within  the
             community."


     39. Mr Desmond's evidence was very clear that a person  who  wanted  a
         domestic servant would 'pay on delivery';  the  traffickers  would
         have their profit on delivery and the deal was complete  when  the
         victim  was  sold  to  the  person  in  the  UK.  Trafficking  for
         exploitation was, he said, different because the victim  paid  off
         her debt as she was  paid  for  her  services.  He  also  referred
         however  to  a  continuing  interest  in  someone  trafficked  for
         domestic servitude to the extent that if a  domestic  servant  ran
         away there may be some  form  of  retribution  from  the  employer
         either to the trafficker or to the  victim's  family  because  the
         'deal' had failed. In view of the conclusions that follow, it  can
         be seen  that  this  view  concerning  retribution  does  not  sit
         comfortably with the evidence considered as a whole,  although  it
         seems reasonable to conclude the extent of  or  existence  of  any
         retribution would  depend  upon  the  extent  and  nature  of  the
         'employer's' contacts.

     40. Mr Desmond was aware of cases where the employer's wife turned the
         victim out on the street where they could fall into the  hands  of
         other exploiters or be re-trafficked. This could  occur  when  the
         domestic servant became of an age where  she  was  attracting  the
         attention of male members of the household or was failing  in  her
         duties.  Although  there  may  be   a   transition   into   sexual
         exploitation such  transition  was  'domestic'  and  was  not  the
         purpose of the initial trafficking. A professional  household  may
         not have connections or know an OCG or someone in an OCG so it was
         more likely that they would just  'kick  the  victim  out  on  the
         street'.  If someone had been brought  here  for  the  purpose  of
         sexual exploitation, then the employers would, he  said,  know  an
         OCG and have the necessary contacts.

     41. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford's evidence regarding domestic  servitude
         was not as clear as that of Mr Desmond or the documentary evidence
         before us. She appeared to be saying that  those  trafficked  into
         domestic servitude could move into being  sexually  exploited  but
         she  did  not  appear  to  make  any  distinction  between   those
         trafficked  for  the  purpose  of  domestic  servitude  and  those
         trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation. She referred to
         the possible sexual exploitation of domestic servants and said

             "..... because of the  fluidity  of  sexual  exploitation  and
             domestic servitude, what was in the mind  of  the  person  who
             wanted the product meant that the fictive debt  could  be  run
             out at a greater level."

         When asked to explain this she said

             "it was important to look at Campana and  the  business  model
             set out therein. It was difficult to look  at  management  and
             who  was   managing   recruitment   and   there   was   little
             understanding about how the payments were made, the  debt  was
             fictive.  Transnational  movement  was  dangerous   for   most
             organised  criminal  gangs  or  organised  criminal  networks;
             therefore who enforced payment of the  debt  was  unknown.  It
             depended on the management structure of any particular group."



     42. She was asked who was  making  money  from  the  servant  and  she
         stated:

              "If the sponsor model was considered  then  the  trolley  was
             paid immediately,  but  the  overall  debt  was  held  by  the
             sponsor... "it would take longer for domestic  servitude,  but
             the Sponsor would get the lion's share of the profit".

         She did not

             "know how a recruiter was paid except  that  the  lesser  jobs
             were paid off first. It was not possible to  say  how  complex
             the sponsor situation was and there was a need to look at  the
             OCG and whether the sponsor was in fact part of the group, but
             the  group  was  fluid  especially  the  trolleys   who   were
             financially paid. The roles of the sponsor and  the  recruiter
             could be complex and it was a very dynamic relationship.   The
             sponsor was not always the same as the consumer.  Chasing  the
             money assisted but it did not  always  indicate  who  was  the
             sponsor".

     43.   She  said  that  the  pattern  described  by  Campana  (who  was
         describing sexual exploitation in Italy) was the same  pattern  in
         the  UK;  domestic  servitude  was  not   separate   from   sexual
         exploitation.  The debt was owed by the victim, therefore  if  the
         victim did not fulfil their contract there would be reprisals.  It
         was not relevant, she said, how much the consumer paid.

     44.  Dr Agnew-Davies, in her evidence derived  from  her  fact-finding
         trip in 2011, referred to conversations she had with medical staff
         in hospitals and shelters in Lagos and Benin  City:  "Even  though
         many of the staff do not like trafficking they still  utilise  it.
         House workers were very common and most workers had one especially
         if they were junior in their work and had a baby. The child  would
         be brought in and the agent would be paid for the whole year.  The
         child would not be sent to school and they were abused. A  lot  of
         the children had behavioural or emotional problems and  may  still
         be wetting the bed at 13 and 14 years of age. If this happened the
         child would simply be replaced by the trafficker  and  no  further
         payment would be made".




Sexual exploitation


     45. According to Cherti, sexual exploitation:

             "... can involve a wider network involving pimps  and  madams.
             Some victims reported working in a brothel-style  set-up  with
             other young women, in the majority of  cases  the  victim  was
             either exploited informally by a man and his friends  or  sold
             to other men alone from  a  flat  or  the  trafficker's  home.
             Strangers, often 'professional'  traffickers,  played  a  much
             larger  role  among  respondents  in  recruitment  for  sexual
             exploitation.  Having  accompanied  victims  to  the  UK,  the
             trafficker would typically either exploit the victim  directly
             themselves or leave them with a partner who would then  manage
             the victim.... Whether these traffickers were working alone or
             as part of a broader criminal  organisation  is  not  easy  to
             discern. There were  signs  of  integration  and  coordination
             between people in the two countries: This included attacks  on
             family members or returned victims. There were also  incidents
             of victims being transferred to another exploiter or sent  and
             received by different  traffickers  in  Nigeria  and  the  UK.
             Rather than necessarily suggesting a  trafficking  'production
             line', the existence of  criminal  networks  beholden  to  the
             trafficker could also be because the trafficker was seen to be
             powerful. Many victims of sexual exploitation met only one  or
             two traffickers throughout their exploitation."

         And he identifies professional traffickers as:

             "Typically these  approach  victims  or  their  families  with
             offers of facilitating travel abroad. In many cases  they  are
             strangers, unknown to the family and are able to link in  with
             networks or exploiters in Europe.  In this scenario, when  the
             victim or their family is approached by a stranger, there  may
             be no direct  social  link.  Rather  than  trafficking  in  an
             opportune way preying on someone within their  social  network
             to exploit them for their own  gain,  there  was  evidence  of
             people targeting  vulnerable  people.  For  example,  recently
             orphaned girls through  schools,  homeless  shelters,  on  the
             streets or directly from prison. Sensing  the  desperation  of
             their victims they would then promise them the possibility  of
             employment or education in Europe."



     46. Whilst working in the anti-trafficking unit Mr Desmond said it was
         rare to find Nigerian victims trafficked for  sexual  exploitation
         in London brothels; they were kept  in  and  worked  from  private
         homes. In his view, drawing upon his experience, Nigerian  victims
         were "often moved  on  to  other  European  countries  with  fewer
         restrictions on street prostitution."

     47. Mr Desmond's evidence was that it was possible to get  a  domestic
         servant package and it was  also  possible  for  a  victim  to  be
         brought in and held for a period to be indoctrinated and then sold
         on[18]. There might be a time when females were brought  into  the
         UK and there was a need to find a buyer. He gave an example of one
         of the  traffickers  he  had  investigated  which  had  led  to  a
         successful prosecution: girls were advertised on the internet, the
         trafficker had photos of all his victims including of the 14  year
         old girl who did his chores and his cooking,  whom  he  then  sold
         after she had been repeatedly raped. But he reiterated that  there
         was  a  distinction  between   domestic   servitude   and   sexual
         exploitation.

     48. Mr Desmond's  opinion  from  his  investigations  and  talking  to
         victims was that whether the victim came to the  UK  for  domestic
         servitude  or  sexual  exploitation  depended  on  her   age   and
         experience and also whether she was a virgin.

             "She needed to be broken into the art of carrying  out  a  sex
             act. A trafficker would not want  to  sell  a  person  without
             experience. So it  may  be  that  if  a  victim  came  into  a
             household, those who were brought here as virgins,  were  then
             raped and indoctrinated."

     49. He said it was usual to expect a victim to undertake domestic work
         in  Nigeria  whether  they  were  being  trafficked   for   sexual
         exploitation or not; domestic servitude would be ancillary to  the
         primary purpose. If not already groomed for sexual exploitation in
         Nigeria, she would be groomed in the UK.

     50. There were cases where  a  person  was  brought  in  for  domestic
         servitude but the person who had  bought  her  decided  that  s/he
         wanted to get her/his money  back  and  therefore  would  sexually
         exploit her, or s/he had connections to sell her on.

     51. Mr Desmond said  he  had  not  come  across  any  cases  where  an
         individual was brought in for  domestic  servitude  and  was  then
         returned to the traffickers for  sexual  exploitation  some  years
         later. He said that it  may  be  that  a  person  brought  in  for
         domestic servitude would subsequently be  sexually  exploited  but
         the subsequent sexual exploitation had arisen where the  employers
         had decided to try to recoup their initial outlay.

     52. Although the Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford's evidence was  as  above,  she
         also  agreed  that  where  someone  was  trafficked   for   sexual
         exploitation the trafficker's profit was derived from the men  who
         paid money for sex whereas in domestic servitude the  profit  came
         from the person who employed/bought the victim.




Conclusions on characteristics of trafficking in a Nigerian context



     53. It can be seen that this evidence does not all point the same way.
         There are tensions  to  be  found  in  the  views  expressed.  For
         example, whether OCGs are structured or not; whether in most cases
         the trafficked woman is trafficked by those known to or related to
         her. The view expressed by Campana that kinship does  not  play  a
         key role resonates with the other evidence before us on  the  role
         played by professional traffickers described by Cherti considering
         trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation.


     54. We are satisfied on the evidence, considered as a whole, that much
         of the trafficking that goes on is the work of what will generally
         be a small OCG, sometimes a single family engaged  principally  in
         trafficking  women  or  a  woman.  That  OCG  calls   upon   other
         individuals or groups (through the OCN) to  provide  services  for
         example securing or providing  travel  documentation,  visas,  and
         making travel arrangements for which payment will be made at  that
         time. That OCN  is  fluid  and  loose[19]  and  provides  specific
         services at particular times.


     55. The potential result of this is that networks that  existed  at  a
         time when an individual is taken from her home may  not  exist  in
         the same form when she returns to Nigeria, but this does  not,  on
         the evidence before us, lead to a finding that the mere passage of
         time reduces the risk of contact with  the  individuals  who  were
         involved in a victim's trafficking where the  particular  services
         that were utilised for that individual may no longer exist in that
         form.


     56. It can be seen that  there  are,  generally,  differences  in  the
         experiences of  those  trafficked  for  the  purpose  of  domestic
         servitude and those trafficked for sexual exploitation.  A  person
         trafficked  for  domestic  servitude  may  well  be   subsequently
         sexually exploited but such exploitation will  generally  be  that
         resulting from the initial 'purchaser' seeking to  recoup  her/his
         investment  or  taking  advantage  of   an   existing   situation.
         Alternatively, where the domestic servant  attracts  the  unwanted
         attentions of males in the household, the woman of  the  household
         may simply throw her out of the household.


     57. Generally, whether trafficked for  domestic  servitude  or  sexual
         exploitation, the family (if there is one) of the trafficked woman
         will have been complicit to a greater or lesser degree. This is an
         important factor when assessing risk on return to Nigeria  as  the
         extent to which a woman's own family was complicit in her  initial
         trafficking may well inform the question of whether return to  the
         family  household  is  a  realistic   option.   Those   trafficked
         specifically for domestic servitude may subsequently  be  sexually
         exploited by those who have paid the trafficker for their domestic
         services, but will not necessarily have been trafficked with  that
         aim.


     58. A key difference, and one that is of  central  importance  to  the
         assessment of risk on return, is that the  financial  interest  of
         the trafficker who delivers a girl or  woman  trafficked  for  the
         purpose of domestic servitude will come to an end at the point  of
         delivery. We do not accept the evidence of the Rev  Dr  Pemberton-
         Ford that there remains a debt to  be  paid.  In  so  far  as  her
         evidence could be understood, she could draw on nothing other than
         her supposition. All the other evidence points the other way:  the
         trafficker will be paid at the point of delivery for providing the
         trafficked woman and he or she will have no continuing interest in
         the trafficked person. Conversely, where a woman is trafficked for
         sexual  exploitation,  the  interest  of  the  trafficker   is   a
         continuing one focussed on the recovery of the investment incurred
         in the cost of trafficking  and  the  expected  profit  which  the
         trafficked woman owes and  which  she  must  pay  off  before  the
         trafficker's interest is extinguished.


     59. There was some evidence that if a person trafficked  for  domestic
         servitude was unsatisfactory then she would  be  replaced  without
         further  cost  to  the  'employer'.  We  are  unable  to  reach  a
         conclusion  on  whether   this   applied   to   those   trafficked
         transnationally as well as internally due to the lack of evidence.
         Nor  were  we  able  to  reach  a  conclusion  who  undertook  the
         'replacement'. It seems reasonable to conclude, given the  absence
         of hard evidence but  in  the  light  of  the  characteristics  of
         trafficking in Nigeria that internal  trafficking  would  be  more
         likely  to  enable  this  to  happen  or,  given  the  nature   of
         trafficking in domestic servitude where, for  example,  the  child
         was  either  previously  employed  or  is  related,  there  remain
         contacts with the original traffickers.


     60. Women who have  been  trafficked  for  sexual  exploitation  will,
         broadly speaking, fall into two groups. The first, and the largest
         group, being those  who  have  been  deceived  into  thinking  the
         purpose of  the  trafficking  exercise  is  to  deliver  her  into
         employment in the UK; she has no idea she is going  to  be  forced
         into prostitution.  That  woman  will  be  raped  and  groomed  in
         preparation for being put to work as a prostitute. This may  occur
         either in Nigeria  or  after  arrival  in  the  UK.  Part  of  the
         experience of being trafficked will generally include  an  abusive
         period during which the victim is 'prepared' to be put to work  as
         a prostitute. The evidence suggests she will also  be  undertaking
         domestic  work  but  that  is  not  the  primary  purpose  of  her
         trafficking. There is some evidence to suggest  that  some  women,
         the second group,  may  realise  that  they  will  be  working  as
         prostitutes but their agreement to the process has  been  obtained
         by deceit, often by falsely representing the amount that will have
         to be repaid to discharge the debt owed to the trafficker.


     61. The evidence indicates that women or girls trafficked for domestic
         servitude are generally not subjected to any violent or physically
         abusive treatment until they arrive in the UK. Where a  victim  of
         trafficking is exposed to violence it is more likely to be at  the
         hands of the  'employer'.  The  evidence  indicates  also  that  a
         significant number of those who are trafficked for the purpose  of
         domestic servitude may subsequently  be  sexually  abused  by  the
         employer and male members of the family. Again, for  the  purposes
         of assessing risk on return of such  a  trafficked  woman,  it  is
         important to recognise that this sexual abuse is the  act  of  the
         employer and not something that is of any interest to the original
         trafficker because the debt has been paid.



Victim profiles and indicators of risk.


     62. It is Mr Desmond's  knowledge  and  experience  that  the  "common
         profile of a typical victim of trafficking to Europe" is likely to
         include some of the following characteristics[20]:


    . They are from Southern Nigeria (mainly Edo or Delta State);
    . They are from a rural area;
    . Mainly female;
    . Aged between 14 to 18 years;
    . From a financially poor family;
    . Brought up by guardians in some cases, but not all;
    . Suffered sexual assault and/or physical abuse by their guardian;
    . Had a limited education;
    . Had to carry out daily chores or work to supplement family income;
    . Have a strong Christian belief;
    . Brought up in a community that practised or believed in the  power  of
      juju;
    . Was the eldest or an only child;
    . Recruited by a family member or a stranger who directly contacted  the
      family;
    . The parent or guardian was involved in and generally consented to  the
      child/ young adult leaving with recruiter;
    . Was promised an education or employment;
    . Happy to leave the home environment where they were ill-treated;
    . Does not have a passport;
    . Travel arrangements made by another person;
    . Does not know the identity of the port of entry into UK;
    . Does not know the name of the person who brought them into the UK;
    . Does not know place name of final destination;
    . Scared of authorities;
    . Distrusting of other persons;
    . Tired during the day and suffer from disturbed sleep patterns;
    . Suffers nightmares and often from PTSD;
    . Victims of sexual assault/ abuse once in the UK;
    . Some are pregnant or have a young child;
    . Inconsistencies or gaps within their account;
    . Unable or unwilling to speak about those who trafficked them;
    . Often reluctant to disclose juju details but  appeared  to  have  been
      subjected to a juju ceremony/ ritual oath taking.


     63. The evidence did not suggest that it was necessary for a victim to
         present  with  all  of  these  characteristics  in  order  to   be
         recognised as a victim of trafficking or to be  at  real  risk  of
         being trafficked  but  the  existence  of  a  selection  of  these
         characteristics should be  seen  to  be  strong  identifiers.  The
         evidence before us did not support a  finding  that  all  Nigerian
         women are at real risk of  being  trafficked  whether  for  sexual
         exploitation or domestic servitude.




The legal test relating to assessment of risk on return


     64. A refugee is a person who, owing to a well-founded fear  of  being
         persecuted for a reason recognised by  the  Convention,  which  in
         this case is membership of  a  particular  social  group,  and  is
         outside her country of nationality and is unable or owing to  such
         fear unwilling to avail herself of the protection of that country.
         Put  another  way,  the  Refugee  Convention  is  concerned   with
         protection against "being persecuted", against  a  predicament  or
         condition. To access entitlement to protection under  the  Refugee
         Convention there needs to be analysis both of the  nature  of  the
         risk and the nature of the State response. It is  the  combination
         of these that results in that predicament or  condition  resulting
         in the individual  potentially  acquiring  a  right  to  surrogate
         protection.  As stated  in  the  UNHCR  guidelines,  an  important
         aspect of the definition of trafficking  is  an  understanding  of
         trafficking as a process  comprising  a  number  of  inter-related
         actions rather than a single act at a given point in time[21].

     65.  This appeal is brought under s83 of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 so that in determining  it  we  are  concerned
         only with the appellant's asylum claim. Although the jurisprudence
         concerning Article 3 of the ECHR is  relevant  to  a  considerable
         extent in informing our assessment, in the context  of  trafficked
         women, of the existence of a real risk of serious harm as part  of
         the serious harm/ lack of sufficiency of  protection  test  to  be
         applied in asylum cases, that assessment is to  be  undertaken  in
         terms of the Refugee Convention and not the ECHR. It  was  not  in
         dispute before us that a victim of trafficking for the purpose  of
         domestic servitude or for the purpose of sexual exploitation  will
         generally have sustained serious harm in the past  and  would,  if
         trafficked again, sustain serious harm again.


     66. The key issues in this appeal are the availability of  sufficiency
         of  protection  and  the  option   of   safe/reasonable   internal
         relocation - although neither party addressed the latter issue  in
         any extensive detail, relying  principally  upon  the  established
         test and submitting either that it would be unduly harsh for  this
         particular appellant to relocate or alternatively that there  were
         adequate facilities available that  would  render  relocation  not
         unduly harsh. We consider this  in  more  detail  below.  It  will
         frequently be the case that the same  discernible  characteristics
         which expose her to risk in her home area will generate  the  same
         risk elsewhere.


     67. It is not generally  in  dispute  that  a  victim  of  trafficking
         returning to Nigeria is a member of a particular social group  who
         will  have  sustained  serious  harm.  It  is  therefore  not   in
         contention that Directive 2011/36/EU on Preventing  and  Combating
         Trafficking  in  Human   Beings   and   Protecting   its   Victims
         (Trafficking Directive),  the  Protocol  to  Prevent  Supress  and
         Punish  Trafficking  in  Persons  Especially  Women  and  Children
         supplementing the United Nations Convention against  Transnational
         Organised Crime (2003) -  the Palermo Protocol - and  The  Council
         of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings
         (2005) (Anti-trafficking Convention) apply. Ms Cronin and Mr Singh
         did not submit that the Anti-trafficking Convention or the Palermo
         Protocol  amended  the  obligations  arising  under  the   Refugee
         Convention; Ms Cronin submitted that under Article 4 of the  Anti-
         trafficking  Convention   the   UK   accepted   and   acknowledged
         obligations that were relevant to determining whether a victim  of
         trafficking was a refugee.  She submitted these duties  include  a
         duty to investigate, from material  available  to  the  SSHD,  the
         means by which an  individual  was  trafficked  and  therefore  to
         enable cogent evidence as to any network or gang  involved  to  be
         provided; those duties to the victim informed the issues of  risk,
         effective  protection  and  relocation   with   regard   to   that
         individual.


    68.  Although not specifically referenced in the cases of EK (Article 4
        ECHR;  Anti-trafficking  Convention)  Tanzania  [2013]  UKUT  00313
        (IAC), AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  [2010]  UKUT  00090
        (IAC) and TD and AD (trafficked women) Albania CG [2016] UKUT 00092
        (IAC), Ms Cronin submitted that this holistic approach was implicit
        in those decisions.


    69. The holistic approach accords broadly, in our view,  with  domestic
        jurisprudence including Horvath v SSHD [2000] UKHL 37, Noune v SSHD
        [2000] EWCA Civ 306, Harakel v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ 884  and  Kacaj
        (Article 3 - Standard of proof - non state actors)  Albania  [2001]
        UKIAT  00018.  Although  in  considering  protection  available  in
        Article 3 terms there is a  different  analysis,[22]  in  the  vast
        majority of cases the outcome in terms of protection  will  clearly
        be the same. We did not hear specific submissions on this given, in
        particular, that the appeal before us is concerned  only  with  the
        Refugee Convention. In R (Bagdanavicius) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 38 Lord
        Brown ([30]) said


             "...it is perhaps not surprising that where, as in the  United
             Kingdom, the concept of persecution  by  non-state  agents  is
             recognised, a broadly similar approach is adopted  under  both
             Conventions [Refugee Convention and ECHR] to  the  requirement
             for the person concerned to demonstrate  in  addition  to  the
             risk of harm a failure in the receiving  state  to  provide  a
             reasonable level of protection...".


        Bagdanavicius specifically holds that the submission made on behalf
        of the claimant that the


             "member state expelling the person can be in breach of Article
             3 because of the risk of injury [the appellant] runs on return
             even though,  were  that  risk  to  eventuate,  the  receiving
             country itself would not be, was "hopeless".


     70. What is apparent however  is  the  need  for  critical  and  close
         analysis of the particular personal circumstances of a  victim  of
         trafficking in the context of the evidenced  background  material.
         As was said in Horvath per Lord Clyde at [513]:

             "In assessing the existence of a real risk of the violation of
             rights occurring anything which may bear on the likelihood  of
             the  incidents  of  the  violation  will  be  relevant...  For
             example, [the applicant's] prominence in society or  political
             life, or anything else  which  might  make  him  a  particular
             target of persecution may be relevant.  The  history  of  past
             violations, the extent to which the applicant  has  personally
             been directly affected, either by being the victim of violence
             or the recipient of threats  of  violence,  considerations  of
             geographical  location,  of  all  the  factors   which   might
             stimulate  or  facilitate  a  violation,  will  be  among  the
             circumstances to be taken into account. As also  will  factors
             which may discourage or  deter  or  render  a  violation  less
             likely. The political  and  legal  situation  in  the  country
             should be taken into account."


     71. In Kacaj (Article 3 -  Standard  of  proof  -  non  state  actors)
         Albania [2001] UKIAT 00018 [21], the Tribunal  held  that  Horvath
         was not to be read as deciding that there will be a sufficiency of
         protection whenever the authorities in  the  receiving  state  are
         doing their best. If this best can be shown to be ineffective,  it
         may be that an applicant can establish that there is an  inability
         to provide the necessary protection. But it is clear that it is  a
         practical standard. The fact that a system may break down  because
         of incompetence or venality of individual  officers  is  generally
         not to be regarded as establishing unwillingness or  inability  to
         provide protection. In many cases the existence of the system will
         be sufficient to remove the reality of the risk.


     72. In R (Dhima) v SSHD [2002] EWHC 80 (Admin), the  court  held  that
         what is critical is a combination of willingness  and  ability  to
         provide protection to the level that can reasonably be expected to
         meet and overcome the real risk of  harm  from  non-State  agents.
         What is reasonable protection in any case depends,  therefore,  on
         the level of risk, without that protection, for which  it  has  to
         provide.


     73. The ultimate  question  is  not  whether  a  receiving  State  has
         complied with any particular standards of conduct but whether  the
         result is such as to reduce the risk below that of real risk.


     74. The Palermo Protocol provides in Article 4  that,  save  as  where
         stated, it  shall  apply  to  the  prevention,  investigation  and
         prosecution of offences identified by  the  Protocol  where  those
         offences are transnational in  nature  and  involve  an  organised
         criminal group, as well as to the victims of such  offences.  Part
         II of the Protocol sets out the considerations for  protection  of
         victims of trafficking. Article 8 considers  the  repatriation  of
         victims and in particular states:


             "(2) .... Such return shall be with due regard for the  safety
             of that person and for the status  of  any  legal  proceedings
             related to the fact that the person is a victim of trafficking
             and shall preferably be voluntary."

     75. Article 16 of the Anti-trafficking Convention states, inter alia,


            "2. When a Party returns a victim to another State, such return
            shall be with due regard for the rights, safety and dignity  of
            that person and for the status of any legal proceedings related
            to the fact that the person is a victim, and  shall  preferably
            be voluntary.
                ....


            5. Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures as
            may  be  necessary  to   establish   repatriation   programmes,
            involving  relevant   national   or   international   and   non
            governmental organisations. These programmes aim at avoiding re-
            victimisation. Each Party should make its best effort to favour
            the reintegration of victims into the society of the  State  of
            return, including reintegration into the education  system  and
            the labour market, in particular through  the  acquisition  and
            improvement of their professional skills...."

     76. Article 14 of the Anti-trafficking Convention considers issues  of
         residence  permits.  The   Convention   does   not   amend   other
         international instruments which enable  alternative  and  in  some
         scenarios greater protection and  assistance  to  the  victims  of
         trafficking. Article 40 (4) states


             "Nothing in  this  Convention  shall  affect  the  rights  and
             obligations and responsibilities  of  states  and  individuals
             under international law, including international  humanitarian
             law and international human rights  law  and,  in  particular,
             where applicable, the [Refugee Convention]"


     77. EK observes that the UK government has  ratified  the  Council  of
         Europe Anti-trafficking Convention. In so doing the UK  government
         not only has to take steps to prevent trafficking but also to take
         various steps to provide  assistance  to  victims  of  trafficking
         within the UK ([60]). [61] - provides that

             "when a party returns a victim to another state,  such  return
             shall be with due regard for the rights, safety and dignity of
             that person (Article 16(2))".


              At [63]  of  EK  Lord  Turnbull  records  that  the  UT  heard
        submissions


             "in relation to severity of harm  or  anticipated  harm  which
             would be necessary to show a breach of Art 3 of the Convention
             (the ECHR) and the considerations which need to be taken  into
             account if such  a  claim  is  based  on  a  lack  of  medical
             facilities in a receiving country".


         Lord Turnbull went on to state that the panel found force  in  the
         submission,  having  considered  that  Article  4  of  the   Anti-
         trafficking Convention was engaged and   considering  N  v  United
         Kingdom and the guidance in para 183 of the Explanatory Report  to
         the Anti-trafficking Convention that:


             "the guidance given in para  183  of  the  Explanatory  Report
             seems to contemplate a quite different standard from the  very
             high one described in N....".


         Lord Turnbull notes "in addition" that the basis  of  EK's  claims
         are quite different    from those in the cases mentioned - EK  was
         a victim of trafficking in relation to whom it had been held there
         had been a breach of the obligations imposed on the UK  government
         by article 4 of the  Anti-trafficking  Convention  and  that  such
         breach


             "... exposed [EK] to harm in  this  country.  The  appellant's
             entitlement to reparation and the obligations under the  Anti-
             Trafficking  Convention  are  considerations  which   had   no
             counterpart in the other cases under discussion."


          Lord Turnbull at [64] of EK records the submission that:


             ".....a duty to return with due regard to  'dignity'  involved
             the consideration of a right in which other protective rights,
             such as safety and health, were subsumed".


          He concluded [64]


             "...it is appropriate to start from the appreciation that  the
             appellant's medical condition is linked to the breach  of  her
             rights under Art 4 of the Convention, in other words that  the
             state should recognise a  degree  of  responsibility  for  it.
             From this starting point it is difficult to see that to remove
             the appellant at  this  stage,  when  she  suffers  from  such
             serious physical and mental health problems, from the care  of
             the medical regime which she presently benefits from,  and  to
             return her to a country where facilities for the  proper  care
             of her present and likely needs are absent, to the extent that
             her life expectancy will be greatly reduced, can be seen as  a
             return with due regard for her dignity."


          This was reinforced at [65]:


             ".... The only context in which Art 4 of  the  Convention  was
             considered was in connection with the risk  of  re-trafficking
             in Tanzania.  Although it was pointed out that there were non-
             governmental  agencies  working   in   Tanzania   to   provide
             assistance to victims of trafficking, no mention was  made  of
             the obligations which the UK had undertaken in  terms  of  Art
             12, 14 or 16 of the Anti-trafficking Convention...."


           And at [66]


             "... the decisions were taken without taking  account  of  the
             link between the appellant's precarious state  of  health  and
             the breach of the respondent's own protective  obligations  in
             terms of policy and Art 4 of the Convention.  They were  taken
             without consideration of the duties which were  engaged  under
             Arts 12, 14 and 16 of the Anti-trafficking Convention..."


     78. We were not provided with a copy of the Explanatory Report to  the
         Anti-trafficking Convention but it is referred to in EK and  is  a
         publicly available  document.   Paragraphs  183  and  184  of  the
         Explanatory Report  are  directed  at  the  issuing  of  residence
         permits and read as follows:


             "183. Thus, for the victim to be granted a  residence  permit,
             and depending on the approach the  Party  adopts,  either  the
             victim's personal circumstances must be such that it would  be
             unreasonable to compel them to leave the  national  territory,
             or there has to be an investigation or  prosecution  with  the
             victim cooperating with the authorities. Parties likewise have
             the  possibility  of  issuing  residence   permits   in   both
             situations.


             184. The personal situation requirement takes in  a  range  of
             situations, depending on whether it is  the  victim's  safety,
             state of health, family situation or some other  factor  which
             has to be taken into account. "


         Paragraphs 200 to  207  of  the  Explanatory  Report  consider  the
         repatriation and return of victims under Article 16  of  the  Anti-
         trafficking Convention.  Paragraph 200 acknowledges that Article 16
         is partly inspired  by  Article  8  of  the  Palermo  Protocol  and
         considers both voluntary and non-voluntary  return  of  victims  of
         trafficking.  The Explanatory Report goes on to state:


             "202. The return of a victim  of  trafficking  is  not  always
             without any risk. Therefore, the drafters wished to precise in
             the text of the convention that the return of a victim  "shall
             be with due regard for the rights, safety and dignity of  that
             person".  This applies to  the  Party  which  facilitates  and
             accepts the return of the victim  as  well  as,  according  to
             paragraph 2, to the Party which returns a  victim  to  another
             State.  Such rights include, in particular, the right  not  to
             be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment, the  right  to
             the protection of private and family life and  the  protection
             of his/ her identity....


             203.  The drafters considered that  in  this  respect  it  was
             important to have in mind the jurisprudence  of  the  European
             Court of Human Rights regarding article 3...... in the case of
             D v United Kingdom (2 May 1997, compendium  of  judgments  and
             decisions, 1997 - III) she precised that the responsibility of
             states parties is also engaged when the alleged ill treatments
             did not follow directly or indirectly from public  authorities
             of the destination country...."


    79. The headnote in TD includes that:


             (d)  "...There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency of
             protection, but it will not be effective in every case.   When
             considering  whether  or  not  there  is  a   sufficiency   of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered."


         TD considers sufficiency of protection but, as can  be  seen  from
         [153] and [172], the  appeals  were  allowed  on  the  basis  that
         internal relocation would be unduly  harsh  given  the  particular
         circumstances of their cases.  In the  case  of  TD  herself,  the
         tribunal found that because of her  particular  vulnerability  she
         would be likely to fall into the hands  of  those  who  would  re-
         traffic her and the sufficiency  of  protection  that,  generally,
         would be available to victims of trafficking on return  would  not
         be available to her.


     80. The approach taken in EK (which was concerned with Article  3  and
         was not considering serious harm and sufficiency of protection  in
         the context of  an  asylum  claim)  that  the  Explanatory  Report
         contemplates a different threshold to  the  high  threshold  of  N
         cannot survive  the  analysis  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the
         subsequent decision in SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA  Civ  442[23].  The
         particular circumstances in EK, where the UK was found  to  be  in
         breach of article 4 Anti-trafficking  Convention,  may  well  have
         provided a sustainable justification that led  to  the  particular
         findings in that case - the Article 3 breach having  occurred,  it
         seems from the findings of fact in that case, in the UK by the  UK
         state. But unless such a finding can be  made  on  the  particular
         facts of the case, in our judgement neither the Palermo  protocol,
         the Anti-trafficking Convention nor  the  Explanatory  Report  are
         authority for the proposition that the  fact  of  having  suffered
         serious harm in the past with continuing deficit in health can  be
         a substitute for rigorous analysis of the circumstances on  return
         to Nigeria which  are  not  the  responsibility  of  the  Nigerian
         authorities, in order to succeed in resisting removal on Article 3
         grounds. In reaching this conclusion we have taken particular note
         of paragraph 16 of the UNHCR guidelines but note that  this  makes
         specific reference to  the  other  interrelated  elements  of  the
         refugee definition being fulfilled.

    81. We can see no justification or authority for incorporating into the
        word 'dignity' as used in the Palermo Protocol and the  Council  of
        Europe Anti-trafficking Convention any amendment or  alteration  to
        the interpretation and applicability of  Article  3  ECHR/  Refugee
        Convention as they relate to sufficiency of protection or  internal
        relocation. Although the Explanatory Report refers to D (the  facts
        of which were at the extreme end of the spectrum),  the  consistent
        authority of domestic and Strasbourg  jurisprudence  requires  some
        receiving  state  failure   to   provide   protection   to   enable
        international protection under the Refugee Convention or Article  3
        to be provided absent the exceptional factors of a nature  such  as
        enabled D's claim to succeed.


    82.   In our judgement, in the context of an asylum claim  there  is  no
         alteration to  the UK's  obligations  arising  under  the  Refugee
         Convention in  the  assessment  of  sufficiency  of  protection  A
         conclusion  that  an  individual  is  at  serious  risk  of  being
         trafficked requires an analysis that takes account of anything and
         everything that may be relevant.  This analysis in the context  of
         victims of trafficking will necessarily include an analysis of the
         trafficking itself including the consequences to  the  victim  and
         not merely of the particular personal circumstances of the  victim
         at the date of consideration. By its  very  nature  this  includes
         consideration of the dignity of a  victim  as  an  element  to  be
         considered.  The characterisation by Ms  Cronin  as  requiring  an
         holistic analysis is correct; not because the various  trafficking
         instruments require an  altered  analysis  but  because  they  re-
         emphasise the importance of and the wide ranging  nature  of  such
         analysis in the particular circumstances of victims of trafficking
         in the context of an asylum claim[24]. This takes account  of  the
         dynamic  experience  of  trafficking,  the  vulnerability  of  the
         victim, the practical help available to and able to be accessed as
         well as the potential for future trafficking.



Risk on return.



    83.   It is not generally in dispute that if a victim of trafficking is,
         on return to her     country of  origin,  at  real  risk  of  being
         trafficked then she is at real risk of being persecuted.


    84.      The key issues on risk on return are
   a) The risk of re-trafficking either by the original traffickers or other
      traffickers.
   b)  The  risk  of  retribution  from  those  involved  in  the   original
      trafficking.
   c) Vulnerability to abuse.


         It is necessary  to  consider  both  groups  of  victims  -  those
         trafficked  primarily  or  solely  for  the  purpose   of   sexual
         exploitation and those trafficked  for  the  purpose  of  domestic
         servitude. Issues of vulnerability feed into the analysis for both
         groups.


     85. Whether or not NAPTIP provides a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
         victims  of  trafficking  who  are  returned  to  Nigeria   is   a
         significant matter in dispute between the parties.  Therefore,  it
         is necessary to conduct a detailed examination of the evidence the
         parties have put before the Tribunal so that we can make  a  clear
         finding of fact as to the level of protection NAPTIP can provide.



NAPTIP


    86.   The IOM 2006 report describes the establishment of  NAPTIP[25]  in
         2003 as an important  step  in  the  change  in  attitude  to  the
         material financial rewards that accrue, through the emigration and
         prostitution of women, to families remaining in Nigeria. NAPTIP is
         a specialised government agency  empowered  with  law  enforcement
         responsibilities, prevention and protection  responsibilities  and
         prosecution responsibilities. The agency has an investigation unit
         and  a  legal  department  which  are  primarily  responsible  for
         prosecuting all trafficking cases in Nigeria.  Police, immigration
         and customs authorities and NAPTIP have powers to arrest suspected
         offenders but the powers of prosecution  rest  with  NAPTIP.   The
         Nigerian Government in 2008 adopted, after extensive  consultation
         with NAPTIP and stakeholders, a National Policy on Protection  and
         Assistance to Trafficking  Persons  (Protection  Policy)  covering
         reception,   identification,   sheltering,   counselling,   family
         tracing, return/repatriation,  integration,  empowerment,  follow-
         up/aftercare and disengagement in a stated holistic approach.

    87.   The evidence before us did not, however, indicate  the  extent  to
         which attitudes have in  fact  changed  such  that  the  level  of
         trafficking  is  reducing.   Although   the   evidence   indicates
         increasing awareness of the  role  of  deception  in  trafficking,
         there does not appear to be evidence to  support  a  finding  that
         trafficking is declining.

    88.   The IOM 2006 report refers to a raid  on  NAPTIP  headquarters  in
         2006 by armed men who destroyed computers, documents and  archives
         as an apparent attempt to undermine and destroy the agency's anti-
         trafficking operations. The report comments  that  this  not  only
         indicates the brutality of the trafficking networks but also  that
         traffickers see NAPTIP as a real threat  to  their  activity.  The
         OSCE/ODIHR report records that members of  a  trafficking  network
         had threatened NAPTIP staff, judicial officers and judges.  It  is
         not clear whether this was the same incident as  recorded  in  the
         IOM report or a continuing problem. We could not find other  later
         references to this type of intimidation. Witness intimidation  was
         reported as a 'big' problem.   The  OSCE/ODIHR  interviewers  were
         told that witnesses will disappear and they  do  not  want  to  be
         found.  NAPTIP is recorded as saying that everyone  is  frightened
         of  repercussions,  there  are  'big'  risks  of  reprisals,   the
         traffickers  have  a  lot  of   influence,   including   political
         influence.  The problem of witness intimidation is exacerbated  by
         the length of time the case took to come trial.


    89.   The USA has legislation to assist in the combating of  trafficking
         in human beings[26] and places every country  into  one  of  three
         Tiers[27] based on the extent of  their  Governments'  efforts  to
         comply  with  the  "minimum  standards  for  the  elimination   of
         trafficking". The USA produces reports on nearly every country  in
         the world (TIP Reports) in the context that

             "... while Tier 1 is the highest ranking,  it  does  not  mean
             that a country  has  no  human  trafficking  problem.  On  the
             contrary, a Tier 1 ranking indicates  that  a  government  has
             acknowledged the existence of human trafficking, made  efforts
             to address the problem, and complies with the  TVPA's  minimum
             standards.  Each  year,  governments   need   to   demonstrate
             appreciable progress in combating trafficking  to  maintain  a
             Tier 1 ranking".


     90. The criteria used by the US State Department  to  determine  which
         Tier a particular country falls  into  are  set  out  in  Annex  5
         together with the  2016  TIP  report  on  Nigeria.  Of  particular
         relevance to the issues before us are the following extracts  from
         the current (2016) TIP Report:

             "The Government of Nigeria does not  fully  meet  the  minimum
             standards for the elimination of trafficking; however,  it  is
             making significant efforts to do so. .... The National  Agency
             for the  Prohibition  of  Trafficking  in  Persons  and  Other
             Related Matters (NAPTIP) received a larger  operating  budget,
             identified and provided services to a large number of victims,
             and continued extensive  awareness  campaigns  throughout  the
             country. .........


             RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NIGERIA:
             .... continue to vigorously pursue trafficking investigations,
             prosecutions,   and   adequate   sentences    for    convicted
             traffickers;  take  proactive  measures  to  investigate   and
             prosecute  government  officials  suspected  of   trafficking-
             related corruption and  complicity  in  trafficking  offenses;
             ensure the activities of NAPTIP  receive  sufficient  funding,
             particularly  for  prosecuting   traffickers   and   providing
             adequate care for victims; ......continue to  provide  regular
             training to  police  and  immigration  officials  to  identify
             trafficking victims  among  vulnerable  populations,  such  as
             women in prostitution and young females  traveling  with  non-
             family members; ...


             PROSECUTION
             The  government   maintained   strong   anti-trafficking   law
             enforcement efforts. ...
             NAPTIP conducted 507 trafficking investigations, completed  at
             least 32 prosecutions, and secured 24 convictions  during  the
             reporting  period,  compared  with  509   investigations,   56
             prosecutions, and 30 convictions  in  the  previous  reporting
             period. ....An additional 148 prosecutions remained pending at
             the end of the reporting  period.  All  prosecutions  occurred
             under the anti-trafficking law ..... The government  commenced
             prosecution of a Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  official  who
             allegedly used his or her position to facilitate a trafficking
             crime abroad; the prosecution remained ongoing at the close of
             the reporting period. The government did not report any  other
             investigations, prosecutions,  or  convictions  of  government
             officials  complicit   in   trafficking   offenses;   however,
             corruption  at  all  levels  of  the  government  remained   a
             pervasive problem.
             The government conducted  extensive  training  throughout  the
             reporting  period...  These   programs   offered   specialized
             training   on   victim   identification,   investigation   and
             prosecution of  trafficking  cases,  counseling,  intelligence
             collection, and monitoring and evaluation. ...


             PROTECTION
             The  government   maintained   strong   efforts   to   protect
             trafficking victims. The government identified 943 trafficking
             victims, including 429 victims of sex trafficking and  514  of
             labor trafficking, compared with 914 victims identified in the
             previous reporting period. NAPTIP provided  initial  screening
             and assistance for all victims it identified and referred them
             to government-run care facilities for  further  medical  care,
             vocational training, education, and  shelter.  The  government
             has  formal  written  procedures  to  guide  law  enforcement,
             immigration,  and  social  services  personnel  in   proactive
             identification  of   trafficking   victims   among   high-risk
             populations. NAPTIP provided police, immigration,  and  social
             services  personnel  with  specialized  training  on  how   to
             identify  trafficking  victims  and  direct  them  to  NAPTIP.
             Additionally, the  government's  national  referral  mechanism
             provides formal guidelines for  law  enforcement,  immigration
             officials, and service providers  to  improve  protection  and
             assistance to trafficking victims,  both  within  Nigeria  and
             abroad.
             .....  NAPTIP  operated   nine   shelters   specifically   for
             trafficking victims, with a total  capacity  of  313  victims.
             Through these  shelters,  NAPTIP  provided  access  to  legal,
             medical, and psychological services,  as  well  as  vocational
             training,  trade  and  financial  empowerment,  and   business
             management skills. Victims who required additional medical and
             psychological treatment were provided  services  by  hospitals
             and clinics through existing agreements  with  NAPTIP.  NAPTIP
             shelters offered short-term care, generally limiting  victims'
             stays to six weeks, although victims were  allowed  to  extend
             their stays under special  circumstances.  If  victims  needed
             longer-term  care,  NAPTIP  collaborated  with  two   shelters
             operated by  the  Ministry  of  Women's  Affairs  and  NGO-run
             shelters. Victims in NAPTIP shelters were not allowed to leave
             unless accompanied by a chaperone. NAPTIP provided funding, in-
             kind donations, and services to NGOs and  other  organizations
             that afforded protective services to trafficking victims.
             .....




             PREVENTION
             The government sustained efforts to prevent human  trafficking
             ...... The government did not make any discernible efforts  to
             decrease the demand for commercial sex acts. ...."


     91. The TIP Report cannot be read in isolation but must be  considered
         in the light of the criteria against which the Report is drawn up.
         In particular, a Government  is  enjoined  to  make  "serious  and
         sustained efforts" to eliminate severe  forms  of  trafficking  in
         persons. The Reports do not refer primarily to  the  effectiveness
         of the  measures  taken;  they  consider  the  existence  of  such
         measures.  For  example,  in  the  reference  to  the  number   of
         prosecutions  undertaken,  the  Report   gives   the   number   of
         investigations,  prosecutions  and  convictions;   there   is   no
         reference to the number of failed prosecutions  or  investigations
         or  the  reasons  for  that;  no  reference  to  the   number   of
         investigations/prosecutions compared to the number  of  identified
         victims;  no  reference  to  the   number   of   prosecutions   or
         investigations undertaken in comparison to  the  numbers  actually
         thought to be exploited either nationally or  transnationally;  no
         breakdown between those who have  been  identified  as  internally
         trafficked and those who have been returned to Nigeria as  victims
         of  trafficking.  The  number  of  successful   prosecutions   for
         trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation (which includes
         domestic servitude) exceeds those prosecutions of trafficking  for
         the purpose of sexual exploitation  yet  the  evidence  before  us
         indicates that greater numbers of women  are  trafficked  for  the
         purpose of sexual exploitation. There is no indication  how  those
         cases came to the attention of NAPTIP to  enable  prosecutions  to
         take place. Although there is reference to the existence of formal
         written procedures and guidelines, there is no  assessment  as  to
         how effective these are in practice or the extent  to  which  they
         are implemented. The OSCE/ODIHR 2011 fact finding report refers to
         the TIP reports and that Nigeria's placement on Tier 1  status  in
         2009 for the first time


             "is mostly for successful investigations and  prosecution  and
             less for efforts made in other areas such as prevention,  care
             and protection. It is therefore not surprising that  the  low-
             risk and high profit trade  of  human  trafficking...continues
             despite the country's Tier 1 status."


    92.    Since  its  establishment,  NAPTIP  has  successfully  prosecuted
         several cases. NAPTIP reports  routine  difficulty  in  persuading
         victims to divulge  the  names  of  traffickers  both  because  of
         victims' fears of supernatural consequences if they have  taken  a
         ritual oath and fear of the traffickers.   The  OSCE/ODIHR  report
         records that NAPTIP does  not  provide  meaningful  protection  to
         either victims or to their close relatives. NAPTIP is reported  to
         have been able to circumvent the victim's fears by  arresting  the
         men who administer ritual oaths  as  accomplices  and  then  often
         mitigate a sentence if they act as informants and witnesses.

    93.   Ms Cronin referred to the actual  manner  in  which  victims  were
         returned to Nigeria. She referred to victims being  returned  when
         the NAPTIP office was closed, to the lack of security for  victims
         who needed food, accommodation and documentation. She referred  to
         reports that some victims were returned to Nigeria in the  clothes
         they had been found  in  and  were  not  allowed  to  bring  their
         possessions or money with them. She referred to NAPTIP  requesting
         that governments liaise with them prior to return, to  traffickers
         waiting at airports to re-traffic victims and the powerlessness of
         NAPTIP to protect those victims if they were unable to meet  them.
         She referred to the Danish report that NAPTIP was simply unable to
         accommodate large numbers of returnees at any one time.

    94.   The references in the evidence before  us,  including  the  Danish
         report and the  Finnish  report,  to  requests  by  NAPTIP  to  be
         notified of returns and to keeping the numbers returned low enough
         to enable NAPTIP to be able to respond were not all concerned with
         returns from the UK, although the manner of return may  impact  on
         the availability and ability to access protection  and  assistance
         from NAPTIP immediately on arrival.  The actual manner  of  return
         is relevant to the issue of sufficiency of protection  on  arrival
         in Nigeria.  The  question  is  the  risk  on  return  facing  any
         particular individual victim. The ability  of  NAPTIP  to  provide
         appropriate levels of support to any  particular  number  who  may
         theoretically be returned at any one  point  is  relevant  to  the
         extent that they have requested prior  notification  and  for  the
         numbers to be managed to enable a returned victim  of  trafficking
         to be met on arrival.

    95.   Ms Cronin submitted there were problems  with  NAPTIP  because  it
         performed various functions all of which  were  onerous.   It  was
         not,  she  submitted,  satisfactory  to   have   prosecution   and
         protection functions undertaken by the same entity. However, it is
         neither appropriate nor relevant for us to express an  opinion  on
         whether such an arrangement as set up by the  Nigerian  Government
         is or is not satisfactory.  The issue before us is  whether  there
         is, either through NAPTIP or some other mechanism, sufficiency  of
         protection available for victims of trafficking.

    96.   The Danish report refers to and considers  the  support  available
         through NGOs including GPI, COSUDOW, IRRAG, WOCON, WOTCLEF,  AWEG,
         Idia Renaissance and the Catholic Secretariat/Caritas Nigeria. The
         report records that  the  NGOs  appear  to  have  a  good  working
         relationship with NAPTIP and  the  government  agencies  including
         Ministries of Education,  Social  Affairs,  Women  and  Children's
         Affairs. The report records that between 2004 and the date of  the
         report (December 2006) Benin City had received 299 victims of whom
         58 had been rehabilitated  and  the  remaining  241  victims  were
         awaiting rehabilitation.

    97.   The Nigerian government in compliance with its  duties  under  the
         various Conventions which it has ratified  endeavours  to  provide
         protection through  a  combination  of  legislation,  the  courts,
         Customs  and  Immigration  Services,  NAPTIP  and  various   NGOs.
         Although in  general  terms  it  cannot  be  concluded  that  non-
         governmental organisations can be relied upon as assisting in  the
         provision of sufficiency of protection that is not wholly the case
         in Nigeria. The CORI report refers to the strong partnerships that
         have been developed at National and state levels with the  Police,
         Immigration and Nigerian Customs Service; the establishment  of  a
         specialised  Anti-trafficking  department  and  the  provision  of
         services from NGOs. Some of the  NGOs,  for  example  WOTCLEF  and
         COSUDOW, run shelters which provide a low  level  of  support  and
         shelter in terms of numbers and have  direct  links  with  NAPTIP.
         Other NGOs provide specialised counselling  and  skills  training.
         The Ministry of Women provides shelters and to that extent, in the
         context of protection, NGOs can be considered  as  instruments  of
         the Nigerian State albeit providing limited protection.

    98.   The Danish Report recorded the views of NGOs on whether there were
         reprisals against victims or their  families  if  the  outstanding
         debt had not been paid. NAPTIP  Benin  Zonal  Office  stated  that
         there had been no reports of retaliation against victims  who  had
         testified since the establishment of the  Zonal  office  in  2004;
         many of the NGOs expressed the view that victims would be at  risk
         but they did not provide any examples of and  had  no  records  of
         individuals who had been threatened or  victimised  regardless  of
         whether they had testified abroad  or  in  Nigeria.  The  Catholic
         Secretariat/Caritas expressed the view that if violence took place
         within the family there was "a good chance that it will  never  be
         known to the public or anyone else".

     99. The NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office said it was  aware  of  attempts  to
         intimidate witnesses but there were no examples  of  such  victims
         being subjected to violence. The view is expressed in the  Finnish
         Report that local traffickers in Nigeria do not  occupy  a  strong
         position in society and  can  do  little  else  than  recruit  new
         victims. The evidence overall as recorded in  the  Finnish  report
         was that although there would be  little  overt  violence  by  the
         traffickers, returning  victims  are  subjected  to  psychological
         and/or emotional violence and/or pressure from their families. The
         report records that victims who return before the debt is paid are
         likely to be re-trafficked by their families because of a fear  of
         retribution, although the evidence before us  did  not  support  a
         finding that retribution was a significant occurrence in practice,
         and because of the loss of possible future financial  benefit  the
         family would be likely to accrue after the debt has been paid. The
         NAPTIP Zonal office considered that most traffickers  have  family
         ties and thus are less willing to kill or persecute a victim as  a
         reprisal or deterrent and that local traffickers would keep a  low
         profile and continue their trafficking business rather  than  risk
         exposure and prosecution.   COSUDOW  considered  the  traffickers'
         objective is to get the money back and the family's  objective  is
         to make money and thus the family and trafficker "will see  to  it
         that the returned victim will be re-trafficked".

    100. The more recent OSCE/ODIHR 2011 Report records IOM in an interview
         in February 2011 as saying they had cases  where  traffickers  had
         threatened  victims.  The  report  also  referred  to   the   main
         traffickers being in Europe

             "whereas the only available traffickers in  Nigeria  were  the
             'small fry' who were easily replaced in the networks,  leaving
             the networks operational despite the convictions."

    101. The Danish Report and the Finnish Report  record  that  some  NGOs
         consider NAPTIP to offer as much protection  as  is  required  for
         returned victims. However, the overall view taken by NGOs was that
         there are simply too many victims of trafficking compared  to  the
         resources available. The Finnish report draws upon the Trafficking
         in Person's Report 2014 by USDOS and states "the reality  is  that
         many victims returning from abroad are still not  afforded  proper
         rehabilitation and social integration". This view is reflected  in
         the OSCE/ODIHR 2011 fact finding report.

    102. It appeared to the members of the  ATLeP  (OSCE/ODIHR)  delegation
         that

          "In terms of protection the capacity of NAPTIP and  indeed  police
              officers to offer protection to victims either from reprisals
              from traffickers or even during the return process is weak...
              there is no proactive use of the law to prevent  trafficking.
              The continued scale of the problem of  human  trafficking  in
              Nigeria suggests that  whilst  there  is  an  adequate  legal
              framework, adequate measures have not been taken to implement
              Nigerian law so as to provide effective protection".

    103. Mr Singh submitted that Dr Agnew-Davies'  evidence  regarding  the
         NAPTIP shelters was some five years old (a visit in 2011 which had
         not been repeated) and the purpose of the visit  had  not  been  a
         fact finding investigation relating to the NAPTIP shelters or  the
         level of protection provided but arose  from  general  discussions
         she had had; there  had  been  no  systematic  research  into  the
         matters upon which she gave her opinion.

    104.  According to the introduction and  framework  of  the  OSCE/ODIHR
         2011 report, it is "research regarding the national laws, policies
         and   practices   of   NIGERIA   relating   to   the   return   of
         trafficked/exploited persons".  There  are  specific  sections  on
         protection, returns in the context of  NAPTIP  and  other  actors.
         Whilst there may not have  been  systematic  and  specific  single
         issue research the report was plainly tasked with consideration of
         the practice of return.



Length of stay in NAPTIP shelter


    105. It is the respondent's case that it is established by the evidence
         that a victim could and would remain in a  NAPTIP  shelter  for  6
         weeks; that there was no requirement  or  intention  that  victims
         were returned to their family after two weeks  and  no  policy  or
         practice of evicting victims who do not co-operate. After  a  stay
         of 6 weeks, as referred to by NAPTIP  in  their  response  to  the
         questionnaire sent in these proceedings, there was the possibility
         of an extension if deemed appropriate or necessary or there  would
         be a transfer to a shelter run  by  an  NGO  or  National  Women's
         Affairs (a Government Ministry).

    106.  Mr Singh submitted that more weight should be  placed  on  the  US
         State Department Report than on the evidence of Dr Agnew-Davies on
         what she saw in two shelters over five  years  ago.  He  submitted
         there was no evidence that victims were sent back to families  and
         exposed to a risk of re-trafficking. If  that  was  happening,  he
         submitted that Nigeria would not be a Tier 2 country but would  be
         in the bottom tier.

    107. Ms Cronin submitted firstly that the evidence was  to  the  effect
         that it was the intention of NAPTIP to  return  victims  to  their
         family as soon as possible, secondly that an individual could  not
         stay in a shelter for more than 6 weeks in any event, thirdly that
         staying in a shelter for only six weeks was an  inadequate  period
         of time  to  facilitate  rehabilitation  or  reintegration  for  a
         returning traumatised victims  of  trafficking  and  finally  that
         there were no adequate other places for victims to go to  after  6
         weeks. WOTCLEF gave the numbers they had rescued as 21 in 2013 and
         22 in 2014 and thus had limited capacity to take any overflow from
         NAPTIP. No specific submission  was  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent as to whether or not 6 weeks was an adequate period  of
         time  to  facilitate  reintegration  for  a  returning  victim  of
         trafficking.

    108. Ms Cronin submitted that in the  response  to  the  questionnaire,
         sent to NAPTIP in the course of these  proceedings,  there  was  a
         statement of policy and not necessarily an  actual  indication  of
         how long people stayed. Ms Cronin submitted that there  were  gaps
         in the NAPTIP documentary  evidence:  the  data  reports  recorded
         shelter capacity but not occupancy; there was no indication of how
         many  victims  were  accommodated  in  one  year;  there  was   no
         indication how many of those who were accommodated were victims of
         internal as oppose to transnational trafficking

    109. The Danish Report records NAPTIP Zonal Office as saying  that  the
         normal period of time in a shelter is 2  weeks  and  this  can  be
         extended for victims who give evidence for as long as the criminal
         case is pending. The  report  also  refers  to  individuals  being
         transferred to WOTCLEF shelters "most victims  stay  in  WOTCLEF's
         shelter for six weeks and some may stay for up to  six  months  or
         more depending on their individual  needs."  The  OSCE/ODIHR  2011
         report states that there  is  no  functioning  witness  protection
         scheme and  that  "Victim  protection  is  limited  to  those  who
         cooperate with NAPTIP in  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of
         traffickers and only lasts for the short period that the victim is
         allowed to remain in a NAPTIP shelter".

    110. In their response to the questionnaire NAPTIP  stated,  consistent
         with Dr Agnew-Davies' evidence and  the  OSCE/ODIHR  2011  report,
         that the primary focus of NAPTIP is to seek  to  reunite  families
         after the reception and identification process was complete.

              "The primary goal in the successful handling  of  trafficking
              cases is the eventual return of victims  to  their  homes  or
              places of origin."

    111. Dr Agnew-Davies met a senior team member (unnamed) from NAPTIP  in
         Lagos during her fact finding trip in 2011.  Her  evidence  before
         us, and reflected in the OSCE/ODIHR 2011 report, in summary, was:

                . NAPTIP will only accommodate victims until active  efforts
                  to locate a relative are successful (often less  than  two
                  weeks);

    . The women who stay in the shelters are not free to leave at will;

                . During her visits to an active shelter in Lagos the  women
                  and children were locked in a building with barred windows
                  in a guarded compound, tantamount to a  detention  centre.
                  Such conditions would be a powerful trigger in trafficking
                  cases as the environment itself would serve as a  reminder
                  of previous situations of entrapment  and  deprivation  of
                  liberty;

                . Staff at the centre describe the  shelter  as  "a  transit
                  centre" before victims are returned to their home after  2
                  to 6 weeks.

                . From a conversation she had with staff at the shelter: The
                  primary role of counsellors was to provide evidence  about
                  traffickers  to  enable  NAPTIP  to  prosecute.  If   such
                  evidence was not forthcoming the victims were returned  to
                  their families within two weeks.  It was the  counsellor's
                  job to find out where  the  families  were.  Victims  only
                  tended to stay for six weeks if a prosecution  was  likely
                  to take place quickly, in which case they were kept  in  a
                  locked shelter with a garden.

                . In reality NAPTIP does not offer  mental  health  care  to
                  returnees in its shelters beyond the  basic  psycho-social
                  counselling provided by untrained staff; the main  purpose
                  of  the  counselling  was  to  identify  victims,   obtain
                  information to  facilitate  family  reunion,  to  identify
                  traffickers and to obtain evidence for prosecution.

    112. Mr Desmond stated that it was his understanding, from what he  had
         been told by victims and from reports that he had read, that if  a
         victim did not cooperate with a prosecution she  was  required  to
         leave the shelter. He also understood that even if a victim wished
         to remain in the shelter beyond 6 weeks that was not possible.

    113. The OSCE/ODIHR 2011 report refers to the follow  up  conducted  by
         NAPTIP as required in the Nigerian Protection Policy

              "Shelter is  provided  for  in  the  Policy  as  a  temporary
              accommodation to provide  opportunity  to  obtain  additional
              information from victims and to amongst other  things  create
              opportunity for knowledge enhancement. Follow- up/after  care
              is  provided  for  with  the  objective  of   ensuring   that
              trafficked persons remain safe and make progress and to avert
              any possibility of being retrafficked.  In  reality,  follow-
              up/after care mechanisms in NAPTIP are weak  or  at  best  ad
              hoc. .... In reality disengagement happens as soon as victims
              are returned to their  home  communities.  In  the  ATLeP[28]
              interview with NAPTIP officials in  Lagos  we  were  informed
              that they conduct follow up monthly for  a  period  of  three
              years. After three years it is assumed  that  the  victim  is
              safe and  no  further  threat.  However  when  probed  as  to
              availability of resources to follow up all their  victims  in
              this manner the officials qualified the assertion by  further
              stating 'That is what is supposed to be but we do it more for
              victims who  have  been  rehabilitated  and  those  who  have
              appeared in court. We monitor them more closely.'"

    114. Cherti considered that family reunion was inappropriate: There was
         a  low  capacity  of  organisation,  low  value  and  a  lack   of
         therapeutic assistance which resulted in further trafficking.

    115. Mrs Olateru-Olagbegi took the  view  that  parents  who  had  been
         complicit in the original trafficking would retraffick the  victim
         due to their poverty.



    What happens after leaving a NAPTIP shelter whether after 2 weeks, after
    6 weeks or because the individual is unable to access a  NAPTIP  shelter
    at all




    116. The IOM 2015  report  considered  the  outcomes  of  two  specific
         projects  considering  return  and  reintegration  of  victims  of
         trafficking: the Coordinated Approach  for  the  reintegration  of
         victims of trafficking ("CARE") and Transnational  Action  -  safe
         and  sustainable  return  and   reintegration   for   victims   of
         trafficking ("TACT"). Specific programmes were  put  in  place  to
         consider the approaches necessary. The CARE project objective  was
         to provide flexible  and  tailored  assistance  helping  returning
         victims of trafficking from the UK (and  other  EU  countries)  to
         Nigeria,  amongst  other  countries.  The  TACT  project  supports
         capacity development processes between five EU member states  (not
         the UK) and three priority countries (not Nigeria). Nigeria had by
         far the largest number of project beneficiaries  under  CARE.  The
         recommendations made were general for all the  countries  involved
         and included


             "family reunification plays a  central  role  in  the  psycho-
             social well being of  victims  upon  return...consent...should
             always  be  sought...victims  need  to  be   in   a   trusting
             environment."


    117. The IOM 2015 report states


             "reintegration is a fundamental though challenging  aspect  of
             return migration. Preserving migrant's rights, ensuring  their
             protection  and  well  being   and   contributing   to   local
             development while enhancing the reintegration perspectives  of
             the individual, are vital facets of  the  AVRR  [IOM  Assisted
             Voluntary  Return  and  Reintegration]  programmes.   Enabling
             migrants to re-establish themselves in the  society  of  their
             country of origin and empowering them to participate in social
             cultural economic and political life again should be  the  aim
             of reintegration assistance in order  for  the  return  to  be
             successful."
              .....

             "When a victim of trafficking returns to his/ her  country  of
             origin,  specific  support  based  on  individual   needs   is
             necessary to make the transition period as smooth as  possible
             and to reduce the risk of  re-trafficking.  The  psychological
             and often physical trauma victims of  trafficking  could  have
             experienced during the period they were trafficked leave  them
             in a fragile and precarious  situation......  the  victims  of
             trafficking have specific needs..... which are notably  rooted
             in security concerns and  potential  stigmatisation  in  their
             country of origin. Therefore the support needed encompasses  a
             very broad range of sectors, such as psychological assistance,
             medical assistance, housing, financial  support,  etc.........
             returning victims of trafficking may face serious risks in the
             country of origin, meaning that these  risks  must  always  be
             assessed, again through a series of questions and criteria for
             evaluation, and measures must be taken to tackle  these  risks
             and to ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the  victim  of
             trafficking after his/ her return.

             ...... safe and sustainable return forms an integral  part  of
             counter trafficking policies. The document the  EU  rights  of
             victims of trafficking  in  human  beings  (2013)...  includes
             provisions on the  return  of  victims  of  trafficking,  thus
             considering return as a fundamental right, on the  same  level
             as the reflection period, the right to protection,  the  right
             to compensation, the right to  integration  and  labour,  etc.
             Safe and  sustainable  return  should  thus  be  promoted  and
             safeguarded across EU member states."

    118. The IOM 2015 Report  records  that  the  CARE  project  identified
         limited procedures in the beneficiary countries

              "...  for  the  follow  up  on  trafficker  prosecution   and
              conviction, thus limited access  to  protection  of  victim's
              rights through  the  judicial  system,  including  access  to
              compensation......The variety and complexity  of  the  issues
              that need to be urgently  addressed  once  again  demonstrate
              that a  broad  range  of  stakeholders......must  pool  their
              efforts in order to effectively improve counter-  trafficking
              policies and better guarantee the fundamental rights  of  the
              victims....who returned to their countries of origin."

    119. In  preparing  her  report  for  these  proceedings,  the  Rev  Dr
         Pemberton-Ford  had  contacted  IOM   and   been   informed   that
         approximately  20%  of  victims  of  trafficking  appeared  to  be
         reintegrated successfully, 10% appear to have disappeared and been
         recycled into trafficking and it was not known what  had  happened
         to the remaining 70%. She was not able to assist the  Tribunal  as
         to the methodology employed by the IOM in obtaining those  figures
         or to what period they related.

    120. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford was unable to offer  an  opinion  as  to
         what had happened to the 70%, and did not agree  with  Mr  Singh's
         submission that they plainly did not fall within the 10%  who  had
         been  re-trafficked.  She  concluded  that  further  research  was
         required and the lack of knowledge was a consequence of nature  of
         trafficking as a hidden crime.

    121. Such evidence as was before us did not indicate what proportion of
         those that were retrafficked were trafficked internally as opposed
         to transnationally. There did not appear to be any  evidence  from
         European sources to identify whether victims  of  trafficking  who
         had been identified were retrafficked or not.

    122. UNODC, reported in the OSCE/ODIHR 2011 report, observes that the

             "rehabilitation and reintegration facilities  were  inadequate
             because of a lack of    resources, limited  time  in  shelters
             and speedy return to families."

    Medical/psychological/therapy

    123. Dr Roxanne Agnew-Davies was part  of  the  OSCE/ODIHR  2011  fact-
         finding team and led the  interviews  in  discussion  with  NAPTIP
         personnel at both the  Lagos  and  Abuja  shelters.  She  has  not
         visited Nigeria since then although she had requested and obtained
         up to date  information  from  psychiatrists  she  previously  had
         contact with.

    124. Dr Agnew-Davies' evidence derived both from her fact finding visit
         to Nigeria in 2011 and the updating information she obtained  from
         conversations in 2016.  She observed that whilst NAPTIP offered  a
         valuable service to some trafficked victims the shelters  did  not
         equate to UK refuges by any means and were more akin to prisons or
         detention centres. NAPTIP staff were not appropriately trained  to
         support traumatised victims  of  trafficking  from  a  psychiatric
         perspective. Psychiatric services were overstretched,  costly  and
         were not equipped to offer trauma focussed therapy as  recommended
         by the National Institute of Clinical Excellence in the UK.  There
         was also a high prevalence of domestic violence and discrimination
         against people with severe mental illness in Nigeria which is  not
         yet adequately addressed by the state.  Conditions  have  improved
         since 2011 in  that  there  is  increased  availability  of  newer
         generations of  drugs,  increased  numbers  of  psychiatrists  and
         expertise with regard to  CBT  and  cognitive  re-processing,  but
         "organization of services are still poor and patients can be  lost
         in this wilderness".  The nurse  and  matron  interviewed  at  the
         Lagos shelter informed the OSCE/ODIHR 2011  delegation  that  they
         had never made a referral of a victim to a  psychiatrist.   During
         the visit of the OSCE/ODIHR 2011 delegation to the NAPTIP  shelter
         in Abuja which has a majority of population of children they  were
         informed by  the   shelter's  managers  that  where  some  of  the
         children who displayed flashbacks and other  signs  of  PTSD,  the
         matron would place them in front of the TV to  "take  their  minds
         off things".

    125. Dr Agnew-Davies interviewed a number of women in  the  shelter  in
         2011 and conducted preliminary tests. In her view 3 out of 4  were
         suffering from PTSD yet this had not been recognised and they were
         receiving no treatment.

    126. Dr  Agnew-Davies  recounted,  on  the  basis  of  her  trip,  that
         counsellors "learned on the  job"  and  had  no  psychological  or
         psychiatric qualifications. They were given  training  on  how  to
         interrogate victims for the purpose of  obtaining  information  to
         enable prosecutions to be pursued.  She  gave  one  example  where
         NAPTIP staff suggested that where children had  been  fighting  in
         locked rooms or a woman was shouting in her sleep that was because
         "evil spirits were at work". She  considered  that  although  some
         short-term basic  vocational  training  such  as  hairdressing  or
         courses on  self-esteem,  health,  etiquette  and  computing  were
         provided, neither  medically  nor  therapeutically  can  these  be
         regarded as adequate or specialist treatment  that  would  address
         the symptoms of complex PTSD or  Major  Depressive  Disorder.  She
         expressed concern that in NAPTIP shelters,  the  onus  is  on  the
         victims to discuss their experiences with NAPTIP staff with a view
         to giving evidence against their traffickers in court prosecutions
         brought by NAPTIP rather  than  as  an  element  of  psychological
         treatment.

    127. Dr Agnew-Davies referred to a report by Ero & Yishau 2007 (a  copy
         of which we did not have and therefore do not know what period  is
         referenced); NAPTIP are recorded as reporting that of 962  victims
         of  trafficking  attended  to  by  NAPTIP  only  2  suffered  from
         psychiatric disorders. Dr Agnew-Davies was firmly of  the  opinion
         that in the light of her own experience of trafficked victims this
         was a gross underestimate and reflected "the incapacity of  NAPTIP
         to identify (and therefore  treat)  psychiatric  disturbance".  Dr
         Agnew-Davies reported that  in  2011  only  one  victim,  who  was
         severely psychotic, had been  referred  by  NAPTIP  to  the  Lagos
         psychiatric hospital by 2011 and the psychiatrist did not  believe
         that   NAPTIP   considered   psychological   needs.   That    same
         psychiatrist, when consulted by Dr Agnew-Davies over  developments
         in the intervening five years since her visit, said  that  he  had
         only treated one more victim of trafficking  and  NAPTIP  had  not
         referred any to the hospital. On discussing the treatment given to
         that victim, Dr Agnew-Davies was of the opinion that the treatment
         offered was not appropriate.

    128. The OSCE/ODIHR 2011 report records that

             "In reality, NAPTIP does  not  offer  mental  health  care  to
             returnees in  its  shelters  beyond  the  basic  psycho-social
             counselling which their staffs  provide...NAPTIP  has  neither
             the specialised personnel  nor  the  capacity  to  treat  post
             traumatic stress disorder.  Whilst  NAPTIP  stated  they  make
             referrals to other agencies, those that were contacted had not
             received more than three or four  referrals  in  the  previous
             three years".

    129. There was no challenge by Mr Singh to Dr Agnew-Davies' evidence as
         to the availability of psychiatric facilities in Lagos, Benin City
         and elsewhere in Nigeria. Dr Agnew-Davies  had  visited  hospitals
         and shelters in Lagos and Benin  City.  She  spoke  of  the  small
         number of psychiatrists who are required to see large  numbers  of
         patients a day. The figures she quoted were: 150 psychiatrists  in
         total in Nigeria  for  150,000,000  population.  There  were  more
         psychiatrists in the city but  few  in  rural  areas.   There  was
         essentially one clinical psychologist to every  8,000,000  people.
         There was also a problem of 'brain drain' where more than  70%  of
         those trained had left for the UK, US and Canada. There was a high
         proportion of people with severe mental health problems and a huge
         population of people with depression  and  anxiety  who  were  not
         accessing care at all. Those who did were not  diagnosed  properly
         and were not getting necessary medication because access to  drugs
         was poor.  Further training was required in primary health.

    130. There was one positive story where a  victim  of  trafficking  was
         approached by a trafficker outside the agency. She told staff  and
         they  contacted  NAPTIP  and  he  was  arrested.  The  victim   of
         trafficking was very happy and said it was like watching  a  film.
         She had complex PTSD which was not being treated  and  no  funding
         was available for her to be rehabilitated.

    131. Mr Singh submitted that additional medical and psychological  care
         was available to victims through  other  clinics  with  agreements
         with NAPTIP.

    132. The CORI report, drawing on the Danish Report, provides details of
         facilities available other than NAPTIP.  These are limited:

                . 2 transit shelters for  children  in  Kano  and  Akwa-Ibom
                  States.

                . WOTCLEF has 1 shelter accommodating  14  victims  offering
                  support in terms of skills such as sewing, leather working
                  and other handcrafts; advising  victims  of  opportunities
                  for micro credits and small scale loans and providing  for
                  education. On average victims stay for 6 months  but  some
                  may stay longer before it is possible to reunite them with
                  their families.

                . COSUDOW's shelter in Benin City in 2011 was reported to be
                  functioning under severe funding restraints and only  able
                  to take a maximum of 18.

                . Idia Renaissance offer counselling and vocational training
                  (in Benin City). In 2007 they rehabilitated 30  girls  and
                  women referred by NAPTIP and 5 were  at  that  time  being
                  rehabilitated; 2 were being housed.

                . AWEG established a centre in August 2012, but there was no
                  information how many women it provides for.

    133.  The CORI report refers to the USDOS Trafficking in persons  Report
         2012 that

             "...despite documentation of a staggering number  of  Nigerian
             trafficking victims identified in countries around the  world,
             the government inconsistently  employed  measures  to  provide
             services to repatriated victims.....Victims  were  allowed  to
             stay in NAPTIP shelters for up to six weeks -  a  limit  which
             was extended by up to four  additional  weeks  in  extenuating
             circumstances -  during  which  time  they  received  informal
             educational or vocational training; after this time, those who
             needed long term care were referred to a network of NGOs  that
             could  provide  additional  services,  though  few  long  term
             options were available for adult victims"

    134. The Finnish report considers the  support  provided  by  NGOs  and
         records:

             "Non-Governmental organisations help in the  reintegration  of
             victims  and  conduct  awareness   campaigns   against   human
             trafficking. The non-governmental  organisations  that  assist
             victims generally receive weak  support  and  are  poorly  co-
             ordinated, even  though  some  service  providers  are  highly
             professional and well informed. ...The  low  capacity  of  the
             organisations means that support can be  unreliable  and  lack
             therapeutic value. In  addition,  the  organisations  may  not
             necessarily be able to provide  the  specialist  support  that
             victims require. The organisations lack  grants  for  victims'
             school tuition, vocational training or  business  setup.   The
             shelter   personnel   have   limited   capacity   to   provide
             psychosocial   and   rehabilitation   support   to    mentally
             handicapped  victims,  and  the  follow-up  of   rehabilitated
             victims is inadequate."

    135.  The  OSCE/ODIHR  2011   report   confirms   that   domestic   and
         international  human  rights  groups  generally  operate   without
         Government restriction but that the NGOs which  provide  care  and
         services to victims of traffic trafficking

             "...  usually  have  severe  capacity  problems  in  providing
             services to victims especially those in  need  of  specialized
             care such as a victim with  a  child  or  with  mental  health
             problems."

    136. The OSCE/ODIHR 2011 report refers to the 2014 USDOS Trafficking in
         Persons Report recording that the reality  is  that  many  victims
         returning from abroad are still not afforded proper rehabilitation
         and social integration.




Conclusions on provision of protection


    137. Drawing together all this evidence, considered in the light of the
          submissions, our conclusions on the extent to which sufficiency
         of protection is provided by or contributed to by NAPTIP, which is
         the protection provided by the government of Nigeria, are as
         follows.

    138. We place no weight on Mr Desmond's evidence about length  of  stay
         in a NAPTIP shelter - it was anecdotal and as he said himself this
         was not a matter upon which he had any specific expertise  or  had
         conducted any research.

    139. The detail  of  the  'empowerment'  material  or  how  individuals
         utilised that material or its success  was  not  detailed  in  the
         evidence before  us.  Although  it  was  claimed  that  there  was
         monitoring, it appears that this was  at  most  ad  hoc  and  very
         limited. In particular, those who leave the shelters  without  any
         ongoing criminal prosecution appear not to  be  monitored  in  any
         meaningful way. There was no report of what action  was  taken  if
         such monitoring as there was identified  breaches  of  any  return
         agreement  or  further  abuse  and  no  statistical  evidence   is
         available to establish whether such monitoring is effective.

    140. NAPTIP's evidence was that, if a family objected to  taking  in  a
         family member who had been a victim  of  trafficking,  they  would
         continue until they  were  persuaded  otherwise.  This  caused  us
         concern when considered in the light of the lack  of  evidence  of
         any  real,  meaningful  or  effective  follow  up  monitoring   or
         protection provisions when a victim is returned either against her
         will or against the initial will of the family.

    141. Although the evidence before us is that  NAPTIP  are  successfully
         prosecuting  more  traffickers,  are  maintaining   strong   Anti-
         trafficking law enforcement efforts and are conducting training on
         victim identification, investigation and  prosecution,  monitoring
         and evaluation, there was inadequate evidence before us to support
         a finding that these measures were  having  a  significant  effect
         either on the number of victims trafficked for the first  time  or
         on the risk of returned victims of  trafficking  being  trafficked
         again. Nigeria remains one  of  the  most  prolific  suppliers  of
         trafficked victims both internally and  transnationally.  The  TIP
         report refers to a general increase of protection  being  offered,
         but the numbers of those  offered  protection  is  very  small  in
         relation to  the  numbers  of  those  trafficked.  Any  protection
         offered by NAPTIP is very short term  and  does  not  address  the
         significant risks of retrafficking to those who are vulnerable  to
         abuse.  The mode of trafficking in Nigeria is not predicated  upon
         abduction; those targeted are targeted because of their particular
         vulnerability and such vulnerability is not, on the basis  of  the
         evidence before us, reduced following a six week stay in a  NAPTIP
         shelter. The Nigerian government  has  not  made  any  discernible
         efforts to decrease the demand for  commercial  sex.  Whilst  this
         demand remains, combined with the continued prolific provision  of
         trafficking in human beings in Nigeria, there exists a  real  risk
         of internal or transnational trafficking of  those  identified  as
         vulnerable.

    142. We conclude that where the services of NAPTIP are  made  available
         to a returned victim of trafficking,  then  for  as  long  as  the
         support from NAPTIP continues, which  includes  the  stay  in  the
         shelter and such psychological assistance as there  is,  then  the
         victim will not be at risk of being trafficked during that  period
         of time.

    143. There was evidence to the effect that the  period  of  stay  in  a
         shelter could, in exceptional circumstances, be  extended  but  no
         evidence of this actually having occurred in  fact.  This  implies
         that if an extended stay  does  happen  the  individual  has  been
         identified as  particularly  vulnerable  to  abuse.  The  evidence
         before  us  does  not  support  the  view  that  those   who   are
         particularly vulnerable to abuse are identified and provided  with
         an extended stay in a shelter.

    144. The evidence before us does not support Mr Singh's submission that
         additional medical and psychological care was available to victims
         through other clinics with agreements made with  NAPTIP.  Although
         some services were provided, they were  severely  constrained  and
         inadequate.

    145. The IOM 2015 report critiques reintegration packages that  do  not
         provide  for  effective   monitoring   either   qualitatively   or
         quantitatively  and  Dr  Agnew  Davies  does  not   consider   the
         counselling and psychotherapeutic services available  to  returned
         victims  of  trafficking  to  be  adequate.  But  the   successful
         reintegration of 20% of returned victims of trafficking  indicates
         that in general there is sufficiency of  protection  for  returned
         victims of trafficking. That 70% 'go missing' is a neutral  factor
         in the assessment of  sufficiency  of  protection;  it  cannot  be
         concluded that they have again become victims of  trafficking  but
         nor  can  it  be  assumed  that  they   have   been   successfully
         reintegrated.

    146.  There  was   simply   inadequate   evidence   to   identify   the
         characteristics of those who were successfully reintegrated. It is
         not known, for example, whether they were  able  to  return  to  a
         supportive  family  network;  whether  the  assistance  they   had
         received from the country to which they had  been  trafficked  had
         enabled them to obtain skills and  psychological  resilience  such
         that they were able to access  assistance   in  Nigeria  including
         adequate employment opportunities and thereby  avoid   destitution
         irrespective of their  family  situation;  whether  they  did  not
         present with identifying factors of vulnerability such  that  they
         were identifiable as vulnerable to abuse or whether they were able
         to return to a part of Nigeria other than their state  of  origin.
         So although  in  general  it  is  our  conclusion  that  there  is
         sufficiency of protection for women in general in Nigeria and that
         for some returned victims of trafficking there is  sufficiency  of
         protection, there remains a strict  requirement  to  consider  and
         identify whether and to what extent an individual returned  victim
         of trafficking presents  with  characteristics  that  render  her,
         despite that sufficiency of protection,  at  real  risk  of  being
         trafficked

    147. So the real question is what is  the  risk  faced  by  a  returned
         victim of trafficking on leaving the shelter  or  if  she  is  not
         admitted to the shelter for whatever reason.  We  have  considered
         this in  the  context  firstly  of  a  person  who  was  initially
         trafficked for the purpose of domestic servitude and then  in  the
         context of a person who was initially trafficked for  the  purpose
         of sexual exploitation.




Domestic servitude


    148. Outside the shelter there is unlikely to be an adverse  risk  from
         her original trafficker.  There is no outstanding debt to be paid.
         Whether or not her original trafficker is successfully  prosecuted
         will make no difference to her.


    149. Generally, there is no real risk of re trafficking by reason alone
         of having been previously trafficked. But there may be a  risk  of
         trafficking by reason of her vulnerability.


    150.  If she escaped  from  servitude,  generally  there  would  be  no
         continuing interest by the trafficker  or  the  employer  but  the
         possibility cannot be excluded in every case. The employer of  the
         victim may demand repayment from the family although the extent to
         which such demands could be enforced could depend upon  the  reach
         of the employer, whether the transaction was at the instigation of
         the family, the nature of the deceit employed if any, whether  the
         two ends of the transaction  were  in  contact  initially  or  the
         extent to which the OCG remains contactable.  The  actual  process
         used to traffic her may have resulted, for example, in  some  form
         of payment being made to her family  or  some  remaining  duty  or
         responsibility may require the victim, at the instigation  of  her
         family, to return to the end-user. A fact sensitive analysis  will
         need to be undertaken to  establish  whether  this  is  reasonably
         likely to be the case.

    151. If her family is supportive and takes the  victim  of  trafficking
         back into the family of their own volition generally she will  not
         face a real risk of future persecution.

    152. If a victim exploited for the purpose  of  domestic  servitude  is
         unable or for good reason unwilling to return to  her  family  she
         may face a real risk of vulnerability to abuse  as  to  which  see
         below for the impact upon her in terms of a protection claim.

    153. The indicators identified by Mr Desmond that could have led to her
         original trafficking may, as a result of treatment  that  she  has
         received during her period of  domestic  servitude,  be  enhanced.
         Such treatment may well include sexual abuse. She  will  be  older
         than when she was originally trafficked and so may be  at  an  age
         where  she  would  be  trafficked  in  the   future   for   sexual
         exploitation.




Sexual exploitation


    154. A victim who was trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation
         who is returned to Nigeria falls into  one  of  two  categories  -
         either she has paid her debt[29] or she has not.

         If the debt has been paid by the victim of trafficking

    155. If the debt has been paid there will be no continuing interest  in
         the  young  woman  from  her  traffickers.  Whether  or  not   her
         traffickers are successfully prosecuted will have no  impact  upon
         her.

    156. Generally, there is no real risk of re-trafficking by reason alone
         of having been previously trafficked. But there may be a  risk  of
         trafficking by reason of vulnerability.


    157. There may be a real risk of serious harm from her family,  whether
         or not they were initially complicit in her trafficking for sexual
         exploitation. It is generally  reasonable  to  conclude  that  her
         family would expect an economic  and  financial  return  from  her
         consequent upon her travel  to  Europe.  Return  to  her  previous
         trafficking situation under the duress of family pressure,  family
         violence,  ostracism  and  stigmatisation  by  her  community  and
         possible resultant  destitution,  homelessness  and  lack  of  any
         financial security is likely in most cases to  amount  to  serious
         harm.

    158. If a victim who has been sexually exploited is unable or for  good
         reason unwilling to return to her family she may face a real  risk
         of vulnerability to abuse as to which see  below  for  the  impact
         upon her in terms of a protection claim.

         If the debt remains outstanding

    159. If the debt has not  been  paid  there  will  be  some  continuing
         interest from the trafficker. The cost of trafficking a woman  for
         sexual exploitation is said to be somewhere  between  $50,000  and
         $70,000. On top of that reimbursement of cost is  the  profit  the
         traffickers expect to make from the  exploitation.  There  was  no
         evidence who actually bore the significant or substantive costs or
         how the profits were divided between members of the OCG other than
         reports that the main profit goes to the  traffickers  in  Europe,
         but it is plain that there may be a significant  financial  burden
         which remains outstanding together with continuing loss of  income
         to the trafficker from the exploitation. If  the  victim  escapes,
         that loss of investment may well  be  significant.  On  the  other
         hand, the evidence does not indicate, generally, that  retribution
         will occur to the young woman in Nigeria once  she  has  left  the
         situation in the UK in which she is being sexually exploited.  The
         risks of retribution occur whilst the young  woman  remains  under
         the physical control of her  trafficker  in  Europe  through,  for
         example, threats to her family  or  to  her;  the  maintaining  of
         control through the oath sworn. Similarly, the evidence  does  not
         generally indicate, once the victim of trafficking  has  left  the
         control of her traffickers, that her family will be the subject of
         retribution.


    160. There will be some individuals for whom that generality  does  not
         apply for example where the young woman has been threatened or her
         family has been threatened after she left the trafficker.

    161. Prosecution of her trafficker may have some impact but, as set out
         above, the  evidence  indicates  that  the  very  organisation  of
         Nigerian trafficking groups means that prosecution of  one  person
         does little to prevent trafficking from occurring.  Thus  even  if
         the victim identifies  one  or  more  of  those  involved  in  her
         trafficking, it is unlikely that this would prevent her being  re-
         exploited by  that  OCG  if  identified  as  vulnerable  to  being
         trafficked again.

    162. There was no clear evidence before  us  of  the  extent  to  which
         active methods are employed to find individuals who have  escaped.
         The evidence does however indicate that the nature  of  the  debt,
         the pressure from family and community for  financial  return  and
         the oath sworn all have an impact to the extent that in some cases
         an individual returns to her  traffickers  without  the  need  for
         express physical force from them. Mr Desmond's evidence  indicates
         that some  considerable  time  may  pass  -  maybe  years-  before
         'enforcement' takes place although this was based on one anecdotal
         incident.

    163. If the victim of trafficking were able to return to her family and
         they were both willing to accept her and able to provide her  with
         appropriate support she would be  unlikely  to  retrafficked.  The
         evidence before us  does  not  support  a  finding  that  Nigerian
         traffickers, in general, resort to abduction (although that is not
         the case in the North East of Nigeria).

    164. There may be some cases where the family pose  a  real  risk.  For
         example, if the young woman was close to paying off the debt,  her
         family may require her to return to the trafficker to  enable  her
         to start sending money back to the  family.  Close  links  between
         victim and trafficker  through  family  or  community  ties  would
         result in her being identified as having returned home. There  may
         be psychological and emotional pressure either for the  victim  to
         "voluntarily" return to her  exploiters  or  she  will  simply  be
         trafficked again.

    165. Generally, there is no real risk of re-trafficking by reason alone
         of having been previously trafficked. But there may be a real risk
         of trafficking by reason of vulnerability.

    166. If a victim who has been sexually exploited and is unable  or  for
         good reason unwilling to return to her family or home area she may
         face a real risk of vulnerability to abuse as to which  see  below
         for the impact upon her in terms of a protection claim.




         Vulnerability to abuse


    167. The factors that indicate vulnerability to abuse apply whether  or
         not the debt has been paid and whether or not the young woman  was
         previously trafficked for the purpose of  sexual  exploitation  or
         for the purpose of domestic servitude. These factors assume that a
         willing family has not taken her back into  the  family  household
         and there is no respectable reason for the victim  of  trafficking
         not to return to her family.

    168. A woman returning to Nigeria after having being trafficked may  be
         subjected to the following indicators that she is at enhanced real
         risk of being trafficked:

                . Some or many of the original indicators that  resulted  in
                  her being identified and trafficked originally;

                . Rejection by her family;

                . The fact of being psychologically  damaged  subsequent  to
                  the serious harm she has sustained during the  period  she
                  was trafficked. This may render her less able to find work
                  or access employment and result in her being  at  enhanced
                  risk of destitution;

                . Being stigmatised and  ostracised;  the  assumption  being
                  within Nigeria  that  those  victims  of  trafficking  who
                  return to Nigeria have been working as prostitutes even if
                  she had  been  trafficked  for  the  purpose  of  domestic
                  servitude;

                . Having been subjected to sexual abuse/exploitation  during
                  domestic servitude;

                . Remaining subjected to  the  spiritual  and  psychological
                  pressures of any oath taken;

                . Destitution;

                . Poverty;

                . Subjected to pressure from her family which is  likely  to
                  be rural and in poverty, to provide an income from  sexual
                  exploitation.




    169. It is not simply that a young woman may face  destitution,  mental
         health problems, lack of education or  poverty  that  renders  her
         vulnerable and vulnerable to abuse and at  real  risk  of  serious
         harm. The identifying factors that led  to  her  being  trafficked
         originally may be present to a greater or  lesser  extent  on  her
         return to Nigeria. She may, for example, no longer be likely to be
         deceived  into  accepting  a  job  that   in   fact   results   in
         prostitution; she may no longer be of an age where she  is  likely
         to be trafficked for domestic servitude. But her vulnerability and
         the indicators of vulnerability to  abuse  may  be  enhanced.  For
         example,  although  originally  trafficked  for  the  purpose   of
         domestic servitude she may have been sexually abused and  may  now
         be of an age where she is vulnerable to being trafficked  for  the
         purpose of sexual abuse; she may find her options so limited  that
         she  approaches  the  same  or  another  trafficker.  That  'quasi
         consent' resulting from the abuse of her vulnerability,  an  abuse
         of power, being the means by which the trafficking takes place.

    170. The analysis required is not simply whether a returned  victim  of
         trafficking will be destitute or poverty  stricken.  As  was  made
         plain in Said, to  succeed  under  Article  3  on  removal  to  an
         appellant's  country  of  origin  on  the  basis  of  poverty   or
         destitution the appellant must show harm to  D  and  N  level.  In
         Said, the appellant fell "far short"  of  that  test  because  the
         highest at which his case could  be  put  is  that  his  PTSD  and
         depression will make it difficult for him to reintegrate back into
         life in Somalia and will have some impact on his ability to  work.
         There was no reason to suppose that Said would be  precluded  from
         working and he would receive  financial  help  from  a  supportive
         family network. There was no reason to suppose that  he  would  be
         unable to access medical treatment and so it was "so  far  removed
         from  the  nature  of  exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances
         envisaged in the Strasbourg cases" as to make clear that Article 3
         would not be infringed.

    171. In an asylum context, it is the vulnerability to abuse  that  puts
         her at serious risk of being trafficked, whether for  the  purpose
         of sexual exploitation or domestic servitude. Whether the risk  to
         which she is thus exposed amounts to serious harm is a matter  for
         analysis. It is not  the  poverty,  destitution  or  vulnerability
         itself which is the basis of the claim, but the harm  that  ensues
         from that namely the exploitation.




        Sufficiency of protection


    172.  Merely  because  Nigeria  is  'doing  its  best'  to   meet   its
         international  obligations  to  prevent   trafficking   does   not
         necessarily result in a  finding  that  there  is  sufficiency  of
         protection  for  those  identified  as  being  at  risk  of  being
         trafficked.  Sufficiency  of  protection  is  the  combination  of
         willingness and ability to provide protection to a level that  can
         reasonably be expected to meet  and  overcome  the  real  risk  of
         serious harm from non-state agents.  The  'reasonable  protection'
         required is assessed in the  context  of  the  risk,  absent  that
         protection, against which it has to provide.

    173. As said above, the incidence of prosecution of the trafficker  who
         trafficked the victim in Nigeria is unlikely to  have  significant
         impact  upon  that  individual  returnee,   although   of   course
         increasing prosecution of offenders may have a long term effect on
         the overall numbers of young women trafficked.

    174. We have referred above to the particular characteristics that  may
         render an individual  at  real  risk  of  being  trafficked.  That
         vulnerability presents on not being able to  access  the  services
         provided by NAPTIP and NGOs. If a woman presents as vulnerable  to
         abuse,  away  from  NAPTIP  or  a  supporting  NGO,  the  Nigerian
         authorities, including NAPTIP and the  instruments  of  State  are
         unable to provide sufficiency of protection. The lack of  adequate
         monitoring of those who leave NAPTIP or an NGO shelter, the  short
         period of time where an individual is in a  shelter  unless  there
         are exceptional reasons (which in itself implies that such a young
         woman is particularly vulnerable and open to  abuse)  renders  the
         protection  available  to  an  individual  vulnerable   to   abuse
         insufficient.

    175. In making an assessment whether an  individual  is  vulnerable  to
         abuse a careful analysis of all her  personal  characteristics  is
         required to assess whether the indicators of risk,  including  any
         mistreatment  in  her  previous  exploitative  situation  and  the
         consequences of that for her personally.

    176. This vulnerability combined with the inability  of  the  state  to
         provide the protection as set out in particular in  paragraph  174
         above will render a returned victim of trafficking at real risk of
         being trafficked again.

    177. The question then arises of internal relocation.




Internal relocation




    178. Paragraph 339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules  deals  with  internal
         relocation:


             339O (i) The Secretary of State will not make:
             (a) a grant of refugee status if in part  of  the  country  of
             origin a person would not have a well founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay
             in that part of the country; or
              b) a grant of humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
             country of return a person would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
             suffering serious harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.


             (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making his decision on whether to grant  asylum
             or humanitarian protection, will have regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.


             (iii)  (i)  applies  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin or country of return.


         The Secretary of State has issued policy guidance, the most  recent
         version of which is dated January 2015[30].


    179. We remind ourselves of what was said in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5:


             "21. ....The decision-maker, taking account  of  all  relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so....
                  ...
             45.  .....the question whether it would be unduly harsh for  a
             claimant to be expected to  live  in  a  place  of  relocation
             within the country of his nationality is not to be  judged  by
             considering whether the  quality  of  life  in  the  place  of
             relocation meets the basic norms of civil, political and socio-
             economic rights. ...."


             "47. The question where the issue of  internal  relocation  is
             raised can, then, be  defined  quite  simply.  .....The  words
             "unduly harsh" set the standard that must be met for  this  to
             be regarded as  unreasonable.  If  the  claimant  can  live  a
             relatively normal life there  judged  by  the  standards  that
             prevail in his country of nationality generally, and if he can
             reach the less hostile part without undue  hardship  or  undue
             difficulty, it will not be unreasonable to expect him to  move
             there."


   180.  Mr Singh submitted that victims of  trafficking  may  be  able  to
        relocate internally to escape localised  threats  from  members  of
        their family or traffickers (or rogue state agents),  depending  on
        their particular circumstances, the nature of the  threat  and  how
        far it would extend. Single women including those who are  pregnant
        or have children, particularly those with no  support  networks  or
        livelihood, may be  particularly  vulnerable  though  this  may  be
        mitigated by the existence of  shelters  and  assistance  available
        from both government and civic society  organisations.  Freedom  of
        movement  is  generally  available.  Whether  it  was  possible  to
        internally relocate to escape  localised  threats  depends  upon  a
        person's circumstances including support  and  vulnerabilities.  If
        she returns voluntarily a victim would have the benefit of a return
        IOM package.


   181. In contrast, Ms Cronin submitted that the opportunity  for  support
        from other  shelters  after  leaving  NAPTIP  was  rare  -  WOTCLEF
        indicated that they only rescued 21 victims of trafficking in  2013
        and 22 in 2014. There was limited capacity to take any overflow. Dr
        Agnew-Davies stressed the requirement for customised rehabilitation
        so that an individual was not vulnerable to retrafficking.  It  was
        submitted that it was only if an individual had skills and a secure
        and protective family to return to, and no mental health  problems,
        would she not be at risk and/or able to relocate.


   182. The Cherti report states  that  internal  relocation  within  other
        areas of Nigeria might be an alternative but this  is  problematic:
        relocation to another area increases vulnerability especially  when
        a victim is young, uneducated, without much working experience, and
        of different religion and ethnicity  to  the  area  of  relocation.
        Tribal  and  religious  differences   across   the   country,   the
        concentration of services to assist are in areas  where  trafficked
        people typically originate from and the stigma of  trafficking  can
        preclude successful reintegration, particularly  for  someone  with
        high support needs.


   183. The Danish Report and the Finnish Report  refer  to  the  differing
        views of the NGOs as to the possibility  of  relocation.  But  both
        reports refer to the potential lack of social networks  that  would
        be available, language difficulties and the lack of ethnic ties.


   184. The majority of victims of trafficking  come  from  Edo  and  Delta
        States. But, as identified in the CORI report, traffickers  operate
        throughout Nigeria. Anti-trafficking networks have been set  up  in
        22 states in Nigeria, Youth Resource  Centres  provide  information
        and skill learning to young people in 7  States  and  sensitisation
        programmes run in 7 States where trafficking  is  endemic.  In  the
        North-east of Nigeria, Boko Haram utilises trafficking as a primary
        means of funding; its attacks include abduction on  a  large  scale
        leading to  extremely  severe  and  widespread  violations  through
        sexual slavery and violence.


   185. The essential issue to be determined is whether it would be  unduly
        harsh, for an individual for whom there is a real risk in her  home
        area, to relocate.  Such  assessment  must  include  not  only  the
        particular personal characteristics of the  individual,  but  those
        characteristics in the context of the potential area of relocation.
         In reaching that assessment note has  also  to  be  taken  of  the
        prevalence of internal trafficking within Nigeria, not  simply  the
        risk of transnational trafficking. There  is  freedom  of  movement
        within Nigeria but those who move  state,  or  indeed  cities,  are
        readily identified as coming from elsewhere.


   186. It is not possible to  state,  on  the  evidence  before  us,  that
        internal relocation is never a viable option. An individual factual
        analysis will always be  required  of  a  victim  of  trafficking's
        vulnerability  and  its  impact  on  the  possibility  of  internal
        relocation if she is at real risk of being persecuted in  her  home
        area. However the  evidence  before  us  indicates  that  where  an
        individual has been identified as  being  at  real  risk  of  being
        trafficked, the possibility of internal relocation will be severely
        limited; particularly where she is vulnerable to abuse  because  of
        lack of skills, mental and psychological problems and isolation.



Country Guidance


   187. The guidance set out in PO (trafficked women) Nigeria [2009]  UKAIT
        00046 at paragraphs 191-192 should no longer be followed.


   188. Although the Government of Nigeria recognises that the  trafficking
        of women, both internally and  transnationally,  is  a  significant
        problem to be addressed, it is not established by the evidence that
        for women in general in Nigeria there  is  a  real  risk  of  being
        trafficked.


   189. For a woman returning to Nigeria, after having been  trafficked  to
        the United Kingdom, there is in general no real risk of retribution
        or of being trafficked afresh by her original traffickers.


   190. Whether  a  woman  returning  to  Nigeria  having  previously  been
        trafficked to the United Kingdom faces on return  a  real  risk  of
        being trafficked afresh will require a detailed assessment  of  her
        particular  and  individual  characteristics.  Factors  that   will
        indicate an enhanced risk of being trafficked include, but are  not
        limited to:


               a. The absence of a supportive family  willing  to  take  her
                  back into the family unit;


               b. Visible or discernible characteristics  of  vulnerability,
                  such as having no social support network to assist her, no
                  or little education or vocational  skills,  mental  health
                  conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences
                  of  abuse  when  originally   trafficked,   material   and
                  financial deprivation such as to mean  that  she  will  be
                  living in poverty or in conditions of destitution;


               c. The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is  likely
                  to mean that she was then identified by the traffickers as
                  someone disclosing characteristics of  vulnerability  such
                  as to give rise to a real risk  of  being  trafficked.  On
                  returning  to  Nigeria,  it   is   probable   that   those
                  characteristics of vulnerability will be enhanced  further
                  in the absence of factors that suggest otherwise.

   191. Factors that indicate a lower risk of being trafficked include, but
        are not limited to:


   a. The availability of a supportive family willing to take the woman back
      into the family unit;


   b. The fact that the woman has  acquired  skills  and  experiences  since
      leaving Nigeria that better equip her to have access to  a  livelihood
      on return to Nigeria, thus enabling her to provide for herself.


    192. There will be little risk of being trafficked if received  into  a
         NAPTIP shelter or a shelter provided by an NGO for the  time  that
         she is there, but that support is likely to be temporary, possibly
         for just a few  weeks,  and  there  will  need  to  be  a  careful
         assessment of the position  of  the  woman  when  she  leaves  the
         shelter.

 193. For a woman who does face a real  risk  of  being  trafficked  if  she
      returns to her home area, the question of whether internal  relocation
      will be available as a safe and reasonable alternative that  will  not
      be unduly harsh will require a detailed assessment of  her  particular
      circumstances. For  a  woman  who  discloses  the  characteristics  of
      vulnerability described above that are indicative of a  real  risk  of
      being trafficked, internal relocation  is  unlikely  to  be  a  viable
      alternative.


Appellant's case




 194. The appellant is a Nigerian Citizen  born  in  June  1989;  she  is  a
      catholic. She entered the UK as a visitor on a  visa  issued  on  17th
      November 2006, aged 17. She escaped from the house where she was being
      held in mid-2007. In late 2012 she was referred to the  Poppy  Project
      and in early 2013 claimed asylum. Her claim was refused in July  2013.
      After her appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  further
      evidence was submitted to the respondent and the  asylum  decision  of
      2013 was withdrawn.  On  20th  October  2014  the  respondent  made  a
      Conclusive Grounds decision that the appellant has been  a  victim  of
      trafficking for domestic exploitation and she was  granted  12  months
      leave to remain in the UK. Her asylum  claim  was  dismissed  and  her
      appeal is now before us.



Undisputed facts



 195. The respondent accepts that the appellant is a victim  of  trafficking
      saying


             "..whilst living in Nigeria [she was] visited by a  woman  who
             offered to take [her] abroad. It is accepted [she] stayed with
             this female in Lagos for a  number  of  months  and  undertook
             domestic work for her. It is also accepted  that  this  female
             brought [her] to the UK where  she  handed  [her]  over  to  a
             family.  Furthermore  it  is  accepted  that  [she]  undertook
             domestic work for  this  family  in  the  UK.  Finally  it  is
             accepted that, having escaped from this situation [she]  lived
             with various men and had sex with them in  exchange  for  food
             and accommodation."


 196. The respondent does not "positively dispute"  the  additional  factual
      matters set out in the appellant's statement  of  facts  and  evidence
      namely (in brief)


   i.  She is from a rural village called Ubogu  in  Delta  State.  She  had
      never travelled to the nearest town Ugeli because it was too far away.
  ii. She is an only child.
 iii. Her father did not work and was in his 70s when she left Nigeria.
  iv. Her mother died in 2010; prior to her death the mother worked  selling
      leaves at the village market. No other relatives live in the  village.
      The family lives in a mud hut.
   v. The appellant was beaten by her father from a young age on  most  days
      and sometimes more than once a day. Her father started to use  sticks,
      whips and belts. He beat her mother when he had been drinking alcohol.
  vi. She speaks English, pigeon English and a little Urhobo.
 vii. She attended school from aged 7 until 14 and was  taught  in  English.
      She generally did not attend school on Fridays because she helped  her
      mother.
viii. As  she  became  older,  her  parents'  ability  to  pay  school  fees
      decreased and she attended school less  frequently  sometimes  causing
      gaps in schooling up to 2 months.
  ix. Aunty 1 (a rich woman) came to the appellant's home and on her  second
      visit brought gifts for her parents -clothes and food - and  a  mobile
      phone for her father.
   x. The appellant was taken to Lagos by Aunty 1 and was told she was being
      taken abroad to go to school.
  xi. In Lagos she remained in a house for 2-3 months.  Aunty  2  and  three
      other children lived there. She did not leave the compound during that
      time and undertook domestic duties, slept on the floor  and  ate  left
      overs. She was shouted at by Aunty 1 and Aunty 2 if she  did  anything
      wrong. Aunty 1 told her "they've got people around" in Nigeria.
 xii. A man came to the Lagos house and took her photograph.
xiii. She believes juju/voodoo to be efficacious and believes  that  she  is
      unable to recall how she travelled to the UK because it  was  used  to
      entrance her. She knew she was no longer in  Nigeria  because  it  was
      cold.
 xiv. A man ("Uncle") collected her, Aunty 1, Aunty 2 and the three children
      from the bus stop. Aunty 1, Aunty 2 and the three children  left.  She
      remained in the house with Uncle and his wife ("Aunty 3") and their  3
      children. She was immediately required to undertake domestic duties.
  xv. Initially she slept in one of the children's beds and was  fed.  After
      about two weeks she was made to sleep on the floor and  the  food  she
      was given reduced. The children  started  hitting  her,  Aunty  3  was
      physically abusive and threatened her with being sent to  Nigeria  and
      imprisoned.
 xvi. Male associates of Uncle came to the house, looked at her in a  manner
      that made her afraid and behaved inappropriately.  Aunty  3  told  the
      appellant she was not behaving properly and  phoned  her  father.  Her
      father shouted at her and told her to do what  she  was  required  and
      that if she did not then her parents "would have problems".
xvii. Male associates of Uncle asked her to sit next to them and  put  their
      arm around her. She pushed them off. She was subsequently spoken to by
      Aunty 3, warned she would be sent to Nigeria an  imprisoned  and  told
      that it was as if she did not want to see her parents again.
xviii. After escaping from the London house she phoned her father  who  told
      her he was not happy, their lives were in danger.  Her  mother  begged
      her to return to  the  London  house  and  said  that  they  had  been
      threatened.
 xix. After fleeing the London household she  had  sexual  relationships  in
      exchange for food  and  accommodation;  on  one  occasion  she  became
      pregnant and had an abortion at the behest of the 'father'.
  xx. Her father telephoned her in 2010 and told her  that  her  mother  had
      died of a heart attack. She has had no  contact  with  her  father  or
      anyone in Nigeria since.


 197. The respondent accepts that the appellant was trafficked for  domestic
      servitude and does not dispute  that  she  may  ultimately  have  been
      subjected to sexual exploitation if she had not escaped. Nor does  the
      respondent  dispute  that  the  appellant  was  likely  to  have  been
      trafficked by a "gang" "in the sense of a  number  of  people  working
      together although the precise number is a matter of speculation or she
      is a victim of past persecution. The respondent considers that, taking
      account  of  the  appellant's  specific  characteristics,   there   is
      sufficiency of protection in Nigeria and/or it  would  not  be  unduly
      harsh for her to relocate.



Areas of dispute



 198. We have identified 4 elements of  dispute  between  the  parties  that
      impact on  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
      relocation:


    Who trafficked the appellant?


 199. The respondent submits there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      appellant was trafficked other than by a small  group  of  people  and
      that  such  a  form  of  trafficking  is  quite  different   from   an
      international trafficking ring "with many hundreds of people".


 200. As can be seen above, trafficking in the Nigerian context  is  through
      small organised groups with extensive networks for  the  provision  of
      specific services for example documentation  and  transportation.  The
      appellant's evidence described the involvement of 7 people - Aunty  1,
      the driver of Aunty  1,  Aunty  2,  a  photographer,  the  person  who
      arranged the  false  passport,  Uncle  and  Aunty  3.  Some  of  those
      individuals may not form part of the OCG  but  rather  fell  within  a
      network (for example probably the  photographer  and  the  person  who
      arranged the false passport) and it is not possible to  determine  who
      was paid for what and  how  much.  The  appellant's  evidence  of  her
      recruitment and the mode of transfer to the UK is not disputed.  Given
      the mode of operation of traffickers in Nigeria this plainly points to
      her being trafficked by an OCG, utilising a network of  contacts.  The
      reference by the respondent to an international trafficking ring  with
      many hundreds of people simply does not  resonate  with  the  mode  of
      trafficking utilised in Nigeria on the basis of  the  evidence  before
      us.


    201.  We find the appellant was trafficked by an OCG.


    Was the appellant trafficked purely for domestic servitude?


    202.  The respondent's primary submission was  that  the  appellant  had
         been trafficked for domestic servitude. Mr  Singh  accepted  there
         were some factors that could justify a finding that the  appellant
         had been trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation but  he
         submitted that any sexual exploitation that either had or would in
         the future take place would be at the  behest  of  the  Uncle  and
         there was no evidence  that  either  Uncle  or  Aunty  3  had  the
         necessary contacts to pursue her on her return to Nigeria.


    203. There is, as explained above, a fluidity within trafficking. Those
         trafficked for  domestic  servitude  may  end  up  being  sexually
         exploited or otherwise discarded when they cease  to  be  required
         for domestic servitude: whether because they are to be replaced by
         a younger child or because the 'wife' in the family does not  wish
         a young woman in the household. We note that Mr Desmond was  aware
         of cases where individuals were  brought  to  the  UK  and  'held'
         awaiting  onward  trafficking  for   sexual   exploitation.    The
         following factors point to the appellant  having  been  trafficked
         for the purpose of sexual exploitation:


    . She was at the higher age range for recruitment  for  'pure'  domestic
      servitude (age 17);
    . The provision of the mobile phone to her father;
    . The attitude of Aunty 3 towards the  appellant  when  she  refused  to
      comply with the inappropriate advances made towards her;
    . The approach made by Aunty 3 to  her  father  to  coerce  her  to  co-
      operate;
    . The appellant's mother's plea that she return to the household because
      of threats her parents had received;
    . The possible use of juju/voodoo;
    . That on transfer from one country to another she was not exploited  by
      the same family;
    . That she was not related to any of her traffickers;
    . That the forged documents on which she travelled appear to  have  been
      of high quality.


         Against this is:
    . the lack of rape  or  forcible  sexual  advances  (albeit  there  were
      inappropriate advances made) either in Nigeria or in the UK;
    . The lack of sexual grooming either in Nigeria or the UK;
    . She was not given a 'legend';
    . if the sexual advances  in  the  UK  were  the  initiation  of  sexual
      grooming they were instigated late in the  process  of  trafficking  -
      some 6-9 months after she left her home;
    . Although there is a possibility of an oath the evidence was limited as
      to its extent and limited to her believing  that  she  was  unable  to
      remember her journey because of it;
    .  there does not appear to have been any attempt to trace her in the UK
      since her escape.
    . The cost of trafficking a person to the UK  is  high  and  no  attempt
      appears to have been made to recoup that cost by forcing her  to  work
      as a prostitute


   204. The absence of rape/grooming appears inexplicable given the  period
        of time that elapsed since the appellant left her home and the cost
        of trafficking a  person  to  the  UK.  Although  Mr  Desmond  gave
        evidence of victims being brought  to  the  UK  and  held  awaiting
        onward transportation, there was no evidence before us that  during
        that time, the victim would not be groomed. Although  his  evidence
        was that those trafficked for sexual exploitation would be expected
        to undertake domestic tasks, those would be ancillary to  the  main
        purpose of their exploitation.


   205. That a person is trafficked for the purpose of  domestic  servitude
        does not prevent sexual abuse or exploitation but that exploitation
        is not in the  context  of  trafficking.  The  evidence  before  us
        illustrated the vulnerability of victims  trafficked  for  domestic
        servitude and the real  possibility  that  such  victims  would  be
        sexually abused. Mr Desmond's  evidence  was  not  that  all  those
        trafficked for domestic servitude would, where sexual advances were
        made by members of the household, be 'thrown out  on  the  street'.
        His evidence was that where that happened it could be  because  the
        'employer' had decided to exploit the victim sexually  but  it  was
        not by the traffickers. The Rev Dr  Pemberton-Ford  also  spoke  of
        what could be categorised as a transition  to  sexual  exploitation
        where victims were subjected to domestic servitude.


   206. Having considered the appellant's evidence in the  context  of  the
        overall evidence before us, we conclude that this appellant was not
        trafficked  for  the  purpose  of  sexual  exploitation   but   was
        trafficked for the purpose of domestic servitude.  We are satisfied
        on the evidence before us that the household within which  she  was
        living were intending to sexually exploit her and thus although she
        was not trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation  she  was
        at the commencement of sexual exploitation. We are  satisfied  that
        the  household   decided   to   undertake   private   exploitation,
        effectively at arm's length from the traffickers  who  brought  her
        into the UK.


    Risk of retrafficking


   207. The personal, medical and  psychotherapeutic  evidence  before  us,
        which was not disputed save as referred to below, establishes  that
        the appellant is a young, ill-educated single woman with no  skills
        other  than  domestic  work.  Her  family  were  complicit  in  her
        trafficking and she has no financial support. She has been taunted,
        bullied, beaten and exploited by various perpetrators including her
        father and those who trafficked her. She was sexually exploited  by
        men who claimed to be assisting her after she  fled  the  place  of
        domestic exploitation. She has complex PTSD, borderline personality
        disorder and major depressive disorder. She presents like  a  child
        although she is now aged 26. She has poor judgement, often  getting
        angry and losing her temper. She takes risks in relationships in an
        attempt to gain protection and security. She  does  not  trust  the
        police.


    208. Ms Cronin submits  that  the  appellant's  persistent  pattern  of
         dissociative behaviour makes  her  clearly  visible  to  potential
         abusers and that she has resorted to  'survival  sex'.  Ms  Cronin
         submits that, as said  by  Dr  Agnew-Davies,  she  cannot  support
         herself or  function.  The  abusive  sexual  activity  is  not  an
         indication of trafficking but is an indicator of vulnerability.


    209. Mr Singh disputes that the appellant would be  unable  to  support
         herself or would be unable to function. He refers to  her  ability
         to seek assistance, for example from the caretaker of the property
         where she now lives and from her solicitors when she  became  lost
         on her way to an appointment. He submits  that  the  appellant  is
         able to travel around independently and is currently on medication
         that is available in Nigeria; she is not  receiving  any  specific
         intensive psychotherapeutic assistance  and  any  such  assistance
         would be available to her in  Nigeria,  albeit  not  to  the  same
         standard as in the UK; there are shelters  available  for  her  in
         Nigeria; she would benefit from an IOM returns financial  package;
         the OCG/OCN was not large and there would be no interest in her on
         her return to Nigeria. He submitted that the appellant was sold to
         Uncle and Aunty 3, who were not part of the OCG, by Aunty 1 and 2.




    210. It is not possible to identify everyone involved in an OCG or  the
         role they play within it. The evidence we heard makes  plain  that
         the very nature of the Nigerian mode  of  trafficking  results  in
         identification (and thus prosecution) being difficult and  in  any
         event the removal of a trafficker from an OCG does  not  make  any
         discernible difference to the possibility of trafficking occurring
         through the remains of that group. It is simply  not  possible  to
         conclude that Uncle and Aunty 3 were not part of an OCG - they had
         contact with Aunty 1 and 2; they sought to enforce the applicant's
         domestic  exploitation  through  contact  with  her  parents  both
         directly and indirectly through threats that  were  made.  Skilled
         documents forgers were employed to bring the  appellant  into  the
         UK, the document escaping the attention of  ECOs  and  immigration
         officials at the border  despite  it  being  known  that  Nigerian
         forgeries were prevalent.


    211. Although the respondent asserts that Aunty  2  was  not  a  repeat
         facilitator/trafficker it  is  not  clear  from  the  respondent's
         evidence on what  basis  she  reaches  that  conclusion.  Aunty  2
         appears from the respondent's evidence to have visited the UK on a
         number of occasions with children (whether the  same  children  or
         different children is not stated); although the two children  with
         whom she travelled when she brought the appellant  in  to  the  UK
         left with her, it is not clear on what basis that  conclusion  was
         reached  given  that  the  UK  does  not  maintain  a  record   of
         departures. Nor is it clear whether that has been the  pattern  on
         each occasion Aunty 2 travelled to the UK with children or whether
         she returned to Nigeria with the children or travelled to Europe.


   212. If the appellant is met by NAPTIP on arrival  in  Nigeria  she  can
        expect to be taken to a NAPTIP shelter. Although in the shelter she
        would not be at risk of being trafficked, the evidence before us is
        that she would in effect be locked up for the duration of her  stay
        and only allowed out with a chaperone. We acknowledge that this  is
        done by the Nigerian authorities for a victim's protection, but  in
        this appellant's case such restriction on her movements  would,  on
        the basis  of  Dr  Agnew-Davies  evidence  and  the  other  medical
        evidence before us, which is not  disputed  and  which  we  accept,
        cause significant  re-traumatisation.  We  accept  Dr  Agnew-Davies
        evidence that such re-traumatisation would result in a  significant
        deterioration in her mental capacity to cope and function.


    213. It is established by the evidence that NAPTIP intend  and  aim  to
         return  victims  of  trafficking  to  their  family  as  soon   as
         practical. Although they acknowledge that families may  have  been
         complicit in the trafficking - as here - their  response  is  that
         they keep an eye on the family. As we  have  seen,  the  level  of
         monitoring that takes place is inadequate and  not  meaningful.  A
         return of this appellant to her father is neither appropriate  nor
         adequate. She was beaten and severely maltreated as a child by her
         father, her  father  was  complicit  in  her  trafficking  and  he
         threatened her and shouted at her when  she  left  the  household.
         Whilst those threats may have been as a result of threats that  he
         received, we are satisfied that  even  following  counselling  and
         visits, he would  continue  to  ill-treat  the  appellant  if  she
         returned to him. She would be unable to live  in  her  village  or
         community without being found by her  father  with  the  resultant
         abuse that would be very likely to follow. Although the  appellant
         may be  able  to  provide  descriptions  of  her  traffickers  and
         possibly the place where she was  held  in  Lagos,  it  cannot  be
         concluded that such evidence (of events several years  ago)  would
         be likely to bring the applicant into that small group of  victims
         who are monitored. The level of monitoring that would  take  place
         would, we are satisfied, in her case be minimal.


    214. If as a result  of  being  unable,  or  justifiably  in  her  case
         unwilling, to return to her father or her village, she remains  in
         the NAPTIP shelter for the full six weeks, there being no evidence
         to indicate or suggest  that  she  would  benefit  from  a  wholly
         exceptional extension of stay,  she  would  then  have  to  leave.
         Although the respondent submitted that she would be able to go  to
         another shelter run either by the Women's Affairs or an NGO, as we
         have said above we do not accept that such further shelter  is  in
         practice available for longer than six months and in any event the
         possibility of access  to  such  an  NGO  shelter  is  effectively
         unavailable given the extremely sparse numbers of  beds  available
         and the huge scale of trafficked victims in Nigeria.


    215. The practical result of this is that after 2 or possibly  6  weeks
         or at most 6 months this appellant would be released. Although she
         would, if returning  voluntarily,  have  the  benefit  of  an  IOM
         financial package, any such financial  package  would  be  rapidly
         exhausted given her lack of employment  skills  and  inability  to
         function effectively on her own; she would be homeless and  living
         on the streets.


    216. There was no evidence before us  that  those  who  trafficked  the
         appellant attempted to find her in the UK. Mr  Desmond's  evidence
         included details of one victim who was traced some 10 years  later
         through her son and required to repay the debt outstanding.  There
         is evidence, which was not disputed, that the  appellant's  mother
         (some time before her death  in  2010)  and  her  father  received
         threats subsequent to the appellant leaving  the  household  where
         she had been held. (After leaving that household she was  sexually
         exploited by men she had met in the UK. They were not, and it  has
         not been suggested that they were, involved in her trafficking.)


    217. The evidence before  us  did  not  indicate  active  searches  for
         individuals in Nigeria. If she returned to her home  area  we  are
         satisfied that her original traffickers, other  than  her  father,
         are unlikely to maintain an interest to  the  extent  of  actively
         seeking her out. We are satisfied that at present she would not be
         returning to Nigeria with the level of personal skills that  would
         enable her to survive  without  displaying  the  vulnerability  to
         abuse that would render her susceptible to trafficking.


    218. We are satisfied that to return her to  her  father  would  be  to
         place her in the position either of him  being  complicit  in  her
         retrafficking or subjected to serious physical abuse.


    219. The evidence before us including  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
         Katona, and evidence from Dr Agnew-Davies, satisfies us that  this
         appellant was not only  a  previous  victim  of  trafficking  with
         characteristics that can be identified from paragraph 62 above but
         that her experiences during her exploitation have rendered her  at
         enhanced vulnerability.


    220. Irrespective of the fact that there is  mental  health  provision,
         albeit to a lower standard to that in the UK,  this  appellant  is
         vulnerable.  Although  she  is  able  to  seek  assistance,   that
         assistance is sought from those who are in positions of caring for
         her - the caretaker of her accommodation and her solicitors.  When
         she was not in such a protected environment she sought  assistance
         from individuals who then sexually exploited her, were violent and
         abused her. There is psychiatric assistance available  in  Nigeria
         but the availability of such assistance is not the issue. This  is
         not a case where the N/D threshold has  to  be  met  in  order  to
         access  protection.  The  issue  is  whether  the  extent  of  her
         psychiatric and mental health problems is such as  to  render  her
         vulnerable to trafficking  because  of  an  inability  to  protect
         herself. The medical evidence  is  that  her  behaviour  would  be
         likely to deteriorate due  to  stress  and  there  is  a  lack  of
         facilities and/or referral available for trafficked  victims  from
         inexperienced NAPTIP staff.


    221. It is the fact of her vulnerability that renders her  at  risk  of
         being trafficked.  Although  she  is  older  than  many  of  those
         trafficked, she displays significant numbers  of  the  indicators.
         She presents as child-like because of her psychological and mental
         health problems; her chronological age  would  not,  in  our  view
         prevent her being identified as a potential victim.


    222. We are satisfied that she presents as a young woman who is at real
         risk of being trafficked and sexually exploited.  The  TIP  report
         shows that even though the  Nigerian  authorities  are  increasing
         their efforts to  provide  protection  and  there  are  increasing
         levels of prosecution, the very  nature  and  extent  of  Nigerian
         trafficking for  sexual  exploitation  renders  the  provision  of
         protection for this  appellant,  presenting  with  her  individual
         vulnerabilities, illusory.


    223. Mr Singh submitted that many victims are  vulnerable  with  mental
         health difficulties and that there  was  a  lack  of  research  to
         indicate that women  in  those  circumstances  were  at  risk.  He
         submitted that if that were the case there would be research which
         indicated that she and others with similar problems  would  be  at
         risk. He submitted there was no specific vulnerability that placed
         this appellant at risk of being trafficked  that  would  seriously
         adversely impact upon the protection available to  her  or  render
         relocation unduly harsh. We do not  accept  this  submission.  The
         indicators of those vulnerable to  trafficking  are  met  by  this
         appellant, save for her age. She has  previously  been  trafficked
         for domestic exploitation. The fact that the Nigerian  authorities
         are  trying  to  provide  protection  is  laudable  but  does  not
         translate into sufficiency of protection for this appellant  given
         her vulnerability. Her vulnerability has been  abused  previously.
         The CARE project which provided specific follow up for  particular
         individuals with intensive support being provided resulted in  20%
         being  successfully  reintegrated.  The  vulnerability   of   this
         appellant is such that it is difficult to conceive  of  her  being
         able to successfully reintegrate. There was no evidence before us,
         other than as discussed above, to  indicate  that  government  and
         civil society were able to provide sufficiency of  protection  for
         an individual presenting as this appellant does.  The  TIP  report
         identifies that the authorities are making  strenuous  efforts  to
         provide protection and assistance,  but  it  does  not  support  a
         finding that there would be  the  possibility  of  sufficiency  of
         protection for an individual such as this appellant.


    Internal relocation


   224. The vulnerability of the applicant would be manifest on her return.
        Although Mr Singh submitted that she would be able to access social
        and community assistance, any such assistance  is  concentrated  in
        the areas where trafficking is rife and in any event such provision
        is short term. Elsewhere she would have additional difficulties  to
        overcome  including  ethnicity  and  language.  The   majority   of
        trafficking victims emanate from Edo and Delta States, but internal
        trafficking occurs across Nigeria. Her vulnerability to abuse would
        be manifest and enhanced because of tribal, language and  isolation
        issues. She has no skills other than  domestic  skills.  Given  the
        appellant's vulnerabilities, her limited skills and difficulties in
        practical  management,  we  have  no  doubt  that  her  return  and
        relocation elsewhere than her home region would be unduly harsh and
        she would remain at real risk of being trafficked.


    Conclusion


    225. Drawing this together we conclude the appellant was trafficked  to
         the UK by an OCG. She cannot reasonably be required to  return  to
         her family. The protection offered by NAPTIP is  short  term  only
         and on leaving the hostel she would  be  at  real  risk  of  being
         trafficked. Internal relocation would be unduly harsh.


    226. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.


     We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


                                    Date 17th October 2016
    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker















                                   ANNEX 1

                             The expert witnesses

    Reverend Dr Carrie Pemberton-Ford

      1. The Reverend Dr Carrie Pemberton-Ford has described the  extensive
         research and personal links she has developed with a large  number
         of  organisations,   both   governmental,   non-governmental   and
         academic. She has not been to Nigeria and has  not  conducted  any
         direct field  work  there.  She  is  a  Visiting  Senior  Research
         Associate at the University of the Free State in the  Republic  of
         South Africa in the Department of Law, Senior  Research  Associate
         at the African Studies Centre  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,
         Director of the Cambridge Centre for  Applied  Research  in  Human
         Trafficking [CCARHT],  which  is  an  affiliated  non-governmental
         organisation with the United Nations, and a Member  of  the  Human
         Trafficking  Foundation  network  and  Director  of  the  National
         Charity Churches Alert to Sex Trafficking. She was  Chair  of  the
         Educational  Research  Board  for   the   United   Kingdom   Human
         Trafficking Centre in Sheffield in 2006 and  was  responsible  for
         encouraging a  number  of  research  initiatives  to  explore  the
         situation around trafficking in Nigeria and West Africa.

      2. She is frequently invited to speak on issues pertaining  to  human
         trafficking  in  the  UK,  at  European  level  and  at  UN  based
         conferences. She has worked on research proposals with the  United
         Nations  Institute  for  Training  and  Research  with  particular
         attention  to  West  and  Central  Arica.  She  has  reported   on
         particular  manifestations  of  trafficking  for   the   Religious
         Congregations responding  to  Trafficking  and  Religious  Sisters
         across Europe against Trafficking.

      3. As director of a CCARHT project for Churches Together  in  England
         she worked with Nigerian Church networks across the  UK  on  human
         trafficking  "particularly  its  impact  on  females  in  domestic
         servitude, false adoption/fostering, gamete harvesting and  sexual
         exploitation." She is writing the report (due to be  published  in
         September 2016) which would be

             "the most comprehensive study so  far  to  have  studied  this
             important sector of a potential informal  support  system  for
             any Nigerians trafficked into the UK, and [it] will  elucidate
             some of the patterns of exploitation and  the  trafficking  of
             females from Nigeria in the 'informal domestic labour'  market
             of the Nigerian diaspora in the UK."


         The project has, she said, involved face-to-face consultation with
         all churches in the UK, asking them about  networks  into  Nigeria
         and West Africa and an online survey. She had been looking at what
         was happening to those who had been  trafficked  and  the  worries
         about those who had been returned. She stated that  this  research
         should "cascade into secondary work".  The Rev Dr.  Pemberton-Ford
         stressed the  "hidden"  nature  of  the  crime,  the  fluidity  of
         domestic servitude into  sexual  exploitation  and  the  need  for
         considerably more  research  to  enable  a  more  evidenced  based
         response to the issues raised. The extent of this research was not
         clear from the answers she gave in oral evidence; whether  it  was
         primary resource research; whether it was research into the social
         support provided by the Nigerian  based  churches  in  the  UK  to
         victims and the effect on return to Nigeria of  those  victims  or
         whether it was research into potential involvement in trafficking.
         She identified that "more research" was required but we were  left
         unclear as to what that research would be on.   We were also  left
         unclear from her evidence why it  was  not  possible  for  her  to
         provide  a  clearer  and  more  detailed  account  about  domestic
         servitude in the UK.

      4. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford has  not  undertaken  any  direct  field
         research in Nigeria and has not visited Nigeria but "over some  15
         years [has] worked with survivors of trafficking abuse in the  UK,
         and consulted with a number of  agencies  in  Nigeria  working  on
         trafficking and with trafficking victims. These include - the  Edo
         State Market Women's Association  and  Women  of  Africa  and  the
         Gender Mainstreaming Directorate in the  Commonwealth  Secretariat
         on counter trafficking initiatives in Nigeria."

      5. Her written report and oral evidence to us addressed the issue  of
         "debt" in trafficking for domestic servitude primarily by  analogy
         with Campana's  report[31]  on  financial  models  developed  from
         secondary research  of  trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation  in
         Italy. She was not able to draw on any research, either her own or
         research in progress that informed her of this directly. She  said
         that more research was needed to enable  firm  conclusions  to  be
         drawn.

      6. Mr Singh did not take issue with  the  expertise  of  the  Rev  Dr
         Pemberton-Ford save for the following points:

   a) her approach to what she described as the  "business  model"  for  the
      financing of trafficking for domestic servitude (the  Campana  model);
      and

   b) given  that  in  "pure"  domestic  servitude  trafficking  cases,  the
      "profit" to the traffickers came from  the  person  who  employed  the
      victim of trafficking, her suggestion that this person could be one of
      the traffickers was flawed because that would defeat  the  purpose  of
      the trafficking which was to make a gain.

Dr Agnew Davis

     7. Dr Roxane Agnew-Davies is a specialist on the impact  of  violence,
        particularly domestic and sexual  violence  or  trauma  on  women's
        mental health. She is the Director of  Domestic  Violence  Training
        Limited and an Honorary Research Fellow in the School of Social and
        Community  Medicine  at  the  University  of  Bristol.  She  is  an
        Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society  and  a  full
        member of the Division of Clinical Psychology.  For five years  she
        was the Head of Psychological Services for  Women  at  Refuge,  the
        national charity for women escaping domestic violence and has  been
        specialist advisor to  various  programmes  in  the  Department  of
        Health.  She is a  clinical  psychologist  and  qualified  to  make
        clinical assessments of mental health. She is a Cardiff  University
        accredited Expert Witness.

     8.  Dr Agnew-Davies last visited Nigeria in 2011 as part of  a  multi-
        disciplinary fact-finding trip to  explore  service  provision  for
        victims of trafficking, funded by the Organisation for Security and
        Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Her role was to evaluate psychiatric
        services available to trafficking victims  returning  from  Europe.
        She  met  with  various  mental  health   professionals   including
        psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, the  chief  nurse  at  state
        hospitals in Lagos and Benin City and representatives of NAPTIP and
        NGOs working with trafficked victims. In  writing  her  report  for
        this appeal she sent them the section of the  report  dealing  with
        that visit and asked for an update and comment.

      9.  Although not a specialist, nor purporting to be an expert in  her
         knowledge of the extent or nature of trafficking in  human  beings
         in Nigeria, she was also able to give evidence from  conversations
         she had with nurses and doctors she met during the course  of  her
         trip in addition to the fact finding elements she reports on.  She
         said that "a lot of people had child help costing  the  equivalent
         of about 500 a year".  It was, she had  been  told,  very  common
         amongst young professionals with young children and 80%  of  young
         professionals in Nigeria would have  a  house  help.  One  of  the
         nurses confirmed to her that she had a  "house  help  child"  from
         Togo whom she used to prevent domestic violence  against  her,  if
         the nurse did not cook food in time, her husband would  beat  her,
         but she was at work and could not cook food, so she used the house
         help. Dr Agnew-Davies said she was told that many  of  the  nurses
         have house help, usually children. There were some cases where the
         children were sexually abused by the husband.  One nurse told  her
         she had arranged an illegal abortion for her house help  and  then
         exchanged her for another one.

     10. Dr Agnew-Davies also commented  that  the  prevalent  attitude  to
         mental illness in Nigeria was that it was caused  by  supernatural
         forces.

    11. Mr Singh did not take issue with  Dr  Agnew-Davies'  expertise.  He
        disputed her conclusion that the appellant was unable  to  function
        on  her  own  without   active   support,   given   her   described
        vulnerability, but he did not take issue with  the  description  of
        her mental health diagnosis.




       Mr Andrew John Desmond

    12.  Mr  Desmond  is  a  freelance  consultant  with   Anti-trafficking
        Consultants and Trafficking.ch. The former is a company  he  formed
        with others, the latter an association with a person in  the  Swiss
        Immigration Service responsible for female  asylum  applicants.  Mr
        Desmond is recognised by the United Nations  Office  of  Drugs  and
        Crime ("UNODC") as an expert in the field  of  investigating  human
        trafficking. He  has  been  employed  by  UNODC  to  deliver  anti-
        trafficking training on their behalf. He  lectures  and  trains  on
        human trafficking for exploitation nationally and  internationally.
        Between 1981 and 2012 he was a police  officer  with  Hertfordshire
        Constabulary and the Metropolitan Police. In 2008 he was  recruited
        to New Scotland  Yard  Anti-Human  Trafficking  Team  -  the  first
        dedicated police unit within the UK. He has been both the principal
        and the support investigator in a  number  of  investigations  into
        Organised  Criminal  Networks  that   are   responsible   for   the
        trafficking  of  human  beings  for  exploitation   into   the   UK
        principally from Nigeria, but also from Albania, Belarus, China and
        Vietnam.  He  has  undertaken  detailed  research  into  Juju   and
        associated West African spiritual beliefs and the rituals  used  by
        traffickers. In 2012 he interviewed every Nigerian suspected victim
        of human trafficking that came to  the  notice  of  the  Anti-Human
        Trafficking Team. He has trained law enforcement  officers  in  Abu
        Dhabi, Switzerland and in the UK and has trained officials and NGOs
        working with vulnerable victims.


    13. Mr Godwin E Morka, the "Ag Director" of NAPTIP has attested that Mr
        Desmond has expertise on the trafficking of  persons  from  Nigeria
        and he had "no hesitation in recommending Mr Andy Desmond as a  fit
        and proper person to speak on the issue of trafficking  of  persons
        from Nigeria."


    14. Mr Desmond has not met HD. He has not travelled to Nigeria  because
        he had been warned by the Nigerian authorities that the  nature  of
        his work placed him at high risk of harm. He specifically  confined
        his report to matters concerning trafficking  networks  that  being
        his  area  of  expertise  from  his   employment   and   consulting
        experience. Although he gave anecdotal evidence (from conversations
        with NAPTIP officials  and  other  law  enforcement  officials)  of
        possible risks to the appellant if  she  were  to  be  returned  to
        Nigeria he made clear that he had no expertise either as to that or
        her possible circumstances if returned.


    15. The respondent accepted the appellant had been trafficked by a gang
        in the sense of a number of people working  together.  He  did  not
        take issue with the detail of Mr Desmond's evidence.



The late Mrs Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi

    16. The Tribunal  has  received  a  report  prepared  by  Mrs  Olateru-
        Olagbegi. Sadly, she died before the date of the hearing. Mr  Singh
        did not refer to her report either in his skeleton argument  or  in
        submissions. We have had regard to her report and must make  of  it
        what we can, even though no questions were put to her  in  response
        to her report and there was no opportunity to  hear  live  evidence
        from her.


    17. Mrs Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi's was a qualified lawyer  with  39  years
        post qualification experience and a notary public. She had  been  a
        consultant to a World Bank project on Women's Human Rights with the
        National Women Development Centre Nigeria in 2003 and  2005  and  a
        consultant to UNESCO Paris for  the  co-ordination  of  a  research
        study on the trafficking of women and children in West  Africa.  In
        March 2006 she  was  appointed  the  Nigerian  Ambassador  for  the
        elimination of gender violence. At the date of her report  she  was
        Executive Director of Women's Consortium of Nigeria ("WOCON") -  an
        NGO holding UN special consultative status with a  sustained  focus
        on  human  trafficking  and  other  forms  of  gender  violence  at
        national, regional and international levels.


    18. She was personally involved in research studies,  and  has  written
        and published jointly and solely, on issues of human trafficking in
        Nigeria and  West  Africa.  She  has  co-ordinated  activities  and
        campaigns on behalf of  WOCON,  United  Nations  Agencies,  UNIFEM,
        UNICEF, UNESCO and the International Labour Organisation on  issues
        of violence against  women  and  children,  human  trafficking  and
        forced labour. In recognition of her work on  the  issue  of  human
        trafficking and gender violence she was awarded, in March 2006, the
        Daisy Gorge Award by Sister to Sister International Inc of  USA  at
        the 50th Session of the United Nations Commission on the Status  of
        Women.


    19. Mrs Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi did not meet HD; she drew her conclusions
        on possible risk to HD on  return  to  Nigeria  from  the  evidence
        contained within the various witness statements given by HD and the
        medical information she was supplied with.








                                   ANNEX 2

                                 Submissions

      1. The parties have put before the Upper Tribunal a considerable body
         of evidence  concerning  the  country  guidance  questions  to  be
         addressed. This is itemised in the appendices  to  this  decision.
         It is not possible to discuss each and  every  piece  of  evidence
         that was produced to us but for the avoidance of doubt,  not  only
         have we  had  specific  regard  to  that  evidence  to  which  our
         attention was drawn, but also to the whole of  the  evidence  that
         was before us.


      2. There was very little primary source research material  before  us
         but, where appropriate,  we  have  endeavoured  to  identify  such
         material. Some material contained  some  primary  source  material
         even though overall it could be considered secondary source.


      3. Both advocates in their submissions referred to an EASO Country of
         Origin Information Report -  Nigeria:  sex  trafficking  of  women
         dated October  2015.  This  is  tertiary  research[32],  a  useful
         synthesis of material (referenced) selected by EASO for inclusion.
         To that extent it is a useful summary of a  considerable  body  of
         material available.  We were unable to access all of the documents
         that are footnoted in the document  as  having  been  drawn  upon.
         Plainly this is not to say that the EASO document is not  helpful.
         It is a good source for the wide  ranging  documentation  that  is
         available, but it is not a report based upon independent  original
         quantitative or qualitative research. The  interpretation  of  the
         material  referred  to  therein  remains  a  matter  for  judicial
         interpretation and the  weight  to  be  placed  upon  the  various
         documents in the context of an asylum appeal  remains  a  judicial
         exercise.

      4. Both advocates identified to us that some of what  appears  to  be
         relatively recent material may in fact  be  predicated  upon  much
         earlier research  material,  both  primary  and  secondary  source
         material; for  example  the  Finnish  Immigration  Service,  Human
         Trafficking of Nigerian Women to Europe Report  dated  24th  March
         2015 relies to a considerable extent upon material  considered  in
         the report  of  the  Danish  Immigration  Service's  fact  finding
         mission to Lagos, Benin City and Abuja - Protection of Victims  of
         Trafficking in Nigeria dated April 2008. This is not to  say  that
         the more recently dated material is inaccurate but  caution  needs
         to be exercised when considering the up to date position to ensure
         that assertions relied upon to reach conclusions are  in  fact  as
         current as possible.


Summary of submissions on behalf of the respondent

      5. Mr Singh submitted that the main  question  to  be  answered  with
         regard to a victim of  trafficking  was  whether  her  traffickers
         would have sufficient interest and/or capability to target her  on
         her return to Nigeria.  He  submitted  that  the  answer  to  this
         question depended on a number of factors which included:


             a. The purpose for which the individual was trafficked. If  the
                victim was trafficked for the purpose of domestic  servitude
                only, then generally there would be no real risk  on  return
                because the "transaction" had been completed,  payment  made
                and received and so there was thus no  continuing  interest.
                He also submitted that if  the  victim  was  trafficked  for
                domestic servitude  and  the  sponsor/employer  subsequently
                decided to exploit her sexually then in the absence  of  any
                ability on the part of the sponsor/employer to pursue her to
                Nigeria there would generally be no  real  risk  on  return,
                such exploitation being as a consequence of the arrangements
                arising from the domestic servitude and  not  from  any  on-
                going trafficking network/gang involvement.


             b. Other factors to be taken into account included whether  any
                attempt had been made by the trafficker to harm  the  victim
                in the UK or to target the victim's family in  Nigeria;  the
                length of time the victim had been away from Nigeria and the
                power and reach of the particular traffickers.


             c. To qualify for international protection, the claimant  would
                need  to  demonstrate  that  the  reach  of   her   original
                traffickers was such that they were realistically capable of
                targeting the victim upon her return to Nigeria, or that she
                would be at serious risk of  being  re-trafficked  by  other
                traffickers and internal relocation was not a viable option.




      6. Mr Singh submitted that although Nigeria does not fully  meet  the
         trafficking minimum standards set by the US State  Department,  in
         combination with the present protection available,  the  following
         matters  resulted  in  the  Horvath  threshold  being   met:   the
         amendments to existing legislation enabling stiffer  penalties  on
         conviction for trafficking; the provision of support by NAPTIP and
         through NAPTIP to other NGOs; that generally freedom  of  movement
         was possible.

      7. In relation to prevention of trafficking he submitted the evidence
         showed that there were  strong  anti-trafficking  law  enforcement
         efforts and increased penalties, convictions and sentences  of  up
         to fourteen years and an increased budget and  strong  efforts  to
         protect trafficking victims.  There was no doubt that Nigeria  met
         the Horvath standard with the anti-trafficking law  in  place  and
         there is sufficiency of protection.


      8. The respondent accepted that a victim of  trafficking  may  be  at
         risk if the sponsor in the UK was able to pursue the victim.




Summary of submissions on behalf of the appellant.


      9.  Ms Cronin submitted that the essential issue to be considered was
         the risk of proscribed  treatment  -  serious  harm  and  lack  of
         protection. She submitted that PO (Nigeria)  was  not  a  starting
         point - the focus in that case, including the paragraphs that  the
         Court of Appeal had preserved, was concerned with gangs and  debt.
         The enlarged focus  on  the  nature  of  the  exploitation  namely
         whether for domestic servitude, for sexual  exploitation  or  both
         does not redeem PO for its understanding of risk  and  protection.
         There is, she submitted, a requirement to engage with the  dynamic
         experience of trafficking, the vulnerability of  the  victim,  the
         practical help available and accessible and for  there  to  be  an
         assessment of what happens when any support that may  be  provided
         on return is withdrawn. She submitted  such  an  approach  was  in
         accordance with paragraph 339K of the immigration rules, article 4
         Council of Europe  Anti-trafficking  Convention  and  the  Palermo
         protocol.


     10. Ms Cronin submitted that the trafficking instruments do not change
         the definition of who is a refugee but the obligations that the UK
         has under the trafficking instruments are relevant. This  includes
         the duty to investigate  trafficking  cases.  The  duties  to  the
         victim should inform the assessment of risk, effective  protection
         and relocation. To understand risk and the  opportunity  for  safe
         and reasonable relocation to avoid localised risk required a fine-
         grained analysis, not through prescriptive evaluation of  risk  by
         reference  to  particular  factors  or  by  resorting  to  general
         guidance on prescriptive types of trafficking.



     11. Ms Cronin submitted that an assessment  of  risk  was  not  solely
         about gangs and debt. She acknowledged that debt was relevant, but
         assessment of risk was about victims.  She  submitted  that  there
         may well be evidence of ongoing interests and reach, or indeed  no
         evidence of such matters, but for this to  be  the  sole  guidance
         would rule out other evidence of the potential for  retrafficking.
         She submitted that clear indicators of risk include the  occasions
         when the risk arises.



     12. Ms Cronin submitted that generic guidance on risk  and  protection
         was insufficient. It was necessary to look at the arrangements for
         protection to ensure that the victim was not  in  a  situation  of
         vulnerability. It was not  a  prescriptive  risk,  but  each  case
         should be decided on  its  own  facts  and  it  was  necessary  to
         evaluate the risk with reference to a number of factors namely :



             (1)   Indications   of   sophistication   of   operations   or
             trafficking threat which extended  beyond  the  family.  There
             were many variables in trafficking and  it  was  necessary  to
             look at the individual trafficking circumstances  focusing  on
             the individual.
             (2)   Serious  harm  in  the  appellant's  own  country.  This
             appellant  had  suffered  serious  domestic  abuse,   lifelong
             domestic abuse and it was accepted that she was trafficked  to
             Nigeria.  This was highly relevant.
             (3)  Factors  dealing  with  the  individual  victim  such  as
             background,  education,  experience  of  abuse,   skills   and
             capacity for self-protection or capacity for sound judgment.
             (4)  Analysis of the position in the home state. Whether there
             were shelters, support, and length of  stay  in  the  shelter.
             For example, in Albania there could be a stay  of  up  to  two
             years  and  there  was  also  a  realistic  work  option   and
             employment.
             (5)  Where the state did not provide a welfare state there had
             to be a safety net of the family  or  an  ability  to  provide
             support.  The family would not be able to do so if  they  were
             complicit in the trafficking.
             (6)  Issues of shame and stigma.  Young  women  returned  from
             Europe are seen to be prostitutes  and  this  further  impeded
             their integration.
             (7)    If   there   was   not   effective   prosecution    and
             criminalisation of trafficking then the  traffickers  can  act
             with impunity.
             (8)  Whether the person was in debt to the  trafficker  was  a
             relevant issue but not the sole driver of the risk on return.











                                   ANNEX 3

                         The Elements of Trafficking

      1. Although  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  fact  finding  Report
         "Protection of Victims of trafficking  in  Nigeria"  ("the  Danish
         Report")  was  undertaken  between  9  and  26   September   2007,
         subsequent reports and academic articles draw  heavily  upon  that
         report.  The  primary  research  conducted  since  then  does  not
         indicate any significant changes to the mechanisms of trafficking.
         Traffickers utilise various methods to undertake  their  business.
         Some specialise in document and  passport  forgery,  while  others
         specialise in recruitment and transportation.

      2. Mr Desmond's undisputed  evidence  was  that  expenditure  on  the
         documents used to traffic women varied depending on the quality of
         the documents used. If a document had been  issued  by  a  corrupt
         official, in that it was genuine document in a false identity that
         would be far more expensive than if the document was a forgery.  A
         forgery is more easily  detected  and  therefore  if  stopped  the
         trafficker could lose the valuable commodity, namely  the  victim.
         The IOM 2006 report records that research undertaken by Okojie and
         Prina in 2003 indicates that because Nigerian passports can  raise
         suspicion, false passports from other countries are used -  Benin,
         Ghana, Togo and Senegal.

      3. The Cherti Report refers to the lack of knowledge  of  victims  of
         the basis upon which they entered the UK - some understanding that
         somehow they had been registered as a relative, others  having  no
         idea of the capacity of  their  entry.  Underlying  that  lack  of
         knowledge was the trust the victim had in the trafficker.



      4. Mr Desmond referred to periods of time spent in Lagos  by  victims
         after they have been taken from their home. They would be kept  in
         an outhouse with other girls in  a  compound  that  contained  the
         large house that the madam lived in. During the time spent in that
         compound which could be for several weeks  or  months,  the  young
         women were sexually groomed and undertook domestic work and learnt
         their "legend".  A photographer may come to the compound to take a
         photograph of the young woman rather than a woman being taken  out
         of the compound.

      5. Mr Desmond's unchallenged evidence  was  that  at  the  time  this
         appellant was brought into the UK, it was rare to  find  Nigerians
         working  in  brothels  or  on  the  street  in  the   UK.   Street
         prostitution is heavily  policed  in  the  UK  compared  to  other
         European countries. Here in the UK victims of sexual  exploitation
         who were kept in private houses and  imprisoned  in  the  bedroom,
         house or flat were abused by members of  the  community  and  were
         exploited by word of mouth. The UK was also a transit  country  to
         Europe, evidence supported by the IOM 2006 Report  of  traffickers
         not sending women direct to Italy but initially by plane from, for
         example Ghana, direct to London, Paris or Amsterdam and then on to
         Italy. Longer (sometimes  years)  and  more  dangerous  routes  to
         Europe are through the Sahara. The Cherti Report refers  to  Italy
         being the most common  destination  for  Nigerians  trafficked  to
         Europe for sexual exploitation.


      The "means"




Vulnerability


     6. Abuse of a position  of  vulnerability  is  cited  in  the  Palermo
        protocol in the list of means  through  which  individuals  can  be
        subjected to a range of various actions for exploitation. There  is
        a  distinction   between   vulnerability   as   susceptibility   to
        trafficking  and  abuse  of  vulnerability  as  a  means  by  which
        trafficking occurs or is made possible. The United National  Office
        on  Drugs  and  Crime  Issue  paper  "Abuse  of   a   position   of
        vulnerability  and  other  "means"   within   the   definition   of
        trafficking  in  persons"  April  2013  ("UNODC  2013")   considers
        trafficking and the concept of vulnerability:


                  "..... vulnerability is  central  to  how  trafficking  is
                  understood......In    the    context    of    trafficking,
                  "vulnerability"  is  typically  used  to  refer  to  those
                  inherent,  environmental  or   contextual   factors   that
                  increase the susceptibility of an individual or  group  to
                  being trafficked. These factors are  generally  agreed  to
                  include  human  rights   violations   such   as   poverty,
                  inequality, discrimination and gender-based violence[33] -
                  all of which contribute to creating  economic  deprivation
                  and social conditions that  limit  individual  choice  and
                  make it easier for traffickers and exploiters to  operate.
                  More specific factors that are commonly cited as  relevant
                  to   individual   vulnerability   to   trafficking    (and
                  occasionally  extrapolated  as  potential  indicators   of
                  trafficking);[34] include gender, membership of a minority
                  group, and lack of legal status.....


             2.1.2 A distinct but related concept: abuse  of  vulnerability
             as a means of trafficking.
                  ....This distinction is important..."


      7. The UNODC 2013 paper identifies why it is important to maintain  a
         distinction between vulnerability as susceptibility to trafficking
         and the abuse of vulnerability as a means by which trafficking  is
         perpetrated.  The paper acknowledges the potential overlap between
         them and that  an  understanding  of  the  factors  that  increase
         susceptibility to trafficking is relevant to the  extent  that  it
         provides an insight into the kinds of vulnerability  that  can  be
         abused to enable trafficking to happen. An example  given  in  the
         paper is the "irregularity of an individual's legal status  vis--
         vis the country destination it is widely  acknowledged  to  be  an
         important  factor  in  enhancing  their  vulnerability  to   being
         trafficked.  Irregular  status  also  appears  to  be  a  form  of
         vulnerability that is particularly amenable to becoming a means by
         which an individual is placed or  maintained  in  a  situation  of
         exploitation.


      8. The paper notes that the concept  of  abuse  of  the  position  of
         vulnerability was unique to the Trafficking  in  Persons  Protocol
         and that it is understood as referring to "any situation in  which
         the person involved has no real and acceptable alternative but  to
         submit to the abuse involved". Reference is made in the  paper  to
         the  Commentary  to  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  against
         Trafficking  in   Human   Beings   2005   ("European   Trafficking
         Convention") and the EU Trafficking  Directive  2011/36/EU   which
         explains the term abuse of vulnerability:

             ".. the vulnerability may be of any  kind,  whether  physical,
             psychological, emotional, family-related, social or  economic.
             The  situation  might,  for  example,  involve  insecurity  or
             illegality  of  the  victim's  immigration  status,   economic
             dependence or fragile health. In short the  situation  can  be
             any state of hardship in which a human being  is  impelled  to
             accept being  exploited.  Persons  abusing  such  a  situation
             flagrantly infringe human rights and violate human dignity and
             integrity, which no-one can validly renounce."


      9. The introduction to the US  State  Department  Trafficking  Report
         2016[35] (a hard copy of which we were not provided  with  but  to
         which reference is made  in  a  number  of  documents  before  us)
         states:


             "Although  human  trafficking  affects  every  demographic,  a
             common factor across  all  forms  of  modern  slavery  is  the
             victims'  vulnerability  to  exploitation.  Systemic   social,
             cultural, and economic policies or practices  may  marginalize
             or discriminate against individuals and  groups  because  they
             are  poor,  are  intellectually  or  physically  disabled,  or
             because of their gender or ethnicity. People may  lack  access
             to health and legal services due to their status  or  language
             barriers; and some,  such  as  communities  in  situations  of
             crisis  and  children,  may  not  be  capable  of   protecting
             themselves.


             Traffickers exploit these disadvantages. They  prey  on  those
             who lack security and opportunity, coerce or deceive  them  to
             gain control, and then profit from their compelled service. To
             prevent  this,  governments,  with   assistance   from   first
             responders, NGOs, and local communities, should consider their
             own populations, cultures,  and  policies  to  identify  those
             individuals  who  may  be  uniquely  vulnerable  within  their
             borders. On this  basis,  communities  can  develop  effective
             strategies   to   increase   awareness   and   prevent   human
             trafficking.
                 ....
             Although there is no exhaustive list of groups  vulnerable  to
             human trafficking, the experiences discussed  above  exemplify
             common challenges faced  by  populations  at  risk  of  modern
             slavery. Moreover, some individuals may be vulnerable for more
             than one reason, making their exploitation even  more  likely.
             Governments can take affirmative steps to consider  those  who
             may be uniquely  vulnerable  given  their  country's  culture,
             social structure, and history, and ensure  those  groups  have
             access to the protections necessary to keep  them  from  being
             targeted for human trafficking."

     10.   The  Cherti  report  concludes  that  trafficking  results  from
         compound situations of exclusion,  deprivation  and  inability  to
         access services.  Protracted vulnerability is a  critical  element
         in the life histories of many trafficked persons  and  in  general
         Cherti concluded that

             "... it is possible to discern  a  continuum  of  subjugation,
             violence,  abuse  or   instability   between   the   childhood
             experiences and their subsequent exploitation abroad.....  for
             the  majority  of  respondents,  the  consequences  of   their
             exploitation still impact very tangibly on  their  lives  long
             after its formal 'end'. Their lives continued to  be  informed
             by vulnerability, fear and uncertainty and in  many  cases  by
             further abuse and exploitation that in some cases lasted  over
             a number of years, before they  were  formally  identified  by
             authorities."


Means of recruitment and retention



     11. The process of recruitment, including the use of  deception,  oath
         taking/juju/voodoo rituals is set out in the IOM 2006 report :


             "Young women's first  contact  with  the  trafficking  network
             almost always happens through  informal  networks.  It  varies
             whether it is the woman herself or the other party  who  first
             takes the initiative. In many cases, friends or  relatives  of
             the  woman  are  the  first  link.  The  conversations   about
             travelling to Europe often take place in her home or in  other
             familiar surroundings.... The first person with whom the woman
             is in contact usually has no other  role  in  the  trafficking
             process than to establish contact.... In this phase, the women
             are lured with promises of work as maids, sales personnel,  or
             hairdressers, or with work in  factories  or  restaurants,  or
             with educational possibilities....
             .... This person puts the woman in touch with a "madam" who is
             the most important person in the network in Nigeria. Sometimes
             there is a third person who acts as a sponsor and finances the
             trip. However, the sponsor and the madam  will  often  be  the
             same person... In addition to the madam in Nigeria, there is a
             madam in Italy who is responsible for the woman after she  has
             arrived. The madam in Europe is closely connected to the madam
             in Nigeria; often, they  will  belong  to  the  same  extended
             family. The other  central  persons  are  a  religious  leader
             (ohen) in Nigeria, the human smugglers who are responsible for
             the journey (trolleys), and a male assistant to the  madam  in
             Italy...
             .... The sponsor is responsible for paying all  the  costs  of
             the journey and settling abroad. These make up a debt that the
             woman is required to payback. Required documents normally cost
             between US$ 500  and  US$3000.  In  addition  smugglers  often
             charged as much US$10,000 for the trip... The debt  the  women
             incur, however, is considerably larger, usually in  the  range
             US$40,000 to US$100,000.  It normally takes  between  one  and
             three years as a prostitute in Europe to pay back this amount.
             Many women do not understand  the  extent  of  what  they  are
             committing themselves to because they are  not  familiar  with
             European currencies...
             ... Once a woman has agreed to go to Europe, she's taken to  a
             shrine  where  the  pact  of  emigration  is   confirmed   and
             sealed..... the distribution of material goods and rights is a
             central  element  in  the  local  religious  traditions.   The
             religious leader (ohen) who seals the pact acts as a  kind  of
             district judge.
             ..... It is often later in the process, and if something  goes
             wrong as seen from the perspective of  the  traffickers,  that
             the use of the local religious traditions  takes  on  a  clear
             element of abuse. If  the  women  are  not  cooperative  after
             arriving in Europe, they  may  be  exposed  to  a  mixture  of
             physical violence and new, enforcing rituals...
             ..... To an increasing extent, the woman or  her  family  must
             also commit themselves through a written contract. This may be
             legally binding  in  Nigeria,  and  use  the  family  home  as
             security for the debt.... In addition to the  rituals  at  the
             traditional shrines, many  women  have  also  participated  in
             prayer in  the  popular  Pentecostal  congregations  prior  to
             leaving for Europe...
             The pact with the sponsor is perceived as very strong  by  the
             prostituted women......  Breaking  the  pact  represents  much
             ashamed towards the entire community."


     12.  Cherti  considers   why   individuals   remain   in   trafficking
         circumstances sometimes for years before attempting to escape.  He
         stresses that it is important to  recognise  the  reality  of  the
         control.  Physical  restraint,  violence  and  threats  played   a
         significant role and were often directed at the victim's family in
         Nigeria.  Control was also achieved through restricted movement or
         isolation, in some cases having to  hide  when  visitors  came  to
         house. Passports would be confiscated and any contact  with  other
         people was restricted, other than with  'clients'  or  family  and
         friends of the exploiter.  But Cherti  also refers to more  subtle
         forms of control:


             "The role that invisibility and isolation play in the coercion
             and  exploitation  of  many  victims,  whether   in   domestic
             servitude or prostitution is critical to understand....  There
             were cases of victims, having fled their exploiters, returning
             either out of desperation and a sense of loyalty or sent  back
             by their parents,  or  at  the  behest  of  their  parents  or
             relatives.  These  cases  also  highlight  important  enabling
             contexts,  such  as  the  vulnerability  of  the  victim   and
             exploitation of the trafficker's authority,  the  age  of  the
             victim making them  unable  to  consent  to  their  situation,
             family expectations, and a feeling of obligation and  deferred
             promises.  For instance, one respondent was abused  constantly
             by her host, yet when the victim asked to  be  taken  back  to
             Nigeria, the exploiter did so, yet after discussions with  her
             family, the victim was made to beg forgiveness  and  was  then
             sent back to the UK. Victims' inaction,  far  from  signalling
             'cooperation' with their exploiters and some sort of  'passive
             agency', reflects the widespread powerlessness,  violence  and
             dislocation that keep many victims locked in their trafficking
             situations for years. This is particularly important  to  bear
             in mind when a significant proportion of the victims  may  not
             be visibly restricted in their movements...."






    Oath taking


     13. The UNHCR -Voodoo, Witchcraft and Human Trafficking in Europe 2013
          report refers to a difference between  voodoo  and  ritual  oaths
         states:


              "As Victoria Nwogu, Programme Specialist with UNIFEM/Nigeria,
             explains:


                  "Voodoo is a religion (which includes ritual oaths in  its
                  practices), while a ritual oath is a  seal  placed  on  an
                  agreement through rituals  binding  both  parties  to  the
                  terms  of  the   agreement   on   pain   of   supernatural
                  retaliation...Voodoo is a religion based on the  existence
                  of  an  invisible  world  interconnected  to  the  visible
                  world.....Ritual oaths are a practice  derived  from  this
                  religion. These oaths seal the pact between women who want
                  to move to Europe and traffickers. Traffickers  commit  to
                  pay all costs of the journey, while the women  promise  to
                  repay the money, be  respectful  to  the  traffickers  and
                  engaging  not  to  denounce   the   traffickers   to   the
                  police...... Ritual oaths are independent of the  victim's
                  religion.   Believing   in   other    religions    (Islam,
                  Christianity  etc)  is  not  necessarily  an  obstacle  to
                  believing in the effect of oaths and voodoo magic"


     14. The Cherti report defines 'juju' as referring


             "to the invisible realm of gods and spirits which is as "real"
             as the material universe. The two  worlds  are  interconnected
             through the operation of  spiritual  power,  accessed  through
             prayer and ritual. 'Juju'  is the West African  term  for  one
             such ritual  practice....  Objects,  words  and  gestures  are
             imbued  with  supernatural  power  through  incantations   and
             sacrifice to bring about a desired  result.....  the  power...
             knows no geographical boundaries; its  influence  can  persist
             through time and space."


    15. Most of the evidence before us referred to oaths as "juju" oaths.


    16. Mr Desmond gave examples of women with whom  he  had  worked  being
        offered considerable  protection  methods  to  keep  her  safe  and
        concealed from those who had trafficked her but  the  response  had
        been "they will know; the spirits will know".


    17. Although Campana does not  specifically  consider  the  recruitment
        process he makes reference to the use of such rituals as a means by
        which madams maintain control of the victims.


    18. According to Cherti


             "juju oaths in Nigeria generally occur in situations where the
             victim is already vulnerable, (for example in  a  pre-existing
             situation of exploitation)...  facilitate[s]  the  journey  as
             well as facilitate[ing] trafficking in the UK."


      He describes it as a "secondary" form of coercion:


             "The presence of  juju  demonstrates  the  importance  of  the
             threat of violence on trafficked people."


     19. The EASO report refers to a paper by Pascoal: The situation of the
         Nigerian Human Trafficking victims and their children in Italy  19
         December 2012 which states that "many Christian girls do not swear
         a juju oath because  of  their  religious  belief."  We  were  not
         provided with a copy of that report and  have  not  been  able  to
         access it but through the footnote it appears that this  is  based
         on an interview with one former victim of trafficking.


     20. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford refers to the oath  taking  ceremony  in
         her written  evidence  and  says  that  even  if  the  victim  was
         Christian and did not want to articulate the oath  they  would  be
         obliged to do so. She does not provide any source  for  this.  The
         Finnish Report refers to a LandInfo 5/2006 Report that "the  Girls
         Power Initiative organisation  (GPI)  have  used  Christianity  to
         decrease the power and influence juju priests have over people and
         to oppose the traditional spirits so  that  the  rituals  will  no
         longer have hold on the victims". The report does not say to  what
         extent that initiative has  been  successful.  The  Danish  Report
         records that NAPTIP states that the  use  of  juju  has  decreased
         although the report also refers  to  Mrs  Olateru-Olagbegi's  view
         that it is usually still common. She says that it is difficult for
         a Christian priest too annul the oath.  The  Finnish  report  also
         refers to a paper by Carling in 2005 that


             "pacts made in juju rituals  are  frequently  also  sanctioned
             with prayer rituals in Pentecostal churches to which  most  of
             the victims belong, further broadening of pact's legitimacy."


    Deception


     21. As the Finnish Report says


             "the agents of traffickers may contact girls' parents directly
             and offer help for their daughters to  migrate  abroad  for  a
             fee....  Some  recruiters  assist   in   facilitating   travel
             documents and may also  have  other  people  helping  them  to
             expedite the process....... After the initial contact with the
             agent, the victim is put in contact with  a  madam,  the  most
             important person in the human trafficking network  in  Nigeria
             and often also the sponsor financing  the  journey......  Some
             women actively seek information about migrating to  Europe  as
             well as financing for the  journey.......  Some  victims  have
             also  been  recruited  through  audio  cassettes  or   letters
             purportedly written by relations or acquaintances  already  in
             destination countries  ....  describing  life  as  being  very
             promising  and  inviting  victims  to  come  and  join   them.
             Occasionally,  young  women  have  also  been  deceived   into
             migrating by recruiting them as performers in musical troupes,
             instead, may have ended up in prostitution as victims of human
             trafficking.  Sports  competitions  and  religious   festivals
             abroad have also been used  as  an  aid  in  recruitment......
             traffickers residing in Europe  have  been  reported  to  have
             legally adopted  teenage  girls  with  the  consent  of  their
             biological parents to facilitate the document of visas for the
             girls."


     22. The Cherti  report  refers  to  victims  thinking  it  was  a  job
         opportunity or education and it was difficult to turn down because
         of the family  and  community  expectation  that  it  was  a  good
         opportunity  that  could  not  be  refused.  Cherti  reports  that
         deception was a  critical  method  of  coercion  employed  -  "the
         traffickers presented them with a compelling  offer,  in  general,
         the opportunity of sanctuary, education and (in a small number  of
         cases) employment as a  child  minder  or  hairdresser....while  a
         number of respondents were subjected to high  levels  of  physical
         and sexual violence by their  exploiters,  the  majority  did  not
         experience  this  in  Nigeria.  Traffickers  seemed  pleasant  and
         supportive until victims reached the destination country and  most
         respondents only became aware of the  exploitation  awaiting  them
         once they had arrived. Deception in other cases  involved  partial
         information, such  as  pay  packages  that,  while  attractive  in
         Nigeria, were exploitative in the UK."


        Debt Bondage


     23. Mr Desmond stated "The net value of  trafficking  the  female  for
         sexual exploitation is greater than for domestic  servitude.   The
         OCG will receive its payment  for  the  domestic  slave  virtually
         immediately on delivery in comparison to the slow return of profit
         for a female who is sexually exploited... the 'deal' was  complete
         when the person was sold and delivered in the  UK".   The  Rev  Dr
         Pemberton-Ford, on being asked if she agreed with this  statement,
         responded that "it was not that clear as it  was  possible  for  a
         domestic slave to move into sexual exploitation......  because  of
         the fluidity of sexual exploitation and domestic  servitude,  what
         was in the mind of the person who wanted the  product  meant  that
         the fictive debt could be  run  out  at  a  greater  level".  When
         pressed she responded that it was important to look at Campana and
         the business model set out therein; there was no  reason  why  the
         same model could not apply.


     24. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford was asked a number  of  questions  about
         the "business model" for domestic servitude but we must say we did
         not find her answers illuminating. She referred  on  a  number  of
         occasions to there being a need for more research - and yet we had
         understood from her written evidence that such was the context  of
         the research she was anticipating  being  published  in  September
         2016. Her answers were difficult to understand - for  example  the
         reason why she identified a 'debt' as 'fictive'. She was asked who
         was making money from the servant and she said,


             "If the Sponsor model was considered then the trolley was paid
             immediately, but the overall debt was held by  the  Sponsor...
             it would take longer for domestic servitude, but  the  Sponsor
             would get the lion's share of the profit..... the lesser  jobs
             were paid off first. It was not possible to  say  how  complex
             the Sponsor situation was and there was a need to look at  the
             OCG and whether the Sponsor was in fact part of the group, but
             the  group  was  fluid  especially  the  trolleys   who   were
             financially paid. The roles of the Sponsor and  the  Recruiter
             could be a complex and it was  a  very  dynamic  relationship.
             The Sponsor was not always the same as the  consumer.  Chasing
             the money assisted but it did not always indicate who was  the
             Sponsor."


     25. Campana, whose research on trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation,
         was not primary source research, confirms stages  of  exploitation
         which are referred to by, for example, the OSCE,  UNODC,  IOM,  US
         State Department in, that


             "trafficking is indeed  best  understood  as  a  process  that
             consists  of  distinct  and  consecutive  stages,  which   can
             generally be identified as (1) recruitment, (2) transportation
             and(3) exploitation.  Recruitment refers to the acquisition of
             control over a victim by different means, including abduction,
             gross  deception  or  payments  to  the  victim's   relatives.
             Recruitment  usually  takes  place  in  the  source   country.
             Transportation refers to the movement of  the  victim  from  a
             source to destination country. Exploitation is the final stage
             of trafficking operations  and  usually  takes  place  in  the
             destination country. The key point here is  that  some  stages
             may benefit from economies of scale more than others. For  the
             transportation stage, an increase in the number of victims may
             greatly decrease the cost -per- victim associated with setting
             up and running the informal infrastructure (made  up  of  safe
             houses and local agents), as well as  acquiring  the  relevant
             knowledge  about  visas,  trafficking  routes   and   counter-
             trafficking measures.  At the same time, monitoring costs tend
             to be lower in this stage the time during  which  victims  are
             involved is shorter. The  exploitation  stage,  on  the  other
             hand,  may  present  severe  limits  to  the  development   of
             economies of scale, as victims have to  be  monitored  closely
             and individually for lengthy periods. The extent of monitoring
             is often  very  large  and  includes  acquiring  constant  and
             reliable information  on  the  victim's  whereabouts  and  the
             earnings generated from  each  transaction  between  a  single
             victim  and  her  clients.   For   high-capacity   trafficking
             networks, the costs incurred  during  the  exploitation  stage
             maybe considerable."


     26.  His  paper  suggests  that  there   is   a   separation   between
         transportation and exploitation costs: transporters expect  to  be
         paid


             "... in full at the moment of delivery.....transporters act as
             service providers contracted by the madams".


         Campana concludes that the network


             "... does not appear to be a unified organization, but  rather
             a collection  of  largely  independent  actors.  There  is  no
             indication of a centralised accounting system",


         And that activities appear to be largely external, and that  there
         is a tendency towards a separation between the transportation  and
         the exploitation stage which is


             "a crucial organisational arrangement that allows  for  higher
             trafficking capacity". "The evidence suggests the adoption  by
             the traffickers of a more  sophisticated  model  [not  run  on
             ethnic or kinship lines] based on the division of  labour  and
             role specialization".


     27. Campana supports Mr Desmond's  evidence  that  victims  of  sexual
         exploitation have no idea of the conditions they will be  required
         to work in or the hours they will have to work or  the  extent  of
         the debt they are required to pay off and the years it will  take.
         The IOM 2006 report, drawing on academic  sources  from  2001  and
         2003 estimates it can take between 1 and 3 years for a  prostitute
         to pay off this debt. The debt can be increased as punishment  for
         bad behaviour, but it is usually only a matter of time before  the
         pact ends.


     28. Mr Desmond was asked about debt bondage. He said this was part  of
         the recruitment process.  The victim would be  trapped  in  sexual
         exploitation with a promise that they would get  a  job  and  that
         their expenses would be paid and that they could pay back  70,000.
         The victim would think it was Naira which would  equate  to  about
         250. They would then go and see a juju priest to give a  blessing
         or swear an oath on the contract that  they  would  pay  back  the
         money. Their soul would be collateral and the victim was then told
         on reaching the UK that the debt was owed in Euros. The  debt  was
         huge, but given that an oath had been sworn  the  victim  was  now
         debt bound and had been trapped. Debt bondage  did  not  occur  in
         domestic servitude because domestic servants were a commodity.  It
         was a transaction between a seller and a buyer. That  is  why  sex
         trafficking was more profitable because you knew you were going to
         get your money because the person would have to pay off  the  debt
         with their earnings. The domestic servant did  not  pay  money  to
         anybody but could if they were going  to  be  deployed  in  sexual
         activity and had performed an oath ceremony. Mr  Desmond  had  not
         met a domestic servant who had gone through juju.


     29. There was no evidence drawn to our attention that  indicated  that
         the debt was never paid off.


     30. The actual debt which a sexually exploited  trafficked  victim  is
         required to repay is difficult to uncover.  The  IOM  2006  report
         brings together research figures from 2003  reports.  These  costs
         appear to break down as follows:




    . The cost of trafficking a  woman  to  Italy  is  between  $50,000  and
      $70,000.
    . On arrival taken shopping for clothes, fellow prostitutes train her.
    . Either lives with the madam or in another  flat  where  watched  by  a
      controller.
    . Living quarters can be overcrowded.
    . Not unusual for one madam to control 10 to 15 women.
    . Flat used to sleep and watch TV between shifts.
    . Work different hours but often nearly round the clock.
    . Expenses for food, lodging, and payment for the accommodation used for
      sex work are deducted; often amount to $2000 a month.  Remainder  used
      to pay back the debt.
    . Have little access to the money and  not  allowed  to  send  money  to
      Nigeria.
    . Madams move  the  women  around  -  enables  them  to  offer  customer
      variation and to prevent individual victims  developing  relationships
      and ties  to  customers.  Also  due  to  changes  in  legislation  and
      enforcement.
    . Repayment accelerated if woman develops a relationship to  a  customer
      who offers to pay all or part of remaining debt.
    . Although the madam may increase the debt for  bad  behaviour,  usually
      only a matter of time before the debt is repaid; often marked  with  a
      party.


     31. There was no more up to date information on the costs incurred  or
         the debt to be repaid although there was nothing to say that costs
         had gone down. It seems uncontested, other  than  by  the  Rev  Dr
         Pemberton-Ford, that trafficking for what could  be  characterised
         as "pure" domestic servitude does take place, and that where  that
         happens it  may  change  into  sexual  exploitation  but  that  is
         localised from those to whom the domestic servant was sold.


     32. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford drew  very  little  distinction  between
         trafficking for domestic  servitude  and  trafficking  for  sexual
         exploitation. Her evidence was  that  the  same  financial  models
         existed for each. She had  no  direct  evidence  to  support  that
         theory and no academic or other sources upon which she  drew.  Her
         conclusion to this effect appeared to be based  upon  the  premise
         that those trafficked for domestic servitude would become sexually
         exploited and thus the financial  involvement  would  be  that  as
         described  by  Campana,  who,  as  we  have  said   earlier,   was
         considering trafficking for sexual exploitation in Italy.  She did
         not, in response to questions put to her, appear  to  accept  that
         there were ever situations where an individual would be trafficked
         solely for the purposes of domestic  servitude.  She  appeared  to
         have the  view  that  trafficking  for  domestic  servitude  would
         inevitably lead to sexual exploitation; that  the  transition  was
         sometimes not apparent to  the  victim,  but  that  the  debt  for
         domestic  servitude  remained  outstanding  and   there   was   no
         difference in financial terms between sex trafficking and domestic
         service trafficking. In response to a written  question  from  the
         respondent  asking  how  a  trafficker  recovered  the  costs   of
         trafficking a person for domestic servitude she says


             "This is the challenge for the costly business of  trafficking
             - domestic servitude over many years would  eventually  recoup
             these costs, however a more expeditious method would be if the
             young  woman  involved  could  be  brought  into  a  form   of
             prostituted  service,  where  higher  remuneration  could   be
             achieved on the outlay by the sponsor, or the madam, using her
             services. This could be  managed  in  a  hybrid  form  -  some
             servitude and some sexual services - as must be  the  case  of
             those moving in between  these  forms  referenced  by  (Ellis,
             2011)."


     33. On being asked to comment on Mr Desmond's statement that "The  OCG
         will  receive  its  payment  for  the  domestic  slave   virtually
         immediately on delivery, in  comparison  to  the  slow  return  of
         profit for a female who is sexually exploited" she responded  that
         it was not that clear because it was possible for a domestic slave
         to move into sexual exploitation. When  pressed  she  referred  to
         Campana and stated that it was important to look at that  business
         model. We did not find her evidence on this helpful. Although  she
         has undertaken research and, given the increasing awareness of the
         level of domestic servitude in the UK, we cannot accept  that  the
         description  of  finance  provided  by  Campana  in  relation   to
         trafficking for sexual  exploitation  in  Italy  can  be  utilised
         directly as a comparator for domestic servitude trafficking in the
         UK.


     34. Mr Desmond stated that in his experience there was a link  between
         the UK and Nigeria and many victims of sexual  exploitation  could
         easily be found by their  traffickers.  He  gave  as  an  example,
         traffickers who found the son of  a  Ugandan  victim,  traced  her
         through him and demanded repayment of her debt.  She attempted  to
         make repayment of part of the debt and then met a  Nigerian  madam
         in Denmark who said she knew her and knew that she owed a debt.


     35. The Rev Dr Pemberton-Ford, in cross-examination agreed that  where
         someone was trafficked for  sexual  exploitation  the  profit  was
         derived from the men who paid money for sex  whereas  in  domestic
         servitude the profit came from the person who employed the victim.
          She said that there  were  other  opportunities  within  domestic
         servitude for sexual exploitation or, for example, benefit fraud.


     36. As can be seen from references above  it  appears  that  the  core
         group, the OCG, organising the trafficking is the group that makes
         the money. Individuals and other specialised groups  are  utilised
         for specific stages enabling the exploitation to  take  place  for
         example documents, cross border crossings and it seems that  these
         tasks are obtained and paid for as and when required.


     37. Mr Desmond described the Hawala financial mechanism through  which
         money was transferred between the UK and Nigeria; this  method  of
         transfer of funds reduced risk to those paying and receiving money
         because large sums were not being transported  across  borders  or
         identifiable through established state banking mechanisms. He gave
         examples of playing cards torn in  half  and  numbers  to  provide
         identification for the senders and receivers of money. This method
         of transfer of funds was, he said, an easy cross  border  movement
         of money. He said that some traffickers would use 'clean' money to
         fund  some  elements  of  trafficking.  For  example,  they   were
         legitimately  employed  and  used  that  money  to  purchase   the
         necessary documents.


     38. The IOM 2006 report refers to  1999  research  that  part  of  the
         income from trafficking is used to expand the business,  but  that
         large sums of money are transferred  to  Nigeria  to  be  invested
         there. The report  records  that  the  madams  frequently  live  a
         'plain' life in Italy, but have big houses built in Nigeria -  and
         a comment is made that building a house in the country  of  origin
         is "something migrants worldwide spend money on, whether they  are
         Pakistanis in Norway, Mexicans in the United States  or  Nigerians
         in Italy".


         Scarring


     39. Mr Desmond referred to ritual scarring of many  victims  from  Edo
         State, inflicted during the oath taking  ceremony;  such  scarring
         not generally occurring on those from other States.


     40. Cherti refers to scarring occurring in some cases as part  of  the
         oath taking ritual.


     41. There was no evidence before us that the scarring was inflicted in
         order to identify an individual  as  having  been  trafficked  for
         sexual or domestic exploitation.


         Violence


     42. Control of the victim extends beyond the oath-taking ceremonies to
         implied or threatened violence against the victim or the  victim's
         family. Mr Desmond gives the example of  the  giving  of  a  phone
         which is then utilised as a means of contact  between  the  victim
         and her family either directly or indirectly to ensure compliance.


    43. Although Cherti refers to some  generalised  violence  directed  to
        victims of trafficking or their families, his overall conclusion is
        that violence or threats of violence tend only  to  appear  once  a
        person is in the UK. He states that the means of coercion  utilised
        by the traffickers demonstrates the  low  importance  of  'physical
        coercion' in Nigerian trafficking.


             "Rather than physical force  or  abduction,  the  majority  of
             trafficking is facilitated whether by  an  abuse  of  power  -
             people being trafficked against their will who are  unable  to
             resist their traffickers either because of their young age, or
             lesser power relationship, or deception - the individual being
             promised a job or life very different to the exploitation they
             faced".


     44. This low level of violence is referred to in the Danish Report.




        Corruption


    45. The World Bank's working definition of corruption, is "the abuse of
        public power  for  private  benefit".   Transparency  International
        takes a broader approach and understands corruption as  "misuse  of
        entrusted power for private gain". UNODC The Role of Corruption  in
        Trafficking in Persons Report 2011, considering the  generality  of
        trafficking  and  not  specifically  Nigeria,  refers  to   corrupt
        behaviour as ranging from


             "..violating  duties,  accepting   or   transferring   bribes,
             facilitating transactions, to passive involvement,  which  can
             include simply ignoring or failing to follow-up on  indicators
             that corruption maybe taking place."


         The report identifies that opportunities for corruption  exist  in
         the trafficking chain, the criminal  justice  chain,  the  victims
         support and protection chain.  The report notes that  most  States
         do not systematically collect and analyse data  on  investigations
         or prosecutions of public officials relating to human  trafficking
         and corruption yet they record that there is a wealth of anecdotal
         evidence provided by the victims of the crime and by  traffickers.
         The report refers to the results of  corruption  being  easier  to
         find than evidence of the corrupt act itself.  The  outcomes,  for
         instance the existence of  fraudulent  travel  and  identification
         documents used in the trafficking process, illegal border crossing
         or the issuance of a  visa  without  all  the  requirements  being
         fulfilled are clues that indicate the existence of exploitation.


     46. Various documents before us including for example:


                . Country information  and  guidance  Nigeria:  gender-based
                  discrimination/ Harm/ Violence against Women August 2015;
                .  Country  information  and  guidance  Nigeria:  background
                  information, including actors of protection, and  internal
                  relocation 9 June 2015;
                . Nigeria Country of origin information (COI) Report 14 June
                  2013 (reissued on 3 February 2014);
                . Protection of victims of trafficking  in  Nigeria.  Report
                  from Danish Immigration Service's fact-finding mission  to
                  Lagos, Benin City and Abuja, Nigeria. April 2008;
                . Finnish immigration service, human trafficking of Nigerian
                  women to Europe 24/03/2015;
                . UNODC The Role of Corruption  in  Trafficking  in  Persons
                  2011;


             provide some support for  Mr  Desmond's  contention  that  the
             level  of  corruption  within  the  law  enforcement  agencies
             enabled OCGs and OCNs in Nigeria to operate with  a  level  of
             impunity. Freedom House, Freedom in the World  2016:  Nigeria,
             27/01/2016 refers to bribe taking within the police force, but
             also  refers  to  the   inspector   general   of   police   in
             collaboration with an NGO launching a  social  media  platform
             that allowed citizens to report police abuse and bribe taking.




     47. The Freedom House Report refers to Organised  Crime  Groups  being
         heavily  involved  in  human  trafficking.  The  OSCE/ODIHR   2011
         research regarding  the national laws, policies and  practices  of
         Nigeria relating to the return of  trafficked/  exploited  persons
         Report compiled after a fact-finding mission to Nigeria between 19
         and 26 February 2011 does not specifically refer  to  a  level  of
         corruption affecting criminal reprisal, but reflects  what appears
         to be a view  taken  in  the  documents  referred  to  above  that
         criminal  groups  in  Nigeria  "operate  through  structures   and
         connections which are entirely unique and therefore have  none  of
         the weakness of other organized criminal networks; thereby  making
         them almost impossible to eliminate completely".


     48. On the basis of the  documentation  before  us  and  Mr  Desmond's
         evidence  which  was  not,  on  this  issue,  challenged  by   the
         respondent, we accept that there is a level of  corruption  within
         the law enforcement agencies and  this  does  inevitably  have  an
         impact on  the  issue  of  trafficking.   We  were  not  taken  to
         documentation that specifically linked high levels  of  corruption
         to trafficking, but  nevertheless  it  is  plain  that  widespread
         corruption through the various law-enforcement agencies would have
         an impact not only in terms of the existence of  trafficking,  but
         also the control that traffickers are able  to  exert  over  their
         victims.










                                   Annex 4



                        Trafficking and investigation


      1. Mr Desmond drew on his lengthy experience in his evidence on  what
         he perceived to be indicators of trafficking that would suggest  a
         need to make further enquiries. He listed these as including:

    . The giving of gifts such  as  a  mobile  phone  that  enables  contact
      between the victim and family or through a third person;

    . Travel to the UK as a 'family group'  where  a  member  of  the  group
      travels frequently and/or one of the members fails to comply with visa
      conditions;

    . Previous entries by a 'family member' with other children;

    . Entry as an unaccompanied asylum seeker;

    . Disappearance from local authority care;

    . Lack of any association with the person with whom the  victim  travels
      other than as an escort;

    . Escort re-entering with children;

    . Repeat journeys by an escort;

    . Lack of evidence of relationship between the escort and the person  to
      whom the victim is delivered.

      2. Ms Cronin submitted that the obligations of the UK  under  Article
         4[36] to investigate trafficking cases was an essential element of
         an holistic approach.  The approach of the Secretary of State was,
         she submitted, to focus on the  criminal  networks  and  that  the
         Upper Tribunal should deliberate on whether the "group" have  some
         retained interest in the trafficking victim and their  "reach"  or
         "lack of reach".  It was submitted by her that  the  assertion  by
         the Secretary of State as to whether those who had  been  involved
         in the trafficking of a victim retained interest  in  her  on  her
         return to  Nigeria  required  more  than  simple  assertion.   She
         submitted that a victim's account of her  entry  to  the  UK,  the
         addresses  at  which  she  stayed  and  the  nature  of  the  work
         undertaken by her either in Nigeria or in the UK could all have an
         impact on the assessment of the nature  of  the  criminality  that
         brought her to the UK.  Some  of  this  information  was,  it  was
         submitted, readily available to the Secretary  of  State  through,
         for  example,  examination   of   airline   passenger   manifests,
         consideration of entry clearance visa application forms, enquiries
         as to whether and where the individuals who bring  the  victim  to
         the UK lived/worked/ travelled to or from. None of  this  type  of
         information  is  available  to  the  victim  but  could,  it   was
         submitted, be  established  by  the  Secretary  of  State  without
         disclosure   of   private   or   confidential   information.   The
         establishment of that information  could,  it  was  submitted,  be
         critical in terms of identifying the risks to the victim on return
         to her country of origin in the context not only of sufficiency of
         protection but also internal relocation.


      3. Ms Cronin asserted that investigations such as these were not only
         open to the Secretary of State but that investigation was required
         to enable the  Secretary  of  State  to  comply  with  the  U.K.'s
         obligations under the international  trafficking  instruments.  We
         are aware that the extent to which documentation can  be  properly
         considered to be of a nature where verification by  the  Secretary
         of State should be undertaken has been  considered  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal  in  MJ  (Singh  v  Belgium:  Tanveer  Ahmed  unaffected)
         Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00253 (IAC) the head note of which reads:


             The conclusions of the European Court of Human Rights in Singh
             v Belgium (Application No.  33210/2011)  neither  justify  nor
             require any departure from the guidance  set  out  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 (starred).  The  Tribunal  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed envisaged the existence of particular cases where it may
             be appropriate for enquiries to be made. On  its  facts  Singh
             can properly be regarded as such a particular case.
             The documentation in that case was clearly of a  nature  where
             verification would be easy, and the documentation came from an
             unimpeachable source.
      4. In trafficking cases it is not so much documentation  provided  by
         the victim that is at question (although clearly the production of
         a passport that is in some way fraudulent is open to investigation
         by  the  state)  but  rather  the  extent  and   nature   of   any
         investigation to be undertaken by the Secretary of State.


      5. Article 9 of the Directive states:


             1. Member States  shall  ensure  that  investigation  into  or
             prosecution of offences referred to in Articles 2 and 3 is not
             dependent on reporting or accusation  by  a  victim  and  that
             criminal proceedings may  continue  even  if  the  victim  has
             withdrawn his or her statement.
             2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to  enable,
             where the nature of the act calls for it, the  prosecution  of
             an offence referred to in Articles 2 and 3  for  a  sufficient
             period of time  after  the  victim  has  reached  the  age  of
             majority.
             3. Member States shall take the necessary measures  to  ensure
             that persons, units or services responsible for  investigating
             or prosecuting the offences referred to in Articles  2  and  3
             are trained accordingly.
             4. Member States shall take the necessary measures  to  ensure
             that effective investigative tools, such as  those  which  are
             used in organised crime  or  other  serious  crime  cases  are
             available  to  persons,  units  or  services  responsible  for
             investigating or  prosecuting  the  offences  referred  to  in
             Articles 2 and 3.

      6. The OSCE Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings 24 July
         2003 aims to provide participating  states  with  a  comprehensive
         toolkit to help them  implement  their  commitments  to  combating
         trafficking in human beings. In section III -  investigation,  law
         enforcement and prosecution - the action plan refers to


                  "encouraging investigators and prosecutors  to  carry  out
                  investigations and prosecutions without relying solely and
                  exclusively on witness  testimony.  Exploring  alternative
                  investigative strategies to preclude the need for  victims
                  to be required to testify in court."

     7. The IOM 2015 report identifies five key priorities and for each  of
        them a series of initiatives to  be  put  in  place  by  EU  Member
        States.  This  includes  increased   prosecution   of   traffickers
        resulting from enhanced cooperation of law  enforcement  bodies  at
        borders and beyond.


      8.  Although the references in these documents to  investigation  are
         linked  to  prosecution  for  criminal  offences,   there   is   a
         recognition  within  the  anti-trafficking  instruments   to   the
         particular vulnerability and nature of the serious harm done to  a
         victim of trafficking together with the  transnational  nature  of
         trafficking such that States are required to investigate to enable
         the perpetrators to be brought to justice. By its very nature such
         investigation will be initiated by the victim's disclosure of what
         has happened to her, but the complexity of the organisational  and
         transnational  nature  of  trafficking  will  require   specialist
         investigation by the State. This is recognised and referred to  in
         the OSCE Action Plan Annex which calls on participating states  to
         cooperate with international  law  enforcement  bodies.  The  OSCE
         Action plan calls upon participating States to  establish  special
         anti-trafficking units, to  provide  resources  and  training  for
         developing   intelligence-led   policing    and    to    encourage
         investigators and prosecutors  to  carry  out  investigations  and
         prosecutions without relying solely  and  exclusively  on  witness
         testimony.


      9.  Given the particular nature of trafficking in  human  beings  and
         taking account of  these  matters  we  accept,  and  there  is  no
         evidence that the Secretary of State does not,  that  there  is  a
         duty on the Secretary  of  State  to  investigate  allegations  of
         trafficking with a view to the prosecution  of  the  perpetrators.
         That investigation may well include examination  of  matters  that
         are out with the knowledge of the victim, although the  initiation
         of the investigation has come from the victim herself.


     10.  In so far as an individual  appellant  is  concerned  however  we
         cannot be satisfied that it is the role of the Upper  Tribunal  to
         require particular investigations to  take  place.  Assessment  of
         risk does of course require analysis  of  all  relevant  material;
         that is a matter that we are sure all parties will bear in mind in
         presenting an appeal.






































                                   ANNEX 5


      1. Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000, Div. A of Pub. L. No.
         106-386,  108, as amended states:


             (1) The government of the country should prohibit severe forms
             of trafficking in persons and punish acts of such trafficking.


             (2) For the knowing commission of any act of  sex  trafficking
             involving force, fraud, coercion, or in which  the  victim  of
             sex trafficking is a  child  incapable  of  giving  meaningful
             consent, or of trafficking which includes rape  or  kidnapping
             or which causes a death, the government of the country  should
             prescribe punishment commensurate with that for grave  crimes,
             such as forcible sexual assault.


             (3) For the knowing commission of any act of a severe form  of
             trafficking in persons, the government of the  country  should
             prescribe punishment that is sufficiently stringent  to  deter
             and  that  adequately  reflects  the  heinous  nature  of  the
             offense.


             (4) The government of the  country  should  make  serious  and
             sustained efforts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking  in
             persons.


         Indicia of "Serious and Sustained Efforts"


             (1)  Whether  the  government  of   the   country   vigorously
             investigates  and  prosecutes  acts   of   severe   forms   of
             trafficking in persons, and  convicts  and  sentences  persons
             responsible for such acts, that take place  wholly  or  partly
             within  the  territory   of   the   country,   including,   as
             appropriate, requiring incarceration of individuals  convicted
             of  such  acts.  For  purposes  of  the  preceding   sentence,
             suspended or significantly reduced sentences  for  convictions
             of principal actors in cases of severe forms of trafficking in
             persons shall be considered, on a case-by-case basis,  whether
             to be considered as an  indicator  of  serious  and  sustained
             efforts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking  in  persons.
             After reasonable requests from the  Department  of  State  for
             data regarding investigations, prosecutions, convictions,  and
             sentences, a government which  does  not  provide  such  data,
             consistent with the capacity of such government to obtain such
             data, shall be presumed not to have  vigorously  investigated,
             prosecuted, convicted, or  sentenced  such  acts.  During  the
             periods prior to the annual report submitted on June 1,  2004,
             and  on  June  1,  2005,  and  the  periods  afterwards  until
             September 30 of each such year, the  Secretary  of  State  may
             disregard the presumption contained in the preceding  sentence
             if the government has provided some data to the Department  of
             State regarding such acts and  the  Secretary  has  determined
             that the government is making a good faith effort  to  collect
             such data.


             (2) Whether the government of the country protects victims  of
             severe forms of trafficking in persons  and  encourages  their
             assistance  in  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of  such
             trafficking, including provisions for  legal  alternatives  to
             their  removal  to  countries  in  which   they   would   face
             retribution or hardship, and  ensures  that  victims  are  not
             inappropriately incarcerated, fined,  or  otherwise  penalized
             solely  for  unlawful  acts  as  a  direct  result  of   being
             trafficked, including by providing training to law enforcement
             and immigration officials  regarding  the  identification  and
             treatment of trafficking victims using approaches  that  focus
             on the needs of the victims.


             (3) Whether the government of the country has adopted measures
             to prevent severe forms of trafficking  in  persons,  such  as
             measures to inform and educate the public, including potential
             victims, about the causes and consequences of severe forms  of
             trafficking in persons, measures to establish the identity  of
             local populations, including birth registration,  citizenship,
             and nationality, measures to ensure that its nationals who are
             deployed abroad as part  of  a  diplomatic,  peacekeeping,  or
             other similar mission do not engage in  or  facilitate  severe
             forms of trafficking in persons or  exploit  victims  of  such
             trafficking, a transparent system for remediating or punishing
             such public officials as a deterrent, measures to prevent  the
             use  of  forced  labor  or  child  labor   in   violation   of
             international standards, effective bilateral, multilateral, or
             regional information sharing and cooperation arrangements with
             other countries, and effective  policies  or  laws  regulating
             foreign  labor  recruiters  and  holding  them   civilly   and
             criminally liable for fraudulent recruiting.


             (4) Whether the government  of  the  country  cooperates  with
             other governments in  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of
             severe forms of trafficking in persons and  has  entered  into
             bilateral,   multilateral,   or   regional   law   enforcement
             cooperation   and   coordination   arrangements   with   other
             countries.


             (5) Whether the government of the country  extradites  persons
             charged with acts of severe forms of trafficking in persons on
             substantially the same terms and  to  substantially  the  same
             extent as persons charged with other serious  crimes  (or,  to
             the extent such extradition would  be  inconsistent  with  the
             laws of such country or with international agreements to which
             the country is a party, whether the government is  taking  all
             appropriate measures  to  modify  or  replace  such  laws  and
             treaties so as to permit such extradition).


             (6) Whether the government of the country monitors immigration
             and emigration  patterns  for  evidence  of  severe  forms  of
             trafficking in persons and whether law enforcement agencies of
             the country respond to any such evidence in a manner  that  is
             consistent with the vigorous investigation and prosecution  of
             acts of such trafficking, as well as with  the  protection  of
             human rights of victims  and  the  internationally  recognized
             human right to leave any country, including one's own, and  to
             return to one's own country.


             (7)  Whether  the  government  of   the   country   vigorously
             investigates,  prosecutes,  convicts,  and  sentences   public
             officials, including diplomats and soldiers,  who  participate
             in or facilitate  severe  forms  of  trafficking  in  persons,
             including nationals of the country who are deployed abroad  as
             part of a diplomatic, peacekeeping, or other  similar  mission
             who engage in or facilitate severe  forms  of  trafficking  in
             persons or exploit victims of such trafficking, and takes  all
             appropriate  measures  against  officials  who  condone   such
             trafficking. A government's failure to  appropriately  address
             public allegations against such public  officials,  especially
             once such officials have returned  to  their  home  countries,
             shall be  considered  inaction  under  these  criteria.  After
             reasonable requests from the  Department  of  State  for  data
             regarding such investigations, prosecutions, convictions,  and
             sentences, a government  which  does  not  provide  such  data
             consistent with its resources shall be presumed  not  to  have
             vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted,  or  sentenced
             such acts. During the  periods  prior  to  the  annual  report
             submitted on June 1, 2004, and June 1, 2005, and  the  periods
             afterwards until September 30 of each such year, the Secretary
             of State  may  disregard  the  presumption  contained  in  the
             preceding sentence if the government has provided some data to
             the Department of State regarding such acts and the  Secretary
             has determined that the government  is  making  a  good  faith
             effort to collect such data.


             (8) Whether the percentage  of  victims  of  severe  forms  of
             trafficking in the  country  that  are  non-citizens  of  such
             countries is insignificant.


             (9)  Whether  the  government  has  entered  into   effective,
             transparent   partnerships,   cooperative   arrangements,   or
             agreements that  have  resulted  in  concrete  and  measurable
             outcomes with


                 (A) domestic civil society  organizations,  private  sector
                 entities, or international  nongovernmental  organizations,
                 or  into   multilateral   or   regional   arrangements   or
                 agreements, to assist the government's efforts  to  prevent
                 trafficking, protect victims, and punish traffickers; or


                 (B) the United States toward agreed goals and objectives in
                 the collective fight against trafficking.


             (10) Whether the government of the  country,  consistent  with
             the capacity of such government, systematically  monitors  its
             efforts to satisfy the criteria described  in  paragraphs  (1)
             through (8) and makes available publicly a periodic assessment
             of such efforts.


             (11)  Whether  the  government   of   the   country   achieves
             appreciable  progress   in   eliminating   severe   forms   of
             trafficking when compared to the assessment  in  the  previous
             year.


             (12) Whether the government of the country  has  made  serious
             and sustained efforts to reduce the demand for


             (A) commercial sex acts; and


             (B) participation in international sex tourism by nationals of
             the country.


      2. The Tiers

                  Tier 1
                  Countries whose governments  fully  meet  the  Trafficking
                  Victims Protection Act's (TVPA) minimum standards.


                  Tier 2
                  Countries whose governments do not fully meet  the  TVPA's
                  minimum standards, but are making significant  efforts  to
                  meet those standards.
                  Tier 2 Watch List
                  Countries whose governments do not fully meet  the  TVPA's
                  minimum standards, but are making significant  efforts  to
                  meet those standards AND:
                  a) The absolute number  of  victims  of  severe  forms  of
                  trafficking  is  very  significant  or  is   significantly
                  increasing;
                  b) There is a failure to provide  evidence  of  increasing
                  efforts to combat severe forms of trafficking  in  persons
                  from    the    previous    year,    including    increased
                  investigations,   prosecutions,   and    convictions    of
                  trafficking crimes, increased assistance to  victims,  and
                  decreasing evidence  of  complicity  in  severe  forms  of
                  trafficking by government officials; or
                  c) The determination that a country is making  significant
                  efforts  to  meet  the  minimum  standards  was  based  on
                  commitments by the country to take additional future steps
                  over the next year.


                  Tier 3
                  Countries whose governments do not fully meet the  minimum
                  standards and are not making significant efforts to do so.


      3. For the years 2009, 2010 and 2011, Nigeria was a Tier  1  country.
         Since then it has been Tier  2.   There  are  differences  in  the
         overview,  prosecution,   protection   and   prevention   analysis
         described in the TIP reports  produced  for  each  year.  A  brief
         comparison of some elements of the Reports for the last year  that
         Nigeria was a Tier 1 country (2011) and the current Report  (2016)
         when it is Tier 2 illustrates  the  approach  of  the  Reports  in
         making the assessment. In essence the Reports identify the meeting
         by Nigeria of aspiration and the  continuing  commitment  to  meet
         those aspirations.





       |2011 Tier 1                        |2016 Tier 2                        |
|...fully complies with the minimum |...does not fully meet the minimum |
|standards for the elimination of   |standards for the elimination of   |
|trafficking                        |trafficking, however it is making  |
|                                   |significant efforts to do so.      |
|Sustained a modest number of       |Sustained strong anti-trafficking  |
|trafficking prosecutions           |law enforcement efforts            |
|Although government claimed to have|NAPTIP received a larger operating |
|increased the budget to NAPTIP,    |budget,                            |
|actual disbursements not disclosed.|                                   |
|Longstanding plans to relocate     |NAPTIP operated 9 shelters         |
|flagship shelter for victims were  |specifically for trafficking       |
|not fulfilled. Other victim's      |victims with a total capacity of   |
|shelters operated below full       |313 victims. Short-term care       |
|capacity. Observers reported       |offered generally limiting stay to |
|shelters at times severely lacked  |6 weeks although victims allowed to|
|resources. Victims allowed to stay |extend stay under special          |
|up to six weeks save in extenuating|circumstances. Collaboration with  |
|circumstances; after this referred |two other shelters operated by     |
|to a network of NGOs               |Ministry of Women's Affairs and    |
|                                   |NGOs.                              |
|Despite the documented magnitude of|Identified and provided services to|
|the problem of Nigerian trafficking|a large number of victims and      |
|victims in countries around the    |continued extensive awareness      |
|world, government inconsistently   |campaigns throughout the country.  |
|employed measures to provide       |                                   |
|services to repatriated victims.   |                                   |
|In September 2010 NAPTIP officials |In 2015 the Government passed      |
|travelled to Mali where they       |amending legislation which         |
|investigated reports of 20,000 to  |increased the penalties for        |
|40,000 women being held in forced  |trafficking offenders. Instigated  |
|prostitution. Officials took no    |507 investigations, completed at   |
|apparent action to rescue victims  |least 32 prosecutions and secured  |
|or arrest traffickers. Of concern  |24 convictions. 148 prosecutions   |
|that NAPTIP regular travels abroad |remained pending at the end of the |
|did not yield discernible results  |reporting period.                  |
|(the 2012 Report (when Nigeria was |                                   |
|downgraded to Tier 2) refers to    |                                   |
|subsequent arrest and rescue).     |                                   |
|Government did not initiate any    |The Government did not report any  |
|investigations, pursue prosecutions|investigations, prosecutions or    |
|or obtain convictions of Government|convictions, save one, of          |
|officials for involvement in       |government officials complicit in  |
|trafficking although corruption was|trafficking offenses. Corruption at|
|known to have occurred in previous |all levels of the Government       |
|years.                             |remained a pervasive problem.      |
|The government continued to lack a |The government maintained string   |
|formal system for identifying      |efforts to protect trafficking     |
|victims among vulnerable           |victims and identified 943         |
|populations...Some police          |trafficking victims including 429  |
|reportedly extorted women in       |victims of sex trafficking and 514 |
|prostitution for money.            |victims of labour trafficking      |
|                                   |compared with 914 victims          |
|                                   |identified in the previous year.   |
|Sustained its efforts to prevent   |Sustained efforts to prevent human |
|human trafficking through campaigns|trafficking. NAPTIP continued to   |
|to raise awareness and educate the |conduct extensive national and     |
|public about the dangers of        |local programming, advocacy visits |
|trafficking.                       |to primary and secondary schools,  |
|                                   |educated transportation carriers.  |

NIGERIA: Tier 2

         Nigeria is a source, transit, and destination country for women and
         children subjected to forced labor and  sex  trafficking.  Nigerian
         trafficking victims are recruited  from  rural  and,  to  a  lesser
         extent, urban areas: women and girls for domestic servitude and sex
         trafficking and boys for forced labor in street  vending,  domestic
         service,   mining,   stone    quarrying,    agriculture,    textile
         manufacturing, and begging. Young boys in Koranic schools, commonly
         known as "Almajiri children,"  are  subjected  to  forced  begging.
         Nigerian women and children are taken from Nigeria  to  other  West
         and Central African countries, as well as to  South  Africa,  where
         they are exploited for the same purposes. Nigerian women and  girls
         are subjected to sex trafficking throughout Europe. Nigerian  women
         and children are also recruited and transported to destinations  in
         North Africa, the Middle East, and Central  Asia,  where  they  are
         held captive in the commercial sex industry or forced labor.  Women
         from other countries in West Africa transit Nigeria to destinations
         in Europe and the Middle East, where they are subjected  to  forced
         prostitution.  Children  from  other  West  African  countries  are
         subjected to forced labor in Nigeria, including in granite and gold
         mines. Nigeria is a transit point for children from other countries
         in West Africa, who are then subjected to forced labor in  Cameroon
         and Gabon. Various  NGOs  continued  to  report  that  children  in
         internally displaced persons (IDP) camps in northeast Nigeria  were
         victims of labor and sex trafficking.


         During the reporting  period,  Boko  Haram  continued  to  forcibly
         recruit and use child soldiers as young as 12 years old and  abduct
         women and girls in the northern region of Nigeria, some of whom  it
         subjected to domestic servitude,  forced  labor,  and  sex  slavery
         through forced marriages to its militants. NGOs  and  international
         observers also reported civilian vigilante groups, often identified
         as the Civilian Joint Taskforce (CJTF), recruited  and  used  child
         soldiers, sometimes by force. Although  the  government  prohibited
         the recruitment and use  of  child  soldiers,  government  security
         forces conducted on-the-ground coordination with  CJTF  during  the
         reporting period. The Borno State government continued  to  provide
         financial and in-kind resources to some members of CJTF, which  was
         also at times aligned with  the  Nigerian  military  in  operations
         against Boko Haram.


         The Government of Nigeria does not fully meet the minimum standards
         for  the  elimination  of  trafficking;  however,  it   is   making
         significant efforts to do so.  During  the  reporting  period,  the
         government  sustained  strong  anti-trafficking   law   enforcement
         efforts by  investigating,  prosecuting,  and  convicting  numerous
         traffickers; by collaborating with 11  countries  on  international
         investigations;  and  by  providing  extensive  specialized   anti-
         trafficking  training  to   officials   from   various   government
         ministries and agencies. The National Agency for the Prohibition of
         Trafficking in Persons and Other Related Matters (NAPTIP)  received
         a larger operating budget, identified and provided  services  to  a
         large  number  of  victims,  and  continued   extensive   awareness
         campaigns throughout the country. During the reporting period,  the
         Borno State government provided financial and in-kind resources  to
         some members of CJTF;  CJTF  recruited  and  used  child  soldiers.
         Additionally, despite a 2015 amendment that removed judges' ability
         to sentence traffickers to fines in lieu of prison  time,  Nigerian
         courts penalized two traffickers with fines alone and gave  another
         three the option to pay a fine in lieu of serving time in prison.


         RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NIGERIA:


         Cease  provision  of  financial  and  in-kind  support  to   groups
         recruiting  and  using  children;  investigate  and  prosecute  all
         individuals suspected of recruiting and using  child  soldiers  and
         allegedly perpetrating other trafficking abuses against  women  and
         children; continue to vigorously pursue trafficking investigations,
         prosecutions, and adequate  sentences  for  convicted  traffickers;
         take proactive measures to  investigate  and  prosecute  government
         officials   suspected   of   trafficking-related   corruption   and
         complicity in trafficking offenses; ensure the activities of NAPTIP
         receive   sufficient   funding,   particularly   for    prosecuting
         traffickers and providing  adequate  care  for  victims;  implement
         programs for the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration  of
         former child combatants that take into account the  specific  needs
         of child ex-combatants; continue to  provide  regular  training  to
         police and immigration officials to  identify  trafficking  victims
         among vulnerable populations, such as  women  in  prostitution  and
         young females traveling with non-family  members;  fully  integrate
         anti-trafficking responsibilities into the  work  of  the  Nigerian
         police force and the Ministry of Labor; and  continue  to  increase
         the  capacity  of  Nigerian  embassies  to  identify  and   provide
         assistance  to  victims  abroad,  including  through  regular   and
         specialized training for diplomatic and consular personnel.


         PROSECUTION


         The government maintained strong anti-trafficking  law  enforcement
         efforts. In 2015, the government  passed  amendments  to  the  2003
         Trafficking in Persons  Law  Enforcement  and  Administration  Act,
         which increased the penalties for trafficking  offenders.  The  law
         prohibits all forms of trafficking and prescribes a minimum penalty
         of five years' imprisonment and a minimum fine of one million naira
         ($5,470) for  sex  and  labor  trafficking  offenses;  the  minimum
         penalty for sex trafficking increases to seven years'  imprisonment
         if the case involves a  child.  These  penalties  are  sufficiently
         stringent and commensurate with other serious crimes, such as rape.


         NAPTIP conducted 507 trafficking investigations, completed at least
         32 prosecutions, and secured 24 convictions  during  the  reporting
         period, compared with 509 investigations, 56 prosecutions,  and  30
         convictions in the  previous  reporting  period.  The  decrease  in
         convictions is likely a result of the seconding of many  judges  to
         electoral tribunals during the reporting period. An additional  148
         prosecutions remained pending at the end of the  reporting  period.
         All prosecutions  occurred  under  the  anti-trafficking  law,  and
         prison sentences upon conviction ranged from three  months'  to  14
         years'  imprisonment.  Of  the  24  convictions,  16  resulted   in
         imprisonment without the option of paying a fine. However,  despite
         a  2015  amendment  that  removed  judges'  ability   to   sentence
         traffickers to fines  in  lieu  of  prison  time,  Nigerian  courts
         penalized five traffickers with only  fines.  The  government  also
         collaborated with law enforcement agencies  from  Belgium,  Burkina
         Faso, Finland, France, Germany, Mali, Norway, Sweden,  Taiwan,  the
         United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States  on  43   investigations
         involving Nigerian  nationals  during  the  reporting  period.  The
         government commenced prosecution of a Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs
         official who allegedly used his or her  position  to  facilitate  a
         trafficking crime abroad; the prosecution remained ongoing  at  the
         close of the reporting period. The government did  not  report  any
         other investigations, prosecutions, or  convictions  of  government
         officials complicit in trafficking offenses; however, corruption at
         all levels of the government remained a pervasive problem.


         The  government  conducted  extensive   training   throughout   the
         reporting  period.  NAPTIP,  in  collaboration  with  international
         partners,  provided  specialized  training  to  approximately   228
         government employees, including judges, prosecutors, and  officials
         from  NAPTIP,  the  Nigerian  police  force,   and   the   Nigerian
         Immigration Service. These programs offered specialized training on
         victim identification, investigation and prosecution of trafficking
         cases, counseling,  intelligence  collection,  and  monitoring  and
         evaluation. NAPTIP officials assisted 18 countries with their anti-
         trafficking efforts through training  courses,  joint  intelligence
         sharing, and mutual legal assistance.


         PROTECTION


         The government maintained strong  efforts  to  protect  trafficking
         victims.  The  government  identified  943   trafficking   victims,
         including  429  victims  of  sex  trafficking  and  514  of   labor
         trafficking, compared with 914 victims identified in  the  previous
         reporting period. NAPTIP provided initial screening and  assistance
         for all victims it identified and referred them  to  government-run
         care facilities for  further  medical  care,  vocational  training,
         education,  and  shelter.  The  government   has   formal   written
         procedures  to  guide  law  enforcement,  immigration,  and  social
         services  personnel  in  proactive  identification  of  trafficking
         victims  among  high-risk  populations.  NAPTIP  provided   police,
         immigration,  and  social  services  personnel   with   specialized
         training on how to identify trafficking victims and direct them  to
         NAPTIP. Additionally, the government's national referral  mechanism
         provides  formal  guidelines  for  law   enforcement,   immigration
         officials,  and  service  providers  to  improve   protection   and
         assistance to trafficking victims, both within Nigeria and abroad.


         In 2015, the government allocated approximately 2.5  billion  naira
         ($13 million) to NAPTIP, which spent roughly 581 million naira  ($3
         million) on victim protection and assistance during  the  reporting
         period. NAPTIP operated nine shelters specifically for  trafficking
         victims, with a  total  capacity  of  313  victims.  Through  these
         shelters,  NAPTIP  provided   access   to   legal,   medical,   and
         psychological services, as well as vocational training,  trade  and
         financial empowerment, and business management skills. Victims  who
         required  additional  medical  and  psychological  treatment   were
         provided  services  by  hospitals  and  clinics  through   existing
         agreements with NAPTIP. NAPTIP shelters  offered  short-term  care,
         generally limiting victims' stays to six  weeks,  although  victims
         were allowed to extend their stays under special circumstances.  If
         victims needed  longer-term  care,  NAPTIP  collaborated  with  two
         shelters operated by the Ministry of Women's  Affairs  and  NGO-run
         shelters. Victims in NAPTIP shelters  were  not  allowed  to  leave
         unless accompanied by a chaperone. NAPTIP provided funding, in-kind
         donations, and  services  to  NGOs  and  other  organizations  that
         afforded protective services to trafficking victims.


         Per provisions of the anti-trafficking  law,  Nigerian  authorities
         ensured identified  trafficking  victims  were  not  penalized  for
         unlawful  acts  committed  as  a  result  of  being  subjected   to
         trafficking. However, in some instances, NAPTIP authorities  deemed
         adults in prostitution, who  claimed  to  be  working  voluntarily,
         victims of trafficking and  detained  them  in  shelter  facilities
         against their will. Officials encouraged victims to assist  in  the
         investigation and prosecution  of  trafficking  cases,  and  NAPTIP
         reported 33 victims served as witnesses  or  gave  evidence  during
         trial in the reporting period. Trafficking victims were  guaranteed
         temporary residence visas during any criminal, civil or other legal
         action. All  victims  were  eligible  to  receive  funds  from  the
         victims'  trust  fund,  which  was   financed   primarily   through
         confiscated assets of convicted traffickers. During  the  reporting
         period, the government disbursed 5.4 million naira ($32,700)  among
         25 victims for various purposes, including vocational training  and
         school tuition, although not necessarily in equal amounts.


         PREVENTION


         The government sustained  efforts  to  prevent  human  trafficking.
         NAPTIP  continued  to  conduct   extensive   national   and   local
         programming through radio and print media in all regions  to  raise
         awareness about trafficking,  including  warning  about  fraudulent
         recruitment for jobs  abroad.  NAPTIP  also  carried  out  advocacy
         visits to five primary and secondary schools in six  states  deemed
         to have a particularly high trafficking incidence, sensitizing over
         10,000 students; NAPTIP also educated  transportation  carriers  in
         these six states on their responsibility to prevent trafficking and
         smuggling. The inter-ministerial committee on  trafficking  met  15
         times during the  reporting  period,  continued  to  implement  the
         national action plan, and released its  first  annual  report.  The
         Ministry of Labor  and  Productivity  continued  to  implement  the
         national policy and action plan on labor migration and  manage  the
         licensing requirement for all private labor  recruitment  agencies.
         The government did not make any discernible efforts to decrease the
         demand for commercial sex acts. The  Borno  State  government  also
         warned  that  the  recruitment  and  use  of  child  soldiers   was
         prohibited; however, state government support for some  members  of
         the  CJTF  continued.  The  government  provided   anti-trafficking
         training for its  diplomatic  personnel  and,  with  foreign  donor
         support, to Nigerian troops prior to  their  deployment  abroad  on
         international peacekeeping missions.









                                 APPENDIX A

Error of law decision


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 August 2015                            |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACOBS

                                   Between

                                    HRED
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thompson
                    & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Davda who, in a decision  promulgated  on  10  June  2015,
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
         of 29 October 2014 to refuse her asylum claim.


      2. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  brought  under  section
         83(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  the
         appellant had been granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
         for a period in excess of a year (366 days).

      3. In the First-tier Tribunal the appeal was argued,  inter  alia,  on
         the basis of Article 8 ECHR. The Judge, at the end of her decision,
         considered the Appellant's Article 8 claim and  dismissed  it.  The
         Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal took  issue  with,  amongst
         other things, the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the Article 8
         claim. At the hearing before us on 12 August 2015 we indicated  our
         concern that, pursuant to section 83(2), the appeal to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal could only have been brought on  asylum  grounds  and
         that the Appellant was not entitled to rely on  Article  8  in  his
         appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. Given that section 83 of the
         Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  repealed  by
         section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014 as of 20 October  2014,  and
         given that neither party had brought this jurisdictional  issue  to
         our attention prior to the hearing, we allowed both representatives
         to make  further  written  representations  after  the  hearing  in
         respect of the relevance of the withdrawal of  section  83  to  the
         present proceedings.

      4. We are grateful to the prompt response from both Mr  Tufan  and  Mr
         Hoshi. We are satisfied that, as a result of  the  Immigration  Act
         2014 (Commencement No 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions)  Order
         2014 (SI  2014/2771),  section  83  was  still  applicable  to  the
         Appellant  at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision.  We  are
         therefore satisfied that the Appellant was not entitled to rely  on
         Article 8 and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  not  entitled
         to consider Article 8. We find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
         in law by considering Article 8 and the decision is  set  aside  on
         this basis.

Background

      5. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, date of birth 30 June 1989.
         She is unsure when she first entered the  United  Kingdom  but  the
         respondent has obtained a visa match in respect of a  Visitor  Visa
         application made by her, or on her behalf, in Lagos on 17  November
         2006. The Appellant made an asylum claim on 02 January 2013 on  the
         basis that she was a victim of trafficking and would  face  a  real
         risk of persecution in Nigeria if removed as a consequence of being
         trafficked.


      6. The Respondent refused this application on  12  July  2013  and  an
         appeal against  this  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on 11 September  2013.  On  02  December  2013  the  Upper
         Tribunal identified a material error of law in the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was adjourned for rehearing  before
         the  Upper  Tribunal  but,  following  the  submission  of  further
         evidence, the Respondent withdrew her decision in order to give the
         application further consideration. The decision that is the subject
         of this appeal was made on 29 October  2014,  although  the  asylum
         decision itself is dated 28  October  2014  and  records  that  the
         Appellant's claim was determined  on  20  October  2014.  No  issue
         however appears to arise as a result of these discrepancies.

Summary basis of the Appellant's asylum claim

      7. The Appellant was an only child. She  had  an  abusive  father  who
         would beat both her and her mother. When the Appellant was 16 years
         old a woman offered to take her  abroad.  This  woman  brought  the
         Appellant food and clothes and a mobile phone for her father. After
         leaving her family the Appellant initially stayed  in  a  house  in
         Lagos for two or three months with two ladies she  referred  to  as
         'aunties' and three other children. The Appellant  worked  in  this
         house and when she did something wrong the women  would  shout  and
         curse her. She did not know how she obtained a passport  but  could
         remember a man taking her photograph at the house.  She  eventually
         entered the United Kingdom, and was taken to and left at  a  family
         residence. Although initially treated well after several weeks  her
         treatment became more severe. She was required to work and was  not
         allowed to leave the house or  use  the  telephone.  Her  food  was
         restricted and she was not allowed to use the  washing  machine  to
         wash her clothes. She had to sleep on the floor of the living  room
         and, when hit by one of the children in the  family,  their  mother
         did nothing. One night men came to the  house  and  the  manner  in
         which they looked at her made the Appellant afraid. That night  her
         employer (the  man  who  lived  in  the  property)  telephoned  the
         Appellant's father and informed him  that  the  Appellant  was  not
         behaving well. The Appellant's  father  shouted  at  her  over  the
         phone. The men came another time and one of them put his arm around
         the Appellant. She pushed him away and left the  room.  That  night
         the Appellant's employer warned her that she would be  returned  to
         Nigeria and put  into  prison.  The  Appellant  considered  killing
         herself but instead decided to  run  away.  By  the  time  she  did
         eventually run away she had lived in the  house  for  approximately
         four to six months.


      8.   The Appellant thereafter led a transient and unsettled life.  She
         was accommodated by several men in exchange for sex. In early  2008
         she became involved with the Jehovah's Witnesses church and a  lady
         called Pauline tried to help her on several occasions. In 2010  the
         Appellant received a phone call from her father informed her of her
         mother's death. Angry, the Appellant smashed her mobile  phone.  In
         2012  the  Appellant  was  introduced  to  the  Poppy  Project.   A
         psychiatric report diagnosed her as  suffering  from  complex  Post
         Traumatic Stress Disorder and an Emotionally  Unstable  Personality
         Disorder. She had been self-harming since the age of 17.

The Reasons For Refusal Letter

      9. In a detailed decision the Respondent  considered  the  Applicant's
         factual account of being trafficked to the United Kingdom. Although
         the Respondent highlighted several concerns with  some  aspects  of
         the Appellant's account, she was satisfied that these concerns were
         adequately allayed by other aspects of  the  Appellant's  evidence,
         notably the report by the Consultant Psychiatrist. In a summary  of
         her conclusions (paragraph 38 of the Reasons  For  Refusal  Letter)
         the Respondent accept that the Appellant was visited by a woman  in
         Nigeria who offered to take her abroad, that she stayed  with  this
         woman in Lagos for a number of months and undertook  domestic  work
         for her, and that the woman  then  brought  the  Appellant  to  the
         United Kingdom and handed her to  a  family.  The  Respondent  also
         accepted that the Appellant undertook domestic work for this family
         and, having then escaped, that she lived with various men  and  had
         sex with them in exchange for food and accommodation.


     10. The Respondent then considered  whether  the  Nigerian  authorities
         could provide  the  Appellant  with  a  sufficiency  of  protection
         against those who trafficked her to  the  United  Kingdom  and  who
         exploited her labour here. In light of the Appellant's account  the
         Respondent  was  not  satisfied  she  had  been  trafficked  by  an
         organised gang, as opposed to individuals, or  that  she  had  been
         expected to earn a certain amount  of  money  for  the  people  who
         brought her to the United Kingdom. With reference to the  authority
         of PO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 132 and to extracts from the
         United States Trafficking in Person Report 2014, the Respondent was
         not satisfied the Appellant would be at real risk of persecution if
         returned to her  home  area  in  Nigeria.  The  Respondent  further
         considered that the internal relocation option was available to the
         Appellant.


     11. The Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
         grant of leave to remain to the Appellant followed the issuance  of
         a conclusive Grounds decision by the Competent Authority  that  the
         Appellant had been trafficked as claimed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     12. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard  on  12  May  2015.
         Both  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  were  represented,  the
         Appellant by Mr Hoshi who appeared before us at the  error  of  law
         hearing. The Judge's determination, which accords with  the  record
         of proceedings maintained by Mr Hoshi, indicated that the Appellant
         relied on her two statements and was not cross-examination-examined
         (paragraph 7). The determination records the  submissions  of  both
         representatives. In her  submissions  the  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer accepted that the Appellant was trafficked but argued, with
         reliance on PO, that she would be sufficiently protected  as  there
         was no evidence of any gang involvement  in  her  trafficking.  The
         determination does not record the Respondent making any submissions
         undermining the Appellant's credibility. This also accords with the
         Grounds of Appeal settled by Mr Hoshi.


     13. The Judge nevertheless proceeded to find the  Appellant  incredible
         with respect to several aspects of her account, some of  which  had
         already been considered  by  the  Respondent  in  her  Reasons  For
         Refusal Letter. The Judge rejected the factual basis that supported
         the Consultant Psychiatrist's findings and  rejected  the  evidence
         from Ms Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi, a  person  presented  as  a  country
         expert, of likely gang involvement in the  Appellant's  trafficking
         as "... at best only a presumption on the part of the author."  The
         Judge rejected the Appellant' account of  being  trafficked  by  an
         organised gang and found, without engaging with any of the specific
         background documents,  that  the  Appellant  would  be  afforded  a
         sufficiency of protection by the Nigerian  authorities.  The  Judge
         dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     14. The Grounds contend that the Judge was not  entitled  to  make  her
         adverse credibility findings in circumstances where the Appellant's
         factual account was unchallenged. It was further submitted that the
         adverse credibility findings were insufficiently reasoned, that the
         Judge failed to consider or apply the Tribunal's vulnerable witness
         guidance, that she failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's  evidence
         relating to events that occurred when she was a child in  a  child-
         sensitive  manner,  that  her  consideration  of  the   psychiatric
         evidence  and  rejection  of  the  country  expert   evidence   was
         inadequately reasoned and unlawful, that she failed  to  apply  the
         governing country  guidance  authority,  and  that  she  failed  to
         determine  a  material  issue,  namely  the  Appellant's  purported
         suicide risk.


The error of law hearing

     15. At the outset of the hearing we indicated our preliminary view that
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge had, for the  reasons  enunciated  in
         the Grounds of Appeal, committed various errors of law that  render
         the decision unsustainable. In  response  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that
         there were material errors of law in the  determination.  Mr  Tufan
         accepted the factual findings contained in the Reasons For  Refusal
         Letter relating to the  Appellant's  account  and  the  credibility
         conclusions therein. Mr Tufan reminded us that the previous country
         guidance case of PO (Trafficked  Women)  Nigeria  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
         00046 had been removed from the Upper Tribunal's CG list  following
         the Court of Appeal decision in PO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  132,  although  paragraphs
         191-192  remained  as  interim  guidance  pending  further  country
         guidance from the UTIAC. As the  Appellant's  credibility  was  now
         accepted Mr Tufan invited us to consider whether this appeal was an
         appropriate vehicle through which to issue further country Guidance
         in respect of victims of trafficking from Nigeria.


     16.  We  indicated  to  the  parties  that  we   were   satisfied   the
         determination contained a number of  material  errors  of  law  and
         that,  pursuant  to  section  12  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
         Enforcement Act 2007, we would set aside the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal.



Discussion

     17. We are satisfied the Judge made several  serious  errors  vitiating
         the fairness of the hearing and undermining the  sustainability  of
         the decision.

     18. It is clear from the Reasons for Refusal Letter (paragraph 38) that
         the Respondent, despite identifying  several  concerns,  ultimately
         accepted as credible the Appellant's account  of  being  trafficked
         into the United Kingdom and her subsequent exposure  to  employment
         and sexual exploitation. This position should have been  reinforced
         in the mind of the Judge given that there was no  cross-examination
         of the Appellant by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  and  given
         the absence of any submissions made by the Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer undermining the credibility of the Appellant's account.  In
         these circumstances we are satisfied the Judge was not entitled  to
         go behind the Respondent's own factual findings  contained  in  the
         Reasons For Refusal Letter without first giving  an  indication  to
         the parties that she intended to do so.

     19. In HA and TD v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28 the Scottish  Court  of  Session
         indicated, at 8, that, "As an expert body, the Tribunal is entitled
         to reject evidence notwithstanding that the evidence has  not  been
         challenged before it. Fairness may however require it  to  disclose
         its concerns about the evidence so as  to  afford  the  parties  an
         opportunity to address them." We are satisfied that the Judge acted
         unfairly in failing to disclose her  concerns  to  the  Appellant's
         representative in respect of issues the  representative  reasonably
         considered to be uncontentious."



     20. By way of example, the Judge appeared to hold against the Appellant
         the fact that she was able to give a detailed account of  her  life
         with her family prior to being trafficked, yet was unable to recall
         the names of those in the family with whom she lived in the  United
         Kingdom (45).  This  point  had  already  been  considered  by  the
         Respondent in the Reasons For Refusal Letter but was found  not  to
         undermine the Appellant's credibility (paragraphs 30 to 33  of  the
         Reasons For Refusal Letter). The Home Office Presenting Officer did
         not rely on this point  at  the  hearing  and  the  Judge  gave  no
         indication that she regarded it as a matter of concern.


     21. The Judge  additionally  drew  an  adverse  inference  because  the
         Appellant provided only 'short names' of the men in  her  life  and
         the women who helped her. Yet  there  is  no  indication  that  the
         Appellant was ever asked to provide further information about these
         individuals, or that she was asked to explain  why  she  only  gave
         first names. The record  of  proceedings  maintained  by  Mr  Hoshi
         indicates that the Judge only  asked  the  Appellant  a  few  short
         questions. It would not have been reasonably apparent to  Mr  Hoshi
         that the Judge had concerns with the nature of the  names  provided
         by the Appellant. The  Judge  additionally  finds  the  Appellant's
         explanation as to how she found the  Poppy  Project  to  be  'self-
         serving' but no satisfactory reasons were offered by her in support
         of this finding.

     22. The Judge held against the Appellant her account of the destruction
         of her mobile phone on being informed by her father that her mother
         had died (52). The Judge records the Appellant's evidence that  she
         was angry when she destroyed the phone but then finds the Appellant
         offered no explanation for the destruction. The Appellant was never
         asked at the hearing to explain why she destroyed the phone and  it
         is inappropriate for an adverse inference  to  be  drawn  in  these
         circumstances. In any event, given that the appellant had just been
         informed by her abusive father that her mother was dead and was, as
         recorded by the Judge, angry, we find it inherently plausible  that
         the  phone  was  destroyed  in  a  moment   of   considerable   and
         understandable anger. The Judge drew a similar adverse inference in
         respect of the Appellant's explanation for not approach the British
         police (she claimed she feared arrest). The Judge stated  that  the
         Appellant did not explain why she feared arrest (57). Yet there  is
         no indication that the Appellant was ever asked for an explanation.



     23. At paragraph 55 the Judge found that the Appellant "... appears  to
         have been able to conduct her life in the United Kingdom  for  many
         years without  difficulty  in  functioning  before  commencing  her
         therapy where she has presented  to  others  as  lacking  any  real
         capacity to cope with her position worsening since she has been  in
         therapy". With respect, we do not regard a lifestyle consisting  of
         having sex with men in exchange for food and  accommodation  as  an
         example of one being able to conduct their life without  difficulty
         in functioning. We find this conclusion simply not worthy.


     24. In concluding that the Appellant had  not  been  trafficked  by  an
         organised gang the Judge failed to take account of or  engage  with
         unchallenged evidence relating to a telephone call received by  the
         Appellant during which her father indicated he  and  his  wife  may
         have problems if the Appellant did not do what she was required  to
         do, and in  respect  of  a  subsequent  phone  call  in  which  the
         Appellant's  mother  indicated  she  and  her  husband   had   been
         threatened.


     25. We are further satisfied that the Judge materially erred in failing
         to refer to or seemingly apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
         No 2 of 2010  and  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  'Practice
         Direction - First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
         and Sensitive Witnesses' guidance when  assessing  the  Appellant's
         credibility. There was clear medical evidence  that  the  Appellant
         was to be regarded as a vulnerable witness.


     26. Although we are satisfied the Judge also erred in her  approach  to
         the psychiatric report and her  rejection  of  the  country  expert
         evidence (for the reasons identified  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,
         paragraphs 29 to 37), and in her failure to determine  the  claimed
         suicide risk, we see no utility  in  further  exposition  of  those
         errors. We are satisfied, for the reasons we  have  already  given,
         that the determination is unsafe and that it must be re-made.



Notice of Decision


The First-tier Tribunal Judge did make a material error of law.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               24 September 2015
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum





                                 APPENDIX B

                            Schedule of Background Evidence



|Item  |Document                                |Source                   |Date        |
|1.    |Home Office letter of instruction to    |                         |29 Jun 2016 |
|      |NAPTIP                                  |                         |            |
|2.    |Premium Times - Nigeria: Over 70% of    |http://www.premiumtimesng|23 June 2016|
|      |Nigeria Girl Trafficking Backed by      |.com/news/more-news/20582|            |
|      |Victims' Parents - NAPTIP               |8-70-per-cent-nigeria-gir|            |
|      |                                        |l-trafficking-backed-vict|            |
|      |                                        |ims-parents-naptip.html  |            |
|3.    |This Day - Nigeria: NAPTIP Expresses    |http://www.thisdaylive.co|11 June 2016|
|      |Solidarity with Victims of Child Labour |m/index.php/2016/06/11/na|            |
|      |                                        |ptip-expresses-solidarity|            |
|      |                                        |-with-victims-of-child-la|            |
|      |                                        |bour/                    |            |
|4.    |US State Department, 'US Trafficking in |https://www.state.gov/doc|1 June 2016 |
|      |Persons Report' 2016                    |uments/organization/25887|            |
|      |                                        |6.pdf                    |            |
|5.    |Premium Times - Nigeria has Largest     |http://www.premiumtimesng|31 May 2016 |
|      |Number of Enslaved People in Sub-Saharan|.com/news/headlines/20441|            |
|      |Africa - Report                         |5-nigeria-largest-number-|            |
|      |                                        |enslaved-people-sub-sahar|            |
|      |                                        |an-africa-report.html    |            |
|6.    |Europol-INTERPOL Report: Migrant        |https://www.europol.europ|May 2016    |
|      |Smuggling Networks                      |a.eu/sites/default/.../ep|            |
|      |                                        |-ip_report_executive_summ|            |
|      |                                        |ary.pdf                  |            |
|7.    |Ikeora, M., 'The Role of African        |http://vc.bridgew.edu/cgi|May 2016    |
|      |Traditional Religion and 'Juju' in Human|/viewcontent.cgi?article=|            |
|      |Trafficking: Implication for            |1835&context=jiws        |            |
|      |Anti-trafficking', Journal of           |                         |            |
|      |International Women's Studies, vol.     |                         |            |
|      |17(1)                                   |                         |            |
|8.    |Van Guard - Nigeria: I Aborted 320      |http://www.vanguardngr.co|3 April 2016|
|      |Pregnancies - Abigail, Self-Confessed   |m/2016/04/aborted-320-pre|            |
|      |Human Trafficking Victim                |gnancies-abigail-self-con|            |
|      |                                        |fessed-human-trafficking-|            |
|      |                                        |victim/                  |            |
|9.    |Van Guard - Nigeria: NAPTIP Denies      |http://www.vanguardngr.co|2 April 2016|
|      |Neglecting Maid Allegedly Raped by      |m/2016/04/naptip-denies-n|            |
|      |Lebanese                                |eglecting-maid-allegedly-|            |
|      |                                        |raped-lebanese/          |            |
|10.   |Stop Violence Against Women (Nigeria) - |https://twitter.com/stopv|April 2016  |
|      |Senate Rejects Landmark Bill on Violence|awglobal/status/717067326|            |
|      |against Women...                        |965702656                |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|11.   |Daily Trust - Nigeria: NAPTIP Urges EU  |http://www.dailytrust.com|23 March    |
|      |to Screen Immigrations for Traffickers, |.ng/news/home-front/napti|2016        |
|      |Victims                                 |p-urges-eu-to-screen-immi|            |
|      |                                        |grants-for-traffickers-vi|            |
|      |                                        |ctims/139427.html        |            |
|12.   |Global Legal Monitor: Gender Equality   |http://www.loc.gov/law/fo|March 2016  |
|      |Bill Fails in the Senate                |reign-news/article/nigeri|            |
|      |                                        |a-gender-equality-bill-fa|            |
|      |                                        |ils-in-the-senate/       |            |
|13.   |Premium Times - Nigeria: Human          |http://www.premiumtimesng|27 January  |
|      |Trafficking - Asemota, Nigerian         |.com/news/more-news/19753|2016        |
|      |Fugitive, Extradited to UK              |9-human-trafficking-asemo|            |
|      |                                        |ta-nigerian-fugitive-extr|            |
|      |                                        |adited-uk.html           |            |
|14.   |Thomson Reuters - Nigerian Crime Gangs  |http://af.reuters.com/art|27 January  |
|      |'Use UK Airports' to Traffic Women - BBC|icle/commoditiesNews/idAF|2016        |
|      |                                        |L8N15B2W1                |            |
|15.   |Premium Times - Nigeria: Bisi           |http://opinion.premiumtim|3 January   |
|      |Olateru-Olagbegi (1953-2015)            |esng.com/2016/01/03/bisi-|2016        |
|      |                                        |olateru-olagbegi-1953-201|            |
|      |                                        |5-by-reuben-abati/       |            |
|16.   |This Day - Nigeria: Giving Victims of   |http://allafrica.com/stor|2 January   |
|      |Human Trafficking Access to Justice (2  |ies/201601042107.html    |2016        |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|17.   |Freedom House: Nigeria                  |https://freedomhouse.org/|January 2016|
|      |                                        |country/nigeria          |            |
|18.   |Europol, Trafficking in Human Beings in |https://www.europol.europ|2016        |
|      |the European Union (2016)               |a.eu/content/trafficking-|            |
|      |                                        |human-beings-eu          |            |
|19.   |Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner - |https://www.gov.uk/govern|2015-2017   |
|      |Strategic Plan 2015-2017                |ment/publications/indepen|            |
|      |                                        |dent-anti-slavery-commiss|            |
|      |                                        |ioner-strategic-plan-2015|            |
|      |                                        |-to-2017                 |            |
|20.   |Campana, P., 'The Structure of Human    |https://www.deepdyve.com/|2016        |
|      |Trafficking: Lifting the Bonnet on a    |lp/oxford-university-pres|            |
|      |Nigerian Transnational Network, Brit. J.|s/the-structure-of-human-|            |
|      |Criminol, 56, (2016)                    |trafficking-lifting-the-b|            |
|      |                                        |onnet-on-a-nigerian-VMIUy|            |
|      |                                        |aoVCI                    |            |
|21.   |Daily Trust - Nigeria: Trafficking in   |http://www.dailytrust.com|24 December |
|      |Persons Still a Booming Business        |.ng/news/home-front/traff|2015        |
|      |                                        |icking-in-persons-still-a|            |
|      |                                        |-booming-business/126002.|            |
|      |                                        |html                     |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|22.   |Transparency International, People and  |http://www.transparency.o|1 December  |
|      |Corruption - Africa Survey              |rg/whatwedo/publication/p|2015        |
|      |                                        |eople_and_corruption_afri|            |
|      |                                        |ca_survey_2015           |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|22.   |IRB Canada : Women without male or      |                         |November    |
|      |family support can obtain housing and   |                         |2015        |
|      |employment                              |                         |            |
|23.   |EASO, 'Nigeria: Sex Trafficking of      |https://www.easo.europa.e|October 2015|
|      |Women', Country of Origin Information   |u/sites/default/files/pub|            |
|      |Report,  (Oct 2015)                     |lic/BZ0415678ENN.pdf     |            |
|24.   |Women Rights Under Siege - Denying basic|http://www.womenundersieg|September   |
|      |human rights, Italy to deport... (Sep   |eproject.org/blog/entry/d|2015        |
|      |2015)                                   |enying-basic-human-rights|            |
|      |                                        |-italy-to-deport-dozens-o|            |
|      |                                        |f-nigerian-women-torture/|            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|25.   |Home Office CIG, 'Nigeria: Gender-Based |http://www.refworld.org/p|August  2015|
|      |Discrimination/Harm/Violence Against    |dfid/55dda9204.pdf       |            |
|      |Women, (Aug 2015)                       |                         |            |
|26.   |BMC  Health Services Research,          |http://bmchealthservres.b|21 June 2015|
|      |Integrating mental health into primary  |iomedcentral.com/articles|            |
|      |care                                    |/10.1186/s12913-015-0911-|            |
|      |                                        |3                        |            |
|27.   |Home Office CIG, Nigeria: Background    |http://www.refworld.org/d|            |
|      |information including Actors of         |ocid/55794ae04.html      |9 June 2015 |
|      |Protection and Internal Relocation      |                         |            |
|28.   |Finnish Immigration Service: Trafficking|http://www.migri.fi/downl|24 March    |
|      |Women to Europe (24 Mar 2015)           |oad/60332_Suuntaus_NigSuu|2015        |
|      |                                        |ntaus_HumanTraffickingfro|            |
|      |                                        |mNigeriaFINAL200415.pdf?b|            |
|      |                                        |3ecfe879399d388          |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|29.   |US State Department, Nigeria Human      |                         |2015        |
|      |Rights Report                           |http://www.state.gov/j/dr|            |
|      |                                        |l/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsre|            |
|      |                                        |port/index.htm#wrapper   |            |
|      |International Movement Against all forms|http://imadr.org/wordpres|October 2015|
|30.   |of Discrimination & Racism (IMADR)      |s/wp-content/uploads/2016|            |
|      |Briefing-Paper: Human Trafficking in    |/01/IMADR-Briefing-Paper_|            |
|      |Nigeria                                 |Human-Trafficking-in-Nige|            |
|      |                                        |ria_5.11.2015.pdf        |            |
|      |IOM (CARE and TACT Projects): Enhancing |http://iomfrance.org/site|2015        |
|31.   |the Safety and Sustainability of the    |s/default/files/Enhancing|            |
|      |Return and Reintegration of Victims of  |%20the%20Safety%20and%20S|            |
|      |Trafficking                             |ustainability%20of%20the%|            |
|      |                                        |20Return%20and%20Reintegr|            |
|      |                                        |ation%20of%20VoTs.pdf    |            |
|32.   |Kigbu, Challenges and Investigation and |http://www.iiste.org/Jour|            |
|      |Prosecuting Trafficking in Persons'     |nals/index.php/JLPG/artic|            |
|      |Cases in Nigeria (2015)                 |le/viewFile/23683/24257  |2015        |
|33.   |Reliefweb, Nigeria - IOM warns of steep |http://reliefweb.int/repo|16 October  |
|      |rise in women trafficked from Nigeria to|rt/nigeria/iom-warns-stee|2015        |
|      |Italy (2015)                            |p-rise-women-trafficked-n|            |
|      |                                        |igeria-italy             |            |
|34.   |NAPTIP: 2015 Data Analysis (Annual      |                         |2015        |
|      |Report)                                 |                         |            |
|35.   |US State Department, 'US Trafficking in |https://www.state.gov/doc|2015        |
|      |Persons Report' 2011-2015               |uments/organization/24536|            |
|      |                                        |5.pdf                    |            |
|36.   |National Crime Agency -UKHTC NRM        |http://www.nationalcrimea|2015        |
|      |Statistics - End of year Summary 2015   |gency.gov.uk/publications|            |
|      |                                        |/676-national-referral-me|            |
|      |                                        |chanism-statistics-end-of|            |
|      |                                        |-year-summary-2015/file  |            |
|37.   |Plambech, S., Between "Victims" and    |                         |September   |
|      |"Criminals": Rescue, Deportation, and   |                         |2014        |
|      |Everyday Violence Among Nigerian        |                         |            |
|      |Migrants', in: Social Politics:         |                         |            |
|      |International Studies in Gender, State &|                         |            |
|      |Society, Vol. 21, No 3, 1, September    |                         |            |
|      |2014.                                   |                         |            |
|38.   |Home Office COI, 'Nigeria' June 2013    |https://www.scribd.com/do|February    |
|      |(reissued February 2014)                |c/213889264/Nigeria-COI-R|2014        |
|      |                                        |eport-Revision-v2-14-1-31|            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|39.   |Goddy, Human Trafficking and Interface  |                         |2014        |
|      |of Slavery In The 21st Century in       |http://iiste.org/Journals|            |
|      |Nigeria (2014)                          |/index.php/RHSS/article/v|            |
|      |                                        |iew/15799/16614          |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|40.   |Nwogu, Anti-Trafficking Interventions in|http://www.antitraffickin|2014        |
|      |Nigeria and the Principal-Agent Aid     |greview.org/index.php/atr|            |
|      |Model (2014)                            |journal/article/view/64/6|            |
|      |                                        |2                        |            |
|41.   |NAPTIP: 2014 Data Analysis (Annual      |                         |2014        |
|      |Report)                                 |                         |            |
|42.   |IPPR (Cherti, M., Pennington, J., Grant,|http://www.ippr.org/files|January 2013|
|      |P.), 'Beyond Borders: Human Trafficking |/images/media/files/publi|            |
|      |from Nigeria to the UK', (January 2013) |cation/2013/01/nigeria-tr|            |
|      |                                        |afficking_Jan2013_10189.p|            |
|      |                                        |df?noredirect=1          |            |
|43.   |IPPR: Homecoming - Return and           |http://www.ippr.org/files|April 2013  |
|      |Reintegration of Irregular Migrants from|/images/media/files/publi|            |
|      |Nigeria (2013)                          |cation/2013/04/Homecoming|            |
|      |                                        |_irregular_migrants_Niger|            |
|      |                                        |ia_Apr2013_10661.pdf?nore|            |
|      |                                        |direct=1                 |            |
|44.   |Okogbule, N.S., 'Combating the "new     |                         |27 February |
|      |slavery" in Nigeria: an appraisal of    |                         |2013        |
|      |legal and policy response to human      |                         |            |
|      |trafficking', Journal of African Law,   |                         |            |
|      |2013                                    |                         |            |
|45.   |UNHCR - Voodoo, Witchcraft and Human    |https://www.ecoi.net/file|2013        |
|      |Trafficking in Europe  (2013)           |_upload/1930_1382531731_5|            |
|      |                                        |26664234.pdf             |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|46.   |IRB Canada: Women without male or family|http://irb-cisr.gc.ca/Eng|19 November |
|      |support can obtain housing and          |/ResRec/RirRdi/Pages/inde|2012        |
|      |employment                              |x.aspx?doc=454259        |            |
|47.   |IMPOWR, Nigeria's Approach to           |http://www.impowr.org/jou|4 September |
|      |Trafficking                             |rnal/room-improvement-nig|2012        |
|      |                                        |erias-approach-traffickin|            |
|      |                                        |g                        |            |
|48.   |CORI (UNHCR), Thematic Report, Nigeria- |http://www.refworld.org/p|December    |
|      |Gender and Age                          |dfid/514830062.pdf       |2012        |
|49.   |UNODC Issue Paper: Abuse of a position  |https://www.unodc.org/doc|2012        |
|      |of vulnerability and other "means"      |uments/human-trafficking/|            |
|      |within the definition of trafficking in |2012/UNODC_2012_Issue_Pap|            |
|      |persons (2012)                          |er_-_Abuse_of_a_Position_|            |
|      |                                        |of_Vulnerability.pdf     |            |
|50.   |NAWEY (Network of Young African-Spanish |http://www.nawey.net/wp-c|October 2011|
|      |Women for Empowerment): Feminism in     |ontent/uploads/downloads/|            |
|      |Nigeria                                 |2012/05/Feminism-in-Niger|            |
|      |                                        |ia.pdf                   |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|51.   |Ellis, T., Akpala, J., 'Making sense of |                         |March 2011  |
|      |the relationship between trafficking in |                         |            |
|      |persons, human smuggling, and organised |                         |            |
|      |crime: the case of Nigeria', The Police |                         |            |
|      |Journal, 84(1), March 2011              |                         |            |
|52.   |WHO, Mental Health Atlas Nigeria (2011) |http://www.who.int/mental|2011        |
|      |                                        |_health/evidence/atlas/pr|            |
|      |                                        |ofiles/nga_mh_profile.pdf|            |
|      |                                        |?ua=1                    |            |
|53.   |UNODC Issue Paper: The Role of          |https://www.unodc.org/doc|2011        |
|      |Corruption in Trafficking in Persons    |uments/human-trafficking/|            |
|      |(2011)                                  |2011/Issue_Paper_-_The_Ro|            |
|      |                                        |le_of_Corruption_in_Traff|            |
|      |                                        |icking_in_Persons.pdf    |            |
|54.   |Akor, L., 'Trafficking of women in      |                         |2011        |
|      |Nigeria: causes, consequences and the   |https://www.google.co.uk/|            |
|      |way forward', Corvinus Journal of       |search?q=Akor,+L.,+%E2%80|            |
|      |Sociology and Social Policy, 2(2), 2011 |%98Trafficking+of+women+i|            |
|      |                                        |n+Nigeria:+causes,+conseq|            |
|      |                                        |uences+and+the+way+forwar|            |
|      |                                        |d%E2%80%99,+Corvinus+Jour|            |
|      |                                        |nal+of+Sociology+and+Soci|            |
|      |                                        |al+Policy,+2%282%29,+2011|            |
|      |                                        |&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&gws_rd|            |
|      |                                        |=cr&ei=TFbpV-qKCOnZgAaw6a|            |
|      |                                        |7QCQ                     |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|55.   |Nwogu, Collateral Damage (Nigeria) -    |                         |2011        |
|      |Study for unpublished paper (2011)      |                         |            |
|56.   |Nwogu, OSCE ODIHR Research regarding the|                         |2011        |
|      |national laws, policies and practices of|                         |            |
|      |NIGERIA relating to the return of       |                         |            |
|      |trafficked-exploited persons (2011)     |                         |            |
|57.   |Fayomi, 'Women, Poverty and Trafficking'|http://citeseerx.ist.psu.|2009        |
|      |                                        |edu/viewdoc/download?doi=|            |
|      |                                        |10.1.1.530.6164&rep=rep1&|            |
|      |                                        |type=pdf                 |            |
|58.   |Laczko, Trafficking in Persons and Human|https://core.ac.uk/downlo|1 October   |
|      |Development- Towards A More Integrated  |ad/pdf/6569605.pdf       |2009        |
|      |Policy Response                         |                         |            |
|59.   |Danish Immigration Service: Protection  |https://www.nyidanmark.dk|2008        |
|      |of victims of trafficking in Nigeria    |/nr/rdonlyres/bad16bf3-a7|            |
|      |                                        |c8-4d62-8334-dc5717591314|            |
|      |                                        |/0/nigeriatrafficking2007|            |
|      |                                        |finalpdf.pdf             |            |
|60.   |IOM, 'Migration, human smuggling, and   |https://www.iom.int/files|2006        |
|      |trafficking from Nigeria to Europe'     |/live/sites/iom/files/Wha|            |
|      |                                        |t-We-Do/idm/docs/MRS23.pd|            |
|      |                                        |f                        |            |
|61.   |Laura Cardinal Reports                  |                         |2006        |
|62.   |Ikpeme & Olateru-Olagbegi (ILO), Review |http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5|2006        |
|      |of Legislation & Policies on Human      |/groups/public/@ed_norm/@|            |
|      |Trafficking and Forced Labour           |declaration/documents/pub|            |
|      |                                        |lication/wcms_083149.pdf |            |
|63.   |Olateru-Olagbegi, Human Trafficking in  |http://unesdoc.unesco.org|2006        |
|      |Nigeria- Root Causes and Recommendations|/images/0014/001478/14784|            |
|      |(2006)                                  |4e.pdf                   |            |
|      |Okojei, Trafficking of Nigerian Girls to|http://www.unicri.it/topi|July 2003   |
|64.   |Italy - Report of the Field Study       |cs/trafficking_exploitati|            |
|      |                                        |on/archive/women/nigeria_|            |
|      |                                        |1/research/rr_okojie_eng.|            |
|      |                                        |pdf                      |            |
|65.   |Prina, Trade and Exploitation of Minors |http://www.unicri.it/topi|July 2003   |
|      |and Young Nigerian Women for            |cs/trafficking_exploitati|            |
|      |Prostitution in Italy                   |on/archive/women/nigeria_|            |
|      |                                        |1/research/rr_prina_eng.p|            |
|      |                                        |df                       |            |
|      |Shelly, Trafficking in Women - The      |                         |2003        |
|66.   |Business Model Approach                 |                         |            |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|67.   |UNODC - Extracts from website           |                         |Not dated   |
|68.   |EU External Actions Service - Nigerian  |https://eeas.europa.eu/de|Not dated   |
|      |Programmes                              |legations/nigeria_en     |            |
|69.   |NAPTIP website pages                    |http://www.naptip.gov.ng/|Not dated   |
|      |                                        |                         |            |
|70.   |WOCON-WOTCLEF-WPSN website pages        |                         |Not dated   |
|71.   |List of Nigerian NGOs provided by SSHD  |                         |Not dated   |
|      |with descriptions                       |                         |            |
|72.   |Completed RALON NAPTIP questionnaire    |                         |Not dated   |
|      |(response to document 1 above)          |                         |            |
|73.   |Completed RALON (other organisations)   |                         |Not dated   |
|      |questionnaires (response to document 1  |                         |            |
|      |above)                                  |                         |            |

-----------------------
[1] More detail of these issues is set out in the annexes.

   [2] Article 3(a) Protocol to Suppress and Punish Trafficking in  Persons,
   especially  Women  and  Children,  supplementing   the   United   Nations
   Convention    against    Transnational    Organized    Crime     (Palermo
   Protocol)(2003); Article 4(a) Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action
   against Trafficking in Human Beings (2005);  Article  2(a)  EU  Directive
   2011/ 36/EU.

   [3] See for example International Organization for  Migration:  Enhancing
   the Safety and Sustainability of the Return and Reintegration of  Victims
   of Trafficking; Lessons learnt from the CARE and TACT projects 2015.

   [4] In HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409(IAC),  the
   Tribunal held: Though very considerable weight is  almost  always  to  be
   attached to UNHCR guidelines on risk categories in particular  countries,
   it is not accepted that departure from the guidelines  should  only  take
   place for a cogent and identified reason. Cases are to be decided on  the
   basis of all the evidence and arguments presented to the Tribunal.




[5] Commissioned by the UNHCR.
[6] From other African countries
[7] from a 2006 census
[8]  Independent  Anti-Slavery  Commissioner   Strategic   Plan   2015-2017;
although similar comments are made in  numerous  reports  including  the  US
State Department TIP Reports, UNODC and by the experts we heard from.

[9] UNODC Measures to combat Trafficking in Human Beings in  Benin,  Nigeria
and  Togo  September  2006  and  corroborated  by  various  other   official
documents before us: IPPR, IOM, European Commission amongst others.

[10] Mrs Olateru-Olagbegi expert opinion 2nd May 2015;
WWW.europol.europa.eu/sites/default/files/publications/trafficking_in_human_
beings_in_the_european_union_2011.pdf
[11] Europol 2016 Report
[12] The OSCE/ODIHR research regarding the national laws, policies and
practices of NIGERIA relating to the return of trafficked/exploited persons
Report compiled after a fact-finding mission to Nigeria between 19 and 26
February 2011
[13] Cherti report
[14] Europol 2016 Report
[15] IOM 2006 Report
[16] Campana suggests that those involved in trafficking networks are not
continuously involved: they participate in an activity with other offenders
and then leave the network.
[17] Including for example the Cherti report which refers to the many
diverse individuals who may facilitate the different stages of a trafficked
journey: transporters, receivers, brothel keepers, forgers of
documentation, corrupt border guards and embassy officials. Cherti also
refers to the use made of well-established structures and services such as
travel agencies, money transfer services, senior and well respected
individuals within the community and local faith healers and the ability of
traffickers to bring people into the UK using legal routes without the
individual in question being questioned about the job offer received, or
provided with information about the visa they are being provided with or
about their rights in the UK.


[18] ILO, ECPAT and Anti  Slavery  International  note  the  high  risks  of
sexual exploitation for child domestic servants. E Felicini  'From  Domestic
Labour  to  Commercial  Sexual  Exploitation:  the  hidden  risk  for  Child
Workers, ECPAT International Journal (October 2013) refers to a  first  link
between  a  child  domestic  worker   and   subsequent   commercial   sexual
exploitation - the promise of employment as a domestic worker is often  used
to recruit children for commercial exploitation.
[19] OSCE Report, IOM Report 2006

   [20] The same or similar characteristics were identified by Cherti and  a
   field survey commissioned by  the  UN  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice
   Research Institute to provide data  to  guide  the  programme  of  action
   against trafficking in minors and women from Nigeria to Italy for  sexual
   exploitation - Professor Okojie and ors "Trafficking of Nigerian girls to
   Italy" July 2003.

   [21] Paragraph 10 UNHCR Guidelines 7 April 2006.
[22] See for example Said [2016] EWCA Civ 422
[23] See in particular paragraphs 16 and 18
[24] It may be that in the context of Article 3 the concept of persecution
may require different analysis - see Said.

   [25]  The National Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking  in  Persons
   established by the Trafficking in Persons (Prohibition)  enforcement  and
   Administration Act 2003; amended in 2005 and  subsequently  repealed  and
   replaced  by  Trafficking  in  Persons  (Prohibition)   enforcement   and
   Administration Act 2015 which received presidential assent  on  15  March
   2015.

   [26] The Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (P.L.
   106-386), the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of  2003
   (H.R. 2620), the Trafficking Victims Protection  Reauthorization  Act  of
   2005 (H.R. 972), and the Trafficking Victims  Protection  Reauthorization
   Act of 2008 (H.R. 7311), see in particular s108; Annex 5

   [27] See Annex 5
[28] OSCE/ODIHR delegation

   [29] This includes not only the actual costs incurred by the  traffickers
   of her travel etc but the anticipated profit before the victim is  deemed
   to be able to retain any money she 'earns'.
[30] "Under paragraph 339O of the Immigration  Rules,  the  question  to  be
asked is whether the claimant would face a well-founded fear of  persecution
or real risk of serious harm in the place of relocation, and whether  it  is
reasonable to expect them to  travel  to,  and  stay  in  that  place.  This
requires full consideration of the  situation  in  the  country  of  origin,
means of travel,  and  proposed  area  of  relocation  in  relation  to  the
individual's personal circumstances.  Even  where  country  information  and
guidance suggest that relocation is possible,  it  is  the  ability  of  the
individual to relocate in practice which must be assessed. While it  remains
the responsibility of the claimant to  establish  a  well  founded  fear  of
persecution or  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  the  country  of  origin,
caseworkers must demonstrate  that  internal  relocation  is  reasonable/not
unduly harsh, having regard to the individual circumstances of the  claimant
and the country of origin information. This  means  taking  account  of  the
means of travel and communication, cultural  traditions,  religious  beliefs
and  customs,  ethnic  or   linguistic   differences,   health   facilities,
employment  opportunities,  supporting  family  or  other  ties   (including
childcare responsibilities and  the  effect  of  relocation  upon  dependent
children),  and  the  presence  and  ability  of  civil  society  (e.g  non-
governmental  organisations)  to  provide  practical  support.  In   certain
countries, financial, logistical, social, cultural  and  other  factors  may
mean that women face particular difficulties.  This  may  be  the  case  for
divorced women, unmarried women, widows or single/lone  parents,  especially
in countries where women are expected to  have  male  protection.  If  women
face discrimination in a possible place of  relocation  and  are  unable  to
work  or  obtain  assistance  from  the  authorities,  relocation  would  be
unreasonable. Where the fear is of members  of  her  family,  relocation  is
clearly not appropriate if the situation a woman would be  placed  in  would
be likely to leave  her  with  no  alternative  but  to  seek  her  family's
assistance and thus re-expose her to a well-founded fear of  persecution  or
a  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  Caseworkers  must  consider  whether  the
claimant, if unaccompanied, would be able  to  safely  access  the  proposed
relocation area. Gender specific risks include the risk of  being  subjected
to sexual violence....."

   [31] The Structure of Human Trafficking: lifting the bonnet on a Nigerian
   Transnational Network, British Journal of Criminology, 56 (2016)  Campana
   P.
[32] Primary, secondary and tertiary sources of research - Library Services
VirginiaTech:

 Primary sources allow researchers to get as close as possible to  original
ideas, events, and  empirical  research  as  possible.  It  is  an  original
document containing first-hand information about a topic. Such  sources  may
include creative works, first hand or contemporary accounts of  events,  and
the publication of the results of empirical observations or research.

Secondary sources analyze, review,  or  summarize  information  in  primary
resources or other secondary resources. Even  sources  presenting  facts  or
descriptions about events are secondary unless  they  are  based  on  direct
participation or observation. Moreover,  secondary  sources  often  rely  on
other secondary sources and standard disciplinary methods to reach  results,
and they provide the principle sources of analysis  about  primary  sources.
An  important  facet  of  secondary  research  is   that   they   offer   an
interpretation of primary research.

Tertiary sources provide overviews of topics  by  synthesizing  information
gathered from other resources. Tertiary resources often provide  data  in  a
convenient form or provide information with context by  which  to  interpret
it.

The distinctions between primary, secondary, and tertiary sources can be
ambiguous. An individual document may be a primary source in one context
and a secondary source in another. Encyclopedias are typically considered
tertiary sources, but a study of how encyclopedias have changed on the
Internet would use them as primary sources. Time is a defining element.





   [33] See for example United Nations  Global  Plan  of  Action  to  Combat
   Trafficking in Persons. UN Doc. A/RES/64/293 (12 August 2010), preambular
   paragraph 3

   [34] International Labour Office and the European Commission, Operational
   Indicators of Trafficking in Human beings (2009)

   [35] http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/258876.pdf
[36] Article 4 of the Palermo Protocol:
"This Protocol shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, to the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of the offences established in
accordance with article 5 of this Protocol, where those offences are
transnational in nature and involve an organized criminal group, as well as
to the protection of victims of such offences."

