
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Mehmood (legitimate expectation) [2014] UKUT 00469 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent,       |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15 July 2014                               |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                                ANSAR MEHMOOD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr A Hussain (of Counsel), instructed by Trent Centre for
Human Rights.
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

The  first  question  in  every  case  concerning  an   alleged   legitimate
expectation is whether the public authority concerned  made  an  unambiguous
representation, promise or assurance devoid of any relevant qualification.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1.     This appeal has its origins in a decision made on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the "Secretary
      of State") whereby it was determined, on 05 November 2013,  to  refuse
      the application of the Appellant, a Pakistani national aged 40  years,
      for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom in  the  capacity
      of Tier 2 Migrant.  The ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      ("the FtT") was refused. The grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal is confined to  a  single  issue,  namely  whether  the
      impugned decision is unlawful as frustrating a substantive  legitimate
      expectation generated in a written  communication  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State.

Factual Matrix

   2.      The  factual  matrix  is  uncontroversial.  It  centres  on   the
      Appellant's immigration history, which is as follows:

      (a) On 14 November 2006, having received a 4  year  work  permit  Visa
           valid until 05 July  2010,  the  Appellant  entered  the  United
           Kingdom.


      (b) On 01 July 2010, he applied for further leave to remain as a  Tier
           2 Migrant.


      (c) On 02 August 2010, the latter  application  was  refused  and  the
           Appellant did not exercise his right of appeal.


        d)    On 30 September 2010, he applied for further leave to  remain
           as a Tier  2  Migrant.   He  withdrew  this  application  on  08
           November 2010.


        e)    On 15 July 2011, he applied for further leave to remain as  a
           Tier 2 Migrant.


        f)    On 07 September 2011, he was granted leave to remain in  this
           capacity until 27 April 2013.

   3.     Lying at the heart of this appeal is  an  exchange  of  electronic
      communications between the Appellant's solicitors and  the  UK  Border
      Agency ("UKBA") in September/October 2011.  It is evident  that  these
      communications were stimulated by the decision made  on  07  September
      2011 conferring  on  the  Appellant  Tier  2  Migrant  status.  On  22
      September 2011, the Appellant's  solicitors  addressed  the  following
      enquiry to UKBA:

         "This migrant was assigned a COS with an expiry date  of  26  April
         2014.  His  application  for  further  leave  to  remain  has  been
         approved, but with an expiry date of  27  April  2013.   Could  you
         explain why there is a difference of one year?"

      "COS" denotes "certificate of sponsorship".  The possession of such  a
      certificate is a requirement of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  Tier  2
      migrants.  On 10 October 2011, a UKBA official replied as follows:

         "Your client applied for leave to remain where his  previous  grant
         of leave was as a Work Permit Holder applying for an  extension  in
         the same job with the same sponsor. In this  case,  the  period  of
         grant given, if [sic] for the period of time needed to  take   your
         client's total stay in the United  Kingdom  to  five  years  in  an
         eligible category or for two years if this is longer (beginning  on
         the start date given on your client's Certificate of  Sponsorship).
         Therefore, in line with published guidance your client was  granted
         to [sic] two years (27/04/2013) as this was longer than five  years
         but shorter than Certificate of Sponsorship plus 14 days."

     This signalled the conclusion of the exchange of communications.

   4. A period of dormancy followed.  The next material development occurred
      on 15 March 2013, when the Appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom.  This stimulated the impugned  decision,
      giving rise to the appeals which have  followed.   In  the  letter  of
      decision, following reference to paragraph 245HF  of  the  Immigration
      Rules and the Appellant's immigration history, it is stated:

         "You therefore had no valid leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         between 02 August 2010 and 07 September 2011, a total of 400  days.
         You have not spent a continuous period of 5 years lawfully  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Therefore, your application for  indefinite  leave
         to remain cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 245HF(c)  of
         the Immigration Rules."

     This was the sole reason proffered for refusing the application.

   5. Based on  the  dates  rehearsed  above,  the  Appellant's  immigration
      history is summarised  thus:

      (i) Initially, he was lawfully present in the United Kingdom during  a
           continuous period of some three years and eight months.


      (ii)    Between 02 August 2010 and 07 September 2011, a period of some
           400 days, his continuous lawful residence was interrupted.


      (iii)   On  07  September  2011,  his  lawful  residence  recommenced,
           expiring on 27 April 2013.


      (iv)    Prior to such expiry, on 15 March 2013, the Appellant made the
           application for indefinite leave to remain giving  rise  to  the
           impugned decision, which was made on 05 November 2013, some  two
           years and two months following the preceding grant of  leave  to
           remain.

Relevant Immigration Rules and Policies

   6. The governing provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the  present
      context is paragraph 245HF.  This regulates the  grant  of  indefinite
      leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  various  categories  of
      migrant,  including  Tier  2  (General)  Migrants.    The  version  of
      paragraph 245HF in force at the time of the impugned decision  belongs
      to Part 6A of the Immigration Rules, which regulates the points  based
      system.  Within this discrete regime there are 4 "routes", one whereof
      is Tier  2.   The  introductory  words  of  paragraph  245HF  are  the
      following:

         "To qualify for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier  2  (General)
         Migrant .....  an  applicant  must  meet  the  requirements  listed
         below.  If the applicant meets these requirements, indefinite leave
         to remain will be granted.  If the applicant does  not  meet  these
         requirements, the application will be refused."

      Paragraph 245HF continues, under the rubric "Requirements":


         "(b) The applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds for refusal and must not be an illegal entrant.


           c) The applicant must have spent a continuous period of 5  years
              lawfully in the UK, of which the most recent period must have
              been spent with leave as a Tier 2 Migrant, in any combination
              of the following categories ...


           d) The Sponsor that issued the Certificate of  Sponsorship  that
              led to the applicant's grant of leave must ......."

      There follows a series of requirements pertaining to the  Sponsor,  of
      no moment for present purposes. In the context  of  this  appeal,  the
      second of the specified requirements is the critical one.  It  engages
      the following definition, contained in paragraph 245 AAA(a):


         "'Continuous period of 5 years lawfully in the UK'  means,  subject
         to paragraphs 245CD, 245GF  and  245HF,  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom for an unbroken period  with  valid  leave  and  for  these
         purposes a period shall not  be  considered  to  have  been  broken
         where:


         (i)  The applicant has been absent from the UK for a period of  180
             days or less in any of the  5  consecutive  12  month  periods
             preceding the date of the application for leave to remain;


         (ii) The applicant has existing limited leave to  enter  or  remain
             upon their departure and return except that where  that  leave
             expired no more than 28 days prior to  a  further  application
             for entry clearance, that period and any  period  pending  the
             determination of an application made within that 28 day period
             shall be disregarded; and


         (iii)    the applicant has  any  period  of  over  staying  between
             periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to  remain
             of up to 28 days and any period of over  staying  pending  the
             determination of an application made within that 28 day period
             disregarded."



      The remaining  provisions  of  paragraph  245AAA  are  immaterial  for
      present purposes.


   7. It is of note that the relevant communication from UKBA (supra) states
      that the decision made on 07 September 2011, whereby the Appellant was
      granted further leave to remain until 27 April 2013, was "in line with
      published guidance".  The preparation of this  judgment  was  deferred
      pending compliance with directions given  at  the  conclusion  of  the
      hearing conducted on 15 July 2014.  Following some delay on  the  part
      of the Respondent, bilateral compliance with the Tribunal's directions
      was achieved on 05 September 2014.


   8. This resulted in the Respondent providing the  text  of  the  relevant
      provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force   when   the   UKBA
      communication of 10 October 2011 (supra) was  made,  namely  paragraph
      245HE.  This provides, in material part:


         "(a) In the cases set out in paragraphs (b) and (c) below, leave to
             remain will be granted for:


               i) subject to paragraph (ii), a period equal to 5 years less
                  X, where X is the period of time that the  applicant  has
                  already spent in the UK with entry  clearance,  leave  to
                  enter or remain in any combination of the categories  set
                  out in paragraph (b) and where X commences on the date on
                  which the applicant was granted entry clearance, leave to
                  enter or leave to remain at the start of  the  continuous
                  period;


              ii) Where the calculation in paragraph (i) would  lead  to  a
                  period of leave of less than 2 years or a period of leave
                  longer than the length of the period of  engagement  plus
                  14 days, a period equal to:

                    1) the length of period of engagement plus 14 days, or


                    2) two years,

                  whichever is the shorter."

      The "cases set out in paragraphs (b) and (c)" follow. These consist of
      a list of various capacities - for example, Ministers of  Religion  or
      sportsperson migrants - in which a person was previously granted entry
      clearance, leave to  enter  or  leave  to  remain.   Throughout  these
      detailed provisions, the words "cases" and "categories"  are  employed
      interchangeably.


   9. The case management  directions  mentioned  above  also  elicited  the
      production of the UKBA Guidance in vogue when  the  impugned  decision
      was made.  This explains the broader context in the following terms:


          "Tier 2 is the route which enables  United  Kingdom  employers  to
          employ nationals from  outside  the  resident  workforce  to  fill
          particular jobs which cannot be  filled  by  settled  workers.   A
          skilled worker in any Tier 2 category must not displace a suitable
          settled worker."

      The guidance further helpfully explains that within Tier 2  there  are
      four categories: general, intra-multinational company transfer, sports
      person and Minister of  Religion.   Fundamental  requirements  are  an
      offer of employment and a Certificate of  Sponsorship  from  a  United
      Kingdom licensed sponsor.

The Appellant's Arguments

  10. The main focus of the argument of Mr Hussain (of Counsel),  on  behalf
      of the Appellant, was the UKBA communication of 10 October  2011.   He
      submitted that the phrase "eligible category" is to be construed as  a
      category eligible for settlement and/or  indefinite  leave  to  remain
      upon the conclusion of 5 years residence in the United Kingdom, as was
      consistent with the rules then in force.  He also drew attention to  a
      subsequent (mid-2012) version of paragraph 245HF which, he  submitted,
      mirrored the 5 years residency provision  in  the  2011  version.   Mr
      Hussain submitted  that  the  purpose  of  the  decision  made  on  07
      September 2011, as explained in the UKBA communication of  10  October
      2011, was to extend his client's residency to a total period  of  five
      years, thereby attaining the threshold for  the  grant  of  indefinite
      leave to remain.  The core of his submission  was  that  the  relevant
      communication generated in the Appellant a legitimate expectation that
      he would later, at the appropriate time, secure  indefinite  leave  to
      remain.

  11. As this resum� of the argument demonstrates, the  Appellant  does  not
      make the case that he is eligible for the grant of indefinite leave to
      remain under the Immigration Rules.  Indeed, the  unexpressed  premise
      of his case is that he does not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.
       Rather, he is driven to rely on a principle, or doctrine,  of  public
      law in order to make good his case.

  12. At this juncture, it is appropriate to reflect on  the  terms  of  the
      refusal decision.  Having rehearsed  paragraph  245HF  of  the  Rules,
      together with the Appellant's immigration history, the letter states:

         "You therefore had no valid leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         between 02 August 2010 and 07 September 2011, a total of 400  days.
         You have not spent a continuous period of 5 years lawfully  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Therefore, your application for  indefinite  leave
         to remain cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 245HF(c)  of
         the Immigration Rules."

     This was the sole refusal reason.

Substantive Legitimate Expectation

  13. The doctrine of substantive  legitimate  expectations  is  now  firmly
      embedded in the public law compartment of the common law of the United
      Kingdom.  The locus classicus continues to  be  the  decision  of  the
      English Court of Appeal in R v North and East Devon Health  Authority,
      ex parte Coughlan, [2001] QB 213.  Other recent contributions  to  the
      developing jurisprudence include the decision of the Privy Council  in
      Paponette v Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago [2012] 1 AC 1  and
      two notable judgments, in  the  same  case,  emanating  from  Northern
      Ireland, Re Loreto Grammar School's Application  [2011]  NIQB  36  (at
      first instance) and [2012] NICA 1  [Court  of  Appeal].   For  present
      purposes,  two  discrete  elements  of  this  doctrine  fall   to   be
      considered.  The first concerns the nature and quality of the  promise
      or representation required.  The second relates to the interaction  of
      substantive legitimate expectations with the public interest.

  14. This doctrine  is the response of the common law to failures by public
      authorities to honour promises and assurances made to  citizens.   Its
      central tenets are fairness and abuse of power.  In appropriate cases,
      it is incumbent on the Court to conduct:

         "..... a detailed examination of the precise terms of  the  promise
         or representation made, the circumstances in which the promise  was
         made and the nature of the statutory or other discretion."


         (Coughlan, paragraph [56]).

      In the typical  case,  the  conduct  of  the  public  authority  under
      scrutiny will normally take the form of something said verbally or  in
      writing.  The cases belonging to this field are replete with the  word
      "promise".  In Coughlan,  for  example,  the  judgment  speaks  of  "a
      current policy  or  an  extant  promise":  paragraph  [65].   In  that
      particular case, there was "an express promise or representation  made
      on a number of occasions in precise terms", such  that  a  failure  to
      honour it "... would be equivalent to a breach of contract in  private
      law": paragraph [86].

  15. Fairness to the citizen and the misuse of public power are two of  the
      themes which course through  the  veins  of  Coughlan  and  subsequent
      decisions.  They are  also  reflected  in  the  following  passage  in
      Administrative Law (Wade and Forsyth, 10th Edition), page 447:

         "Good government depends upon trust between the  governed  and  the
         governor.  Unless that trust is sustained and  protected  officials
         will not be believed and the Government becomes  a  choice  between
         chaos and coercion."


      The two basic ingredients of what the law has come to recognise  as  a
      substantive legitimate expectation are satisfied  where  there  is  an
      unambiguous promise or assurance by a public  official  in  which  the
      affected citizen reposes trust.  The decided  cases  have  established
      with reasonable clarity the boundaries of the doctrine.  In  Coughlan,
      for example, the Court recognised, tacitly, that  a  public  authority
      would not be acting unlawfully in circumstances where to adhere to the
      relevant promise would be tantamount to  "acting  inconsistently  with
      its statutory or other public law  duties":  paragraph  [86].   In  an
      earlier passage, the Court coined the test of "a sufficient overriding
      interest  to  justify  a  departure  from  what  has  been  previously
      promised": paragraph [58].  In the  immediately  preceding  paragraph,
      the standard formulated was that of "any  overriding  interest  relied
      upon for the change of  policy".   In  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for
      Education, ex parte Begbie [2000] 1 WLR 1115, the Court held  that  an
      election promise made by a shadow Minister did not bind the  appointed
      Minister following a change of Government.  In a different context, in
      R (Bloggs 61) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  1
      WLR 2724, it was decided that the public agency concerned, the  Prison
      Service, was not bound by a promise made by the police to  a  prisoner
      about  future  conditions,  as  this  lay  outwith  their   ostensible
      authority. Further guidance is found in the  following  passage  in  R
      (Bhatt Murphy and Others) v The Independent Assessor and Others [2008]
      EWCA Civ 755:


         "[41]     .......   Public  authorities  typically,   and   central
             government par excellence, enjoy wide discretions which it  is
             their duty to exercise in the public interest ....


             This entitlement - in truth, a duty - is ordinarily  repugnant
             to any requirement to bow to another's  will,  albeit  in  the
             name of a substantive legitimate expectation.....


         [42] But the Court will (subject to the overriding public interest)
             insist on such a requirement and enforce  such  an  obligation
             where the decision maker's proposed action would otherwise  be
             so unfair as to amount to an abuse of power, by reason of  the
             way in which it has earlier conducted itself ....


         What is fair or  unfair  is  of  course  notoriously  sensitive  to
             factual nuance."


     [Emphasis added]

         Finally, turning to the nature of the  promise  or  representation
      required to engage the doctrine,  Laws  LJ  adverted  to  "a  specific
      undertaking, directed at a particular individual or  group"  and  "the
      pressing and focused  nature  of  the  kind  of  assurance  required":
      paragraphs [45] and [46].


  16. Given the intrinsic dynamism of the common law, it seems unlikely that
      the  ingredients  and  boundaries  of  the  doctrine  of   substantive
      legitimate expectations have been finally settled.  In an  immigration
      context, the doctrine has  been  described  as  "much  in  vogue":  EB
      (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  3  WLR
      178, at  [31],  per  Lord  Scott.   Since  the  landmark  decision  in
      Coughlan, the doctrine has been  considered,  and  developed,  by  the
      Court of Appeal in around a dozen cases. In addition,  there  is  much
      scholarly writing, including dedicated  text  books.   Dr  Christopher
      Forsyth has offered the following sombre reflection:


           "...  Notwithstanding those many  judgments  and  the  acres  of
           scholarly writing, we have made little  progress.   There  is  a
           real danger that the  concept  of  legitimate  expectation  will
           collapse   into   an   inchoate   justification   for   judicial
           intervention.  It sounds so benign - who could  be  against  the
           protection of legitimate expectations? - but, it seems to me, as
           sometimes interpreted, the concept often gives  little  guidance
           and plays at best a rhetorical role."

      [Legitimate Expectations Revisited (2011) 16 JR 429]

      Similar reservations resonate in the following comment:

           "A legitimate expectation in its current state, as  a  patchwork
           of possible elements to consider rather than an organised system
           of rules, is little more than a mechanism to dispense palm  tree
           justice."

      This  somewhat  withering  dismissal  is  contained  in  "Clarity  and
      Ambiguity: A New Approach to the Test of  Legitimacy  in  the  Law  of
      Expectations"  [Watson,  Legal  Studies,  Volume  30,  No   4   2010].
      Notwithstanding, the doctrine now has deep roots and, in a substantial
      number of cases, the main  question  for  the  Court  is  whether  the
      promise  or  assurance  under  scrutiny  is  sufficiently  clear   and
      unconditional.

Conclusions

  17. The enquiry which prompted the relevant communication  from  UKBA  was
      simplicity itself.  The  solicitor  simply  wished  to  know  why,  in
      circumstances where the relevant COS was valid until  26  April  2014,
      the Appellant's grant of further  leave  to  remain  had  a  scheduled
      expiry date of 27 April 2013.  The response confirmed,  in  substance,
      that this was intentional and no error had  been  committed.   In  the
      response,  the  correspondent  attempted  to  explain  the  underlying
      reason.  The key sentence is the second one (beginning "In  this  case
      ..."): [3] supra.  Considered literally, the sentence is not the  most
      intelligible.  However, it seems likely that the word "if" was written
      in error and should have been "is". With this  minor  adjustment,  the
      sentence becomes coherent.  The final sentence, particularly the words
      "granted to two years", is difficult to construe in  any  intelligible
      way.  This is so for the further reason that  on  the  date  when  the
      decision was made, 07 September 2011, the Appellant  was  not  granted
      leave to remain for a  further  two  years:  rather,  the  period  was
      confined to approximately twenty months. Moreover, these words are not
      rendered intelligible by the exercise of subtracting two years from 27
      April  2013,  since  the  date  27  April  2011  has   no   particular
      significance.

  18. The first question in every case of this genre is whether  the  public
      authority concerned made an  unambiguous  representation,  promise  or
      assurance devoid of any relevant qualification.   In  this  case,  the
      application of this test raises the question of whether the  Secretary
      of State represented,  or  promised,  that  upon  the  expiry  of  the
      authorised period of leave, on 27 April 2013, the Appellant  would  be
      granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  I  consider  that  the   UKBA
      communication falls measurably short of satisfying  this  requirement.
      Fairly, reasonably and objectively construed, it  simply  stated  that
      the rationale underlying the grant of leave to remain to the Appellant
      was "..... to take [his] total stay in  the  United  Kingdom  to  five
      years in an eligible category".  There is no suggestion that this  was
      other than a correct  exposition  of  the  Rules  and  related  policy
      guidance operative  when  the  statement  was  made.   Crucially,  the
      statement  said  nothing  about  continuous   residence,   explicitly.
      Furthermore, I am satisfied that, implicitly, it was  also  silent  on
      this discrete issue.


  19. In addition, the UKBA communication was not made in a vacuum.  Rather,
      the context included the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules,
      rehearsed  above.   I  consider  that  the  communication  cannot   be
      construed as conveying that the continuous  residence  requirement  of
      the Rules would, in the Appellant's  particular  case,  be  waived  or
      relaxed.  It  contains  no  unambiguous  and  unqualified  promise  or
      assurance to this effect.  I am further satisfied that  it  could  not
      reasonably have been understood in this  way.   Moreover,  I  consider
      that the Appellant's argument founders on the formidable rock of three
      of the pillars of the United Kingdom's legal system,  namely  equality
      before the law, the consistent application of the law to all  citizens
      and  legal  certainty.   For  these  reasons,  I  conclude  that   the
      expectation asserted by the Appellant was not generated  by  the  UKBA
      communication. It  has  no  basis,  in  fact  or  in  law.  There  is,
      therefore, no substantive legitimate expectation to  which  the  Court
      will give effect.

  20. I add the following. If, hypothetically, the SoS official  had  stated
      unambiguously and without  qualification  that,  upon  expiry  of  the
      relevant period, the Appellant would be granted  indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom, I consider  that  no  Court  would  give
      effect to such assurance, for two reasons.  First, in the language  of
      Coughlan [58], the official would  have  been  "acting  inconsistently
      with its statutory or other public law duties"  which,  fundamentally,
      were to adhere and give effect to the Immigration Rules.   Second,  as
      in Begbie, the expectation invoked would have  been  defeated  by  the
      relevant legal rule - in this instance, paragraph 245HF (d), in tandem
      with paragraph 245AAA  of the Immigration Rules

  21. By analogy, the Appellant is in no better position than the  immigrant
      in Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  UKHL
      25, who argued unsuccessfully,  in  a  kindred  though  not  identical
      juridical context, that her application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      postgraduate doctor should be determined according  to  the  operative
      provisions of the Immigration Rules in force when the application  was
      made, rather than  those  in  existence  at  the  later  date  of  its
      determination.

Decision

  22. For the reasons elaborated above, I dismiss the appeal.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                   Dated:  17 September 2014



