

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the  application  of  Sharma)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00484 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 27th July 2015                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                           BHAVNA ANILKUMAR SHARMA

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Mr P Turner, counsel, for the applicant (instructed by Bhogal & Partners)
Mr C Staker, counsel, for the respondent (instructed by Government Legal
Department)

                                  JUDGMENT

   1. The applicant was granted permission to judicially review  a  decision
      of the respondent dated 10th January 2014 refusing her leave to remain
      in the UK subsequent to an application made on 20th November 2013  for
      leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  or   on   compelling   and
      compassionate  circumstances  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
      application had been made when the applicant had no leave to remain in
      the UK.
   2. The grounds seeking permission also sought  permission  to  judicially
      review a claimed on-going failure of the respondent to make a decision
      on the further representations made by the applicant through her legal
      representatives on 24th February 2014.


        Background


   3. The applicant, a Kenyan citizen by birth on 17th May 1987, arrived  in
      the UK with lawful leave to enter as a student on  27th  August  2005,
      valid until 2007. She did not leave  the  UK  on  the  expiry  of  her
      student visa. On 14th  May  2010  she  submitted  an  application  for
      naturalisation as a British Citizen, such application being refused on
      2nd August 2010. No appeal was lodged against that decision.


   4. On 1st June 2012 the applicant submitted an application for  leave  to
      remain on Article 8 grounds. It was submitted that the  applicant  was
      stateless having renounced her Kenyan citizenship; that her mother had
      a number of medical conditions and that the applicant had been  caring
      for her mother since her arrival  in  the  UK.  That  application  was
      refused in a decision dated 24th July 2013. A further application  was
      submitted for leave to remain on  compassionate  grounds  outside  the
      Rules and under Article 8 on 20th November 2013. The applicant did not
      re-assert her claimed statelessness but relied on:

    . her studies both before and after the expiry of her visa;
    . that she had ceased her studies in 2012 after failing courses;
    . her mother had a hysterectomy in 2008  and  thereafter  was  diagnosed
      with Lupus; her mother is also epileptic and she attributed  her  lack
      of academic success in part to looking after her mother;
    . at the time of application she had been in the UK in excess of 8 years
      during which time she has established strong social ties with friends;
    . she enjoyed family life with her mother, grandparents and brother  who
      are all settled in the UK;
    . she has  been  supporting  her  mother  financially,  emotionally  and
      physically;
    . she has no criminal record, has not had recourse to public  funds  and
      has sought to maintain herself financially independently;
    . she has a psychiatric disorder as described by Dr Raj Persaud;
    . if granted leave to remain she would continue to maintain herself  and
      her family without recourse to public funds.


   5. The report by Dr Persaud was prepared following a consultation on 29th
      October 2013 having been asked to focus  on  the  applicant's  current
      state and her fitness to survive a return to her  country  of  origin.
      There is no indication how long the interview was for. He concluded:


             ".... this lady  potentially  suffers  from  a  fairly  serious
             psychiatric disorder most probably extreme shyness secondary to
             a  Social  Phobia  or  an  Avoidant  Personality  Disorder.  In
             particular though what marks  this  case  out  is  her  extreme
             dependency on her mother with whom she had been very close  all
             her life. This kind of dependency is very common in  this  kind
             of disorder but does mean that moving her away from her  mother
             could be catastrophic for her psychiatrically..."


   6. According to her application her father lives in Kenya.


        Procedural history


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Latter for the reason that the
      decision letter which is the subject of challenge only dealt with  the
      application under the Rules and  it  was  arguable  that  no  apparent
      consideration had been given to Article 8 and no mention had been made
      about psychiatric evidence.


   8. It then became apparent that the applicant in issuing the  proceedings
      had failed to provide a full copy of the decision dated  10th  January
      2014. An application by the respondent for the UT  to  reconsider  the
      grant of permission in the light of the failure by  the  applicant  to
      provide a full copy of the challenged  decision  was  refused  on  the
      basis that there was no jurisdiction for such reconsideration.

   9. The respondent replied to the request dated  24th  February  2014  for
      reconsideration of the  decision  on  15th  July  2015  (Decision  2).
      Reconsideration was refused, in essence, because the request  did  not
      meet the guidance for such reconsideration. The applicant was  invited
      to make a new application for leave to remain, paying the  appropriate
      fee if she considered she met the relevant requirements for the  grant
      of leave to remain.

        Hearing on 27th July 2015

  10. Mr Turner did not seek to amend his grounds  and  confirmed  that  his
      skeleton argument had been prepared on 6th July  2015  (prior  to  the
      making of the decision dated 15th July 2015). The  challenge  remained
      the same namely an unlawful failure on the part of the  respondent  to
      make and serve an appealable decision together with a failure  by  the
      respondent to engage with, consider and evaluate the medical evidence,
      the dependency of the applicant's mother upon the  applicant  and  the
      resulting impact on her if the applicant is removed.  Furthermore  the
      interdependency  of  the  applicant  and  her   mother   amounted   to
      exceptional circumstances and  she  should  thus  be  served  with  an
      appealable decision. Mr Turner submitted it was unfair to require  the
      applicant to make a further application and pay a further fee in order
      to obtain an appealable decision.


  11. Mr Staker contested the assertion that the applicant was  entitled  to
      an appealable decision and that it was unfair and unreasonable to deny
      her access to that right. The legislative regime as it  existed  prior
      to April 2015 did not confer a right of appeal on the  refusal  of  an
      application for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  in  the
      circumstances of  the  present  case;  there  was  no  requirement  or
      obligation to make a decision to  remove  under  s10  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999 (absent falling within the policy guidance)  and  that
      any implication that the applicant had been prejudiced  by  delay  was
      unfounded - whether the decision had been made  immediately  or  after
      some months or years,  there  was  and  would  have  been  no  removal
      decision and thus no appeal. He  referred  to  the  policy  introduced
      following the implementation of the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  that
      where there was an application outstanding for  reconsideration  of  a
      previous decision, such reconsideration would  be  undertaken  if  the
      applicant fell within one of five categories - this applicant did  not
      fall within one of those categories and thus there was no  requirement
      for the respondent to make an appealable decision. In so  far  as  the
      applicant submitted it was unfair for the  applicant  to  pay  another
      fee, he submitted that the regime approved by Parliament  required  an
      application to be made, a fee paid  and  any  resulting  human  rights
      decision would have a right of appeal (subject to certification). This
      applicant had already made two  applications;  there  was  nothing  to
      prevent her from making a third if so advised.


        Consideration


  12. The decision dated  10th  January  2014  considered  and  refused  the
      application made under the Rules. It was not submitted that there  was
      a public law error in that regard. Permission had been granted on  the
      grounds that there had been no consideration or  engagement  with  the
      medical evidence submitted. The applicant had  not  submitted  a  full
      copy of the decision the subject of challenge and specifically had not
      submitted page 2. Page 2, under a sub heading "Decision on exceptional
      circumstances"  identified  the  application  made  namely  that   the
      applicant had


             "...applied  for  leave   to   remain   outside   the   normal
             requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  exceptional  and
             compelling grounds to remain in the UK in order  to  care  for
             your mother. This has been refused as there are family members
             in the UK who are  not  subject  to  immigration  control,  as
             evidenced by the references you have provided  in  support  of
             your application, and there is nothing to suggest  that  these
             family members are unable to arrange alternative care for your
             mother if this is required.
             The local authority and social services are under  a  duty  to
             provide suitable care for people whom they have community care
             functions (sic) and as you have failed to provide evidence  of
             contact with formal care providers such as the local authority
             or social services  department  which  is  a  requirement  for
             consideration as a carer, it is therefore  not  accepted  that
             alternative arrangements  for  care  have  been  explored  and
             exhausted.
             You have failed to provide sufficient evidence that the nature
             of the illness requires  any  care  and  that  the  long  term
             prognosis of your mother's condition requires continued care.
             ....We have carefully  considered  your  claim  for  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom as a carer for  your  mother.  In
             view of the above, the Secretary of  State  is  not  satisfied
             that your circumstances are such  that  discretion  should  be
             exercised outside the Immigration Rules.
             In support of your application you have raised the  fact  that
             you have some form of Social Phobia Disorder, as stated by the
             psychiatric report. This has been carefully  considered.  Your
             condition is not life-threatening and according to the Country
             of Origin Information Service treatment for your condition  is
             available in  Kenya.  Consideration  has  been  given  to  the
             difference in the standard  of  medical  facilities  in  Kenya
             compared with that available here.  Although  it  is  accepted
             that the health care systems in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in
             Kenya are unlikely to be equivalent, this does not  mean  that
             your case is exceptional and does not entitle  you  to  remain
             here.
             On  the  basis  of  the  available  information  it  has  been
             concluded that suitable medical treatment is available in your
             country of origin. You  have  not  provided  any  evidence  to
             suggest that you would be denied medical treatment,  nor  that
             you would be unable to travel to obtain such treatment. It  is
             also noted in your application form that your  father  remains
             living in Kenya, and there is no reason  to  suggest  that  he
             would not adequately support and assist you on return.
             ..."

  13.  The grounds and skeleton of the applicant asserts that it  would  not
      be proportionate to return the applicant to Kenya because:


             "She  enjoys  family  life  with  her  mother;  her  mother  is
             dependant upon her; she suffers  from  mental  difficulties  as
             identified in the report from Dr Persaud; she has lived in  the
             UK over 8 years; she is of good character; there is nothing for
             her to return to in Kenya; she is in a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a British national (the latter was not relied
             upon before me)."

  14. The respondent considered and engaged with  the  submissions  made  on
      behalf of the  applicant  together  with  the  medical  evidence,  the
      presence of other family members in the UK and her  father  in  Kenya,
      the availability of health treatment in  the  UK  and  in  Kenya.  The
      applicant's length of residence in the UK is as a direct result of the
      applicant overstaying. The respondent did not simply apply the  Rules;
      she considered the information and evidence submitted by the applicant
      outside the Rules. The decision by the respondent to refuse  leave  to
      remain was plainly open to  her  on  the  evidence  produced  and  was
      clearly consistent with the established case law.


  15.  In so far as the failure to make and serve an appealable decision  is
      concerned, the applicant submits that the respondent failed to  engage
      either with the original material before her or the new material.  The
      respondent submits that the  consideration  of  whether  the  material
      presented was exceptional and/or compelling, amounted to consideration
      of the request for an appealable decision which had been refused. This
      is rather a circular argument and it is difficult to see if that  were
      the case and the Article 8  claim  had  been  lawfully  refused,  that
      anyone would have fallen within that category and thus would have been
      eligible for an appealable removal decision.

  16. The  applicant  asserts  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  make  an
      appealable decision within three months of the decision refusing leave
      to remain and relies upon Bharadva [2010] EWHC 3030 (Admin).  Bharadva
      makes clear that the failure to make an  appealable  decision  at  the
      same time as the decision to refuse leave to remain is  not  unlawful.
      Whether and to what extent the respondent  then  takes  an  appealable
      decision is a matter for the  respondent  in  line  with  her  policy.
      Although as I have indicated there is a circularity in the submissions
      by the respondent as to what constitutes  exceptional  and  compelling
      circumstances, in this case the factors relied upon by  the  applicant
      do not come near to amounting to  such  circumstances  such  that  the
      failure of the respondent to make an appealable decision  is  unlawful
      on public law grounds.

  17. Mr Turner did not seek to amend the grounds in order to challenge  the
      decision of the respondent  refusing  to  reconsider  the  application
      although he did refer  to  the  respondent's  current  policy  in  his
      submissions and submitted that this was a case which was  "crying  out
      for a common sense approach". He referred to what he described  as  an
      "implication" in the  Acknowledgement  of  Service  ("AoS")  that  the
      request for reconsideration would  be  dealt  with  as  a  substantive
      reconsideration; the inordinate delay in the decision merely to refuse
      to reconsider in the light of the AoS stating that a decision would be
      taken "imminently" and that it was, in  accordance  with  the  current
      policy "operationally expedient or appropriate" for the decision to be
      reconsidered.

  18. The issue of whether it is operationally expedient or  appropriate  to
      reconsider is a matter for the Secretary of State. Although the  delay
      in the respondent taking what  in  fact  was  a  very  straightforward
      decision is to be deprecated, that does not render, in the applicant's
      circumstances, the decision unlawful - whether taken then  (or  indeed
      very shortly after the service of the AoS) or in July  2015  does  not
      alter the factual basis of the decision.

  19. As for the claimed 'unfairness' of requiring  the  applicant  to  make
      another paid application, the legislative  scheme  as  it  now  stands
      enables an appeal against a refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim.  The
      applicant is an overstayer; she came to the UK  with  no  anticipation
      that she would be able to remain; the respondent  has  considered  the
      circumstances she put forward as  justifying  her  remaining  (twice).
      Having to pay for an application is not unfair.

  20. For these reasons the claim must fail.

  21. I order that the applicant pay the respondent's costs in a sum  to  be
      agreed. In default of agreement the Tribunal will determine  costs  on
      receipt of submissions limited to 2 pages of A4. The  parties  are  on
      notice that costs sanctions may arise  from  unreasonable  failure  to
      reach agreement.


  22. Although no application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal was made, I refuse permission; there being no arguable point of
      law capable of affecting the outcome of the application.






                                    Date 20th August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
