
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

UR and others (policy; executive discretion; remittal) Nepal [2010] UKUT
480 (IAC)

                    THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:   Field House
On:             27 October 2010                    Determination
promulgated


                            Before

                               Mr Justice Owen
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee


                             Between


                 Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi


                                            And


                                             UR
                                             YR
                                             KR



Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mrs T.Sharland, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:  Mr K. Owusu, instructed by Bishop, Lloyd & Jackson

While in rare cases a policy may be expressed in such absolute  terms  that,
on the facts as found, an appeal may be allowed outright under  the  policy,
this should not be confused with the general intention which appears to  lie
behind the policy.  Thus, a policy  which  allows  overage  children  to  be
reunited with a settled sponsor in certain circumstances, and whose  purpose
may appear to be the avoidance of the 'stranded sibling' phenomenon,  should
not be taken to mean that, in most cases, entry clearance  will  be  granted
to overage children.  Apart from anything else, the  policy  may  have  been
more loosely drafted than an immigration rule, and the discretion  which  it
imports ought to be exercised by the respondent at first instance.


                          DETERMINATION and REASONS

1.  These three conjoined cases have come before the Upper  Tribunal  on  an
appeal  against  part  of  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge   M.J.
Gillespie, promulgated on 28 July 2010.  The appeal is brought on behalf  of
the Entry Clearance Officer, who  was  the  respondent  at  first  instance.
Although the roles of appellant and respondent are now reversed, it will  be
convenient if we continue  to  refer  to  the  three  applicants  for  entry
clearance as 'the appellants' and to the ECO as 'the respondent'.

2.  On 21 December 2009 the  respondent  refused  the  applications  of  the
three appellants as the dependent, but overage,  children  of  the  sponsor,
UR, a former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas who obtained indefinite  leave
to enter the United Kingdom in 2006 under rule  276E-K  of  the  Immigration
Rules.  He left behind a wife and six  children  in  Nepal.   Two  of  those
children are now married and leading  independent  lives,  but  applications
were made for the sponsor's wife and the other four children to join him  in
this country.  His wife and one of  the  children  were  granted  indefinite
leave to enter ( it is unclear whether this was under rules 281 and  297  of
the Immigration Rules as the spouse and minor  child  of  a  person  settled
here, or under rules 276S-Z as the spouse  and  minor  child  of  a  foreign
citizen discharged from HM Forces).  At any rate, the  applications  of  the
three remaining children, who were over 18, were considered under rule  317,
which is for 'ordinary' applications by  the  overage  children  of  settled
persons.  The applications could not  in  any  event  have  succeeded  under
rules 276X-Z as the children of a discharged  Gurkha,  because  those  rules
pertain only to children below the age of 18.

3.  When the appeals came before Immigration Judge  Gillespie,  he  believed
that the consideration of the applications under rule 317 was  misconceived,
and that the applications should have been considered under rule  276X.   He
proceeded to consider  the  requirements  of  rule  276X  for  himself,  and
concluded that the appellants could not meet those requirements.  As one  of
the requirements was that the applicants be aged under 18,  that  conclusion
was inevitable.  We do not think that the ECO  was  wrong  to  consider  the
applications under rule 317, this being  the  only  immigration  rule  under
which children over the age of 18 can be admitted for  settlement.   Nothing
turns on this, however, as it  has  not  been  argued  before  us  that  the
appellants ought to succeed under rule 317.

4.  The ECO went on to consider the applications under what  he  thought  to
be the relevant policy  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  his  written
reasons for refusing the applications, which are in identical terms for  all
three appellants, he cites 'the Secretary of State's policy  for  dependants
over the age of 18 of foreign and Commonwealth HM  Forces  members.".   This
policy is referred to in the  Explanatory  Statement  prepared  on  2  March
2010, after notice of appeal had been received at the High  Commission.   It
is cited as Chapter 15 of the 'Immigration  Departmental  Instructions'  (we
assume that the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions  are  meant),  under
which "discretion may be exercised in exceptional circumstances by  ECOs  in
individual cases where there are strong reasons for doing so"  (emphasis  in
the  original).   The  quotation  in  the  Explanatory  Statement  is  taken
verbatim from paragraph 13.2 of Section 2A of Chapter 15 of the IDIs,  which
deals with settlement applications under  the  HM  Forces  rule.   Paragraph
13.2, on 'dependants over the age of 18', states that such  dependants  will
normally have to apply for settlement under one of  the  Immigration  Rules,
save in exceptional circumstances.  This focus on exceptional  circumstances
would explain why, in his reasons for rejecting the applications  under  the
policy, the ECO says this:

      "You have not provided details of exceptional  circumstances  in  your
      case  that  should,  over  and  above  the  consideration  within  the
      Immigration Rules, lead to your application being successful. All  the
      evidence points to this application being unexceptional. ... The Rules
      take account of the presence of a parent and that factor on its own  I
      do not regard as determinative, particularly because of the  need  for
      there to be exceptional circumstances."

5.  Immigration Judge Gillespie thought that  the  ECO  had  looked  at  the
policy  relating  to  the  overage   children   of   ex-soldiers   and   had
misapprehended it.  It seems likelier to us that the ECO was not looking  at
the policy which the judge was looking at.  That policy is to be found in  a
document entitled 'SET 12 - Former members of HM Forces  &  families',  last
updated on 25 June 2009.  SET 12.16 poses the question 'Can dependants  over
the age of 18 apply for settlement?', and answers it as follows:

      "It is not the intention to split  a  family  unit  solely  because  a
      dependant is 18 years of age or over.

      "Applications for settlement from dependants who are 18 years  of  age
      or over will be considered and discretion to grant settlement  outside
      the Rules may be exercised in individual cases.  Dependants  over  the
      age of 18 need to make separate individual applications  and  pay  the
      appropriate fee.   In  assessing  whether  settlement  in  the  UK  is
      appropriate the ECO should consider the following factors :

    . One parent or a relative of the applicant is present and  settled,  or
      being admitted for, or being granted, settlement in the UK  under  the
      HM Forces rule;
    . The applicant has previously been granted limited leave as a dependant
      of a member of HM Forces;
    . The applicant has been, and wishes to continue, pursuing  a  full-time
      course of studies in the UK;
    . Refusal of the application would mean  that  the  applicant  would  be
      living alone outside the UK and is financially dependent on the parent
      or relative present and settled, or being granted settlement in the UK
      under the HM Forces rule;
    . The applicant would find it very  difficult  to  function  because  of
      illness or disability without the help and support of their parent  or
      close relative in the UK.

   "If one or more of the factors listed above  are  present,  the  ECO  may
   exercise discretion and grant entry clearance for settlement in the UK."


6.  We pause here to observe two  things.   First,  the  policy  on  overage
dependants set out at Chapter 15 of the IDIs is much less generous than  the
policy set out in SET 12, which is not in  the  IDIs  and  is  described  as
'internal guidance for use by entry clearance staff' (although the IDIs  are
also internal guidance for UKBA staff).  The  relationship  between  Chapter
15 and SET 12 is quite unclear.  Secondly, the factor set out at  the  first
of the bullet points in SET 12 seems  curiously  out  of  place.   It  is  a
factor equally applicable to the spouses and minor  children  of  discharged
soldiers, who can qualify for entry clearance under the Rules,  rather  than
under a discretionary  policy,  if  they  have  a  sponsor  (an  ex-soldier)
present and settled  in  the  UK.   Yet  the  discretion  can  be  exercised
favourably, so the policy says, if only that one factor  is  present.   That
might appear to blur the distinction  between  the  minor  and  the  overage
children of a retired member of HM Forces.

7.  When SET 12.16 was examined by the judge below, he considered  that  not
only the first factor but  also  the  fourth  was  engaged  in  the  present
appeals, in that  the  appellants  "are  financially  dependent  upon  their
parents in the United  Kingdom  and,  if  refused  entry,  would  be  living
outside the United Kingdom with no other family members to whom  they  could
turn for financial support."  We note that one word has  been  omitted  here
from the fourth bullet point,  namely  'alone'.   The  policy  on  its  face
envisages 'the applicant' living alone outside  the  UK.   It  says  nothing
about the situation where, as here, several applicants are living together.

8.  The judge found that the relevant policy had not been  properly  applied
in the instant cases, and therefore that the  refusals  of  entry  clearance
were not in accordance with the law.  That is  not  in  dispute  before  us.
What has been challenged on behalf of the ECO is what the  judge  did  next.
He asked himself whether the correct course would  be  to  remit  the  three
cases to the respondent, so that they could  be  properly  considered  under
the policy and a lawful decision could then be made, or  whether  he  should
allow the appeals  outright,  with  no  remittal.   Quite  rightly,  in  our
respectful view,  he  cited  AG  &  ors  (policies;  executive  discretions;
Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007]  UKAIT  82  and  SS  (jurisdiction  -  rule
62(7);  refugee's  family;  policy)  Somalia  [2005]  UKAIT  167   for   the
proposition that while, in the generality of cases, a finding that a  policy
has not been applied properly or at all, and that the decision under  appeal
is therefore 'not in accordance with the law', will result  in  remittal  to
the original decision-maker, it may be possible in very  unusual  cases  for
the appellate authority to allow the appeal outright.

9.  SS (Somalia) puts the matter this way:

      "Unless the policy is expressed in terms that are absolute or have  to
      be regarded as absolute on the  individual  facts  of  the  case,  the
      effect of a successful appeal will be  merely  that  the  decision  is
      found to  be  an  unlawful  one,  so  that  there  is  outstanding  an
      application ..."

10.  AG (Kosovo) sets out the circumstances  which  might  render  a  policy
'absolute':

      "They are those in which (1) the claimant proves the precise terms  of
      the policy, which (2) creates a presumption, on the facts of his case,
      in favour of granting leave, and (3) there is either nothing at all to
      displace the presumption, or nothing that,  under  the  terms  of  the
      policy, falls for consideration.  If all those factors  apply  to  the
      case, the appeal should be allowed, with a direction as indicated."

11.  Immigration Judge Gillespie did indeed allow the instant appeals,  with
a direction that entry clearance be granted.  He found that SET 12.16  gives
"a strong and unequivocal indication of intention to maintain  family  unity
and not to split a family solely on the  grounds  of  the  majority  of  one
family member."  He considered it to be "a statement of policy  that  is  to
be 'regarded as absolute in the  individual  facts  of  the  case'."   There
being no factors contra-indicating the favourable  exercise  of  discretion,
"it would be irrational to refuse leave to enter."

12.  In seeking leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the  respondent  made
no complaint about the judge's  findings  of  fact.   What  was  sought  was
simply the deletion from  the  determination  of  the  direction  for  entry
clearance, and its substitution with a direction that  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer consider his policy in the light of the facts as found.  Before  us,
detailed and persuasive submissions were made  by  both  representatives  on
the question whether, given that the appellants remain dependent upon  their
sponsor in the United Kingdom, who has  been  joined  by  their  mother  and
younger sibling, the policy should be regarded as 'absolute', such  that  no
other  outcome  is  rationally  possible  but  that  entry   clearance   for
settlement be granted.

13.  The representatives will, we trust, forgive us if we  do  not  set  out
their arguments in extenso here.  It simply does not seem  to  us  that,  on
the facts of the  present  appeals,  the  policy  is  'absolute'.   It  does
indeed, as the judge below said, evince an intention "not to split a  family
solely on the grounds of the majority of one  family  member."   The  desire
appears to be to avoid the  phenomenon  of  the  'stranded  sibling',  whose
parents and younger siblings have all gone to the  United  Kingdom,  leaving
him alone in his own country.   That  is  somewhat  different  from  several
overage siblings living together in their own country, as is the case  here.
 The fourth bullet point of SET 12.16 reinforces the  impression  that  what
might prompt the favourable exercise of discretion is the  prospect  of  the
applicant "living alone outside the UK."

14.  We observed above that the first bullet point  is  listed  as  a  free-
standing factor, although  it  is  really  a  condition  precedent  for  any
application to join a sponsor who is settled here under the HM Forces  rule,
whether the application  falls  for  consideration  within  or  outwith  the
Immigration Rules.  As such, it is actually irrelevant to  the  exercise  of
discretion.  The other  factors  listed  under  SET  12.16  clearly  do  add
something to the basic requirement that the applicant should have a  settled
sponsor.  An applicant who  meets  the  requirements  of  the  first  bullet
point, but none of the others,  should  not  expect  the  discretion  to  be
exercised in his favour, without more.  Although the express wording of  SET
12.16 might suggest  otherwise,  we  remind  ourselves  of  the  distinction
between rules and policies made by Lord Justice  Sedley  in  Pankina  [2010]
EWCA Civ 719.  The Immigration Rules have been "elevated to  a  status  akin
to that of law" and so must be construed more strictly than was the case  in
the past.  Policies, on the other hand, are meant to  be  applied  flexibly,
and to allow the sensible exercise of discretion.   Their wording  does  not
have to be construed with all the strictness of a statute.

15.  What all this boils down to is that this  is  not  one  of  those  rare
cases where,  on  its  facts,  no  rational  decision-maker  could  fail  to
exercise his discretion favourably under  the  relevant  policy.   There  is
even some confusion as  to  what  the  relevant  policy  actually  is.   The
treatment of dependants over the age of 18 at Chapter  15  of  the  IDIs  is
very brief, and simply insists upon exceptional  circumstances.   SET  12.16
deals with dependants over the age of 18 in much more detail, and  does  not
use the term 'exceptional  circumstances',  although  it  may  be  that  the
factors  listed  in  SET  12.16  are  intended  to  encompass   'exceptional
circumstances'.  It follows that the appropriate course is  to  remit  these
appeals to the ECO in New Delhi for him to apply the policy  SET  12.16,  in
conjunction with Chapter 15 of the IDIs and in the light  of  the  facts  as
found.

16.  That is not quite the end of the matter, however, as Mr Owusu  strongly
urged  us  to  consider  the  appeals  under  Article  8  of  the   European
Convention, and to allow them on that basis.   Immigration  Judge  Gillespie
thought it "unnecessary to consider any alternative relief under  the  Human
Rights Act 1998" because he was allowing  the  appeals  outright  under  the
policy, rather than remitting them for a fresh decision to be  made.   In  a
sense, that was putting the cart before the horse.  As Mrs Sharland  pointed
out, the head note to AG (Kosovo) begins with the following  prescription  :
"If human rights are argued, they should be determined  in  advance  of  any
argument based on discretion : if the appellant's human rights  entitle  him
to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, any discretionary power  to  allow
him to do so is otiose."

17.  We think there are two good reasons for not entertaining these  appeals
under  Article  8  at  the  current  stage.   First,  when  the  appellants'
solicitors responded under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  to
the grant of permission to appeal - which would have  allowed  them  to  re-
state any grounds on which they were unsuccessful at first instance  -  they
did not invoke Article 8.  On the  contrary,  they  intimated  that,  if  an
error of law was established, the outcome which they sought was "a  remittal
to the appellant", i.e. to the ECO.  That is precisely the outcome which  we
favour.

18.  Secondly, we apprehend that, if the appellants' circumstances  are  not
such as to warrant an exercise of discretion in their favour, Article  8  on
its own will hardly, on the evidence that is currently  before  us,  entitle
the appellants to settlement in the United  Kingdom.   Financial  dependency
will not suffice.  As was held in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31,  an  unusual
degree of emotional dependency must  be  established,  in  order  to  enable
adult children to settle with a parent in this country.  The appellants  are
currently aged 19, 26 and 29.  They are living in  a  house  rented  by  the
sponsor, which they share with three  male  cousins.   The  focus  of  these
appeals has been the policy on  overage  children  of  ex-Gurkhas.   A  full
Article 8 case has not yet been put together.


DECISION

19. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed, to the extent that  the
applications for entry clearance are remitted to him for  a  fresh  decision
to be made, in accordance with the policy set  out  in  SET  12,  read  with
Chapter 15 of the Immigration Directorates' Instructions, and on  the  basis
of the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed

Senior Immigration Judge McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

