

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Daby (Forgery; appeal allowed; subsequent applications) Mauritius [2011]
UKUT 00485 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination delivered      |
|                                              |orally                       |
|On 27 September 2011                          |at hearing.  Sent out on     |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan


                                   Between

                           VIJAYLAXMEE KUMARI DABY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, instructed by Zuriel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer


Where an in-country application is refused on the ground that a document  is
false, and the respondent fails to prove  the  falsity  before  a  Tribunal,
with the result that an appeal against the refusal is allowed:-

   1) the respondent is obliged to comply with the terms of  the  Tribunal's
      decision and make a grant in accordance with the original application;
   2) it may be open to a respondent to raise the question of the falsity of
      the document in response to any subsequent application.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Mauritius.    She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 as a visitor, remained as a student as she was entitled
    to do having obtained  leave  to  do  so  and  obtained  further  leave
    extending up to 2009.

 2. During the course of that leave, having finished her studies, she  made
    an application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post  Study  Work)
    Migrant.  That application was refused on the 20  February  2010.   The
    sole ground of refusal  was  that  the  appellant  had,  it  was  said,
    produced a forged  document  in  support  of  her  claim  to  meet  the
    maintenance requirements of the rules.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision.  Immigration  Judge
    Herlihy, who heard that appeal was clearly not assisted by there  being
    no representation on behalf of the Secretary of State; she  noted  that
    in a case where forgery is alleged it is for the Secretary of State  to
    discharge the burden of proof; she noted that there was before  her  no
    evidence supporting  the  Secretary  of  State's  allegation  that  the
    document was forged.  She therefore decided that the Secretary of State
    had not discharged the burden of proof  in  relation  to  the  forgery.
    Looking therefore at the evidence on its own merits she concluded  that
    the appellant met the requirements of the relevant  rules  and  allowed
    the appeal.

 4. The appellant, no doubt buoyed up by that  decision,  returned  to  the
    Secretary of State and sought the leave for which  she  had  originally
    applied and in respect of which the Secretary of State's  decision  had
    been reversed on appeal.  She received a further decision refusing  her
    leave.   That decision is dated 6 October 2010 and the refusal  is  for
    precisely the same reason as before, that is to say that  the  document
    supporting the claim to meet the maintenance requirements of the  rules
    is a forgery.

 5. The appellant appealed again against that decision;  on  this  occasion
    there was representation from the Secretary of State and  evidence  was
    put before Immigration  Judge  W  L  Grant,  which  was  sufficient  to
    persuade him that the document was  indeed  a  forgery.   He  therefore
    dismissed the appeal.

 6. The question raised by the  grounds  drafted  by  Mr  Adophy,  who  has
    represented the appellant throughout, is whether the Secretary of State
    was  entitled  to  issue  a  new  decision  refusing  the   appellant's
    application on precisely the same ground as had failed before the first
    Immigration Judge.  He reminds us, and Mr Hopkin very frankly  accepts,
    that the Secretary of State and her executive officers are required  to
    carry out the judgments of the Tribunal and that it is not open  to  an
    officer to circumvent a judgment  of  the  Tribunal  by  making  a  new
    administrative decision.  If authority were required for that it is  to
    be found in the judgement of Stanley Burnton LJ, with  whom  the  other
    members of the court agreed, in SSHD v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977
    at [32] and [33], where he says this:

       "32.  As a matter of principle, it cannot  be  right  for  the  Home
           Secretary to be able to circumvent the decision of  the  IAT  by
           administrative decision.  If she  could  do  so,  the  statutory
           appeal system would be undermined; indeed, in a case such as the
           present,  the  decision  of  the  Immigration   Judge   on   the
           application of the Refugee Convention would be made  irrelevant.
           That would be inconsistent with the statutory scheme.


        33. The principle that the decision of the Tribunal is  binding  on
           the parties, and in particular on the Home Secretary,  has  been
           consistently upheld  by  the  Courts.   In  R  (Mersin)  v  Home
           Secretary [2000] EWHC Admin 348, Elias J said:


             "In my opinion there is a clear duty on the Secretary of  State
             to give effect to the Special Adjudicator's decision.  Even  if
             he can refuse to do so in the event of changed circumstances or
             because there is another country to which the applicant can  be
             sent, there is still a duty unless  and  until  that  situation
             arises.  It would wholly undermine the rule of law if he  could
             simply ignore the ruling of  the  Special  Adjudicator  without
             appealing it, and indeed Mr. Catchpole [counsel  for  the  Home
             Secretary] does not suggest that he can.   Nor  in  my  opinion
             could he deliberately delay giving effect to the ruling in  the
             hope that something might turn up to justify  not  implementing
             it.  In my judgement, once the adjudicator had  determined  the
             application in the applicant's  favour,  the  applicant  had  a
             right to be granted refugee status, at least unless  and  until
             there was a change in the position." "

 7. Those observations were made in  relation  to  appellants  who  claimed
    asylum; but there is no difference in principle in terms of the duty of
    the Secretary of State and her officers to carry out decisions  of  the
    Tribunal; indeed Mr Hopkin, as we have indicated, does not suggest  the
    contrary.  He does draw to our attention that in response to the  grant
    of permission  to  appeal  one  of  his  colleagues  submitted  a  note
    indicating this:

        "The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.  The issue needs to
        be addressed as to whether it is open in law to the  respondent  to
        "re-refuse" an application  for  variation  of  leave  such  as  to
        constitute a  fresh  immigration  decision.   This  is  a  separate
        question from whether to do so is an abuse of process."

 8. It appears to us that whether it is open in law to  the  respondent  to
    "re-refuse" an application for variation of leave such as to constitute
    a fresh immigration decision rather misses the point.  Procedurally, if
    there is to be  another  refusal  there  needs  to  be  an  immigration
    decision carrying a right  of  appeal:  so  that  any  failure  by  the
    respondent to carry out his clear duty to  follow  a  decision  of  the
    tribunal can be the subject of a further appeal, as this one has been.

 9. We do not think that the present decision was an abuse  of  process  in
    any real sense; Mr Hopkin describes the procedure in the  present  case
    as having been characterised by a want of  zeal  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State first, followed by an excess OF zeal  latterly,  and
    that may well be right.

10. The position is that the Secretary of State had what she regarded,  and
    indeed what the second Immigration Judge regarded,  as  clear  evidence
    that the document in question is a forgery, but failed to produce  that
    at the only time it mattered, which was before  the  first  Immigration
    Judge.  If the Secretary of State fails to put her case properly before
    Immigration Judges then she suffers the consequences.  The  consequence
    in this case was that she failed to establish the matter on  which  she
    bore the burden of proof, and she was therefore obliged  to  carry  out
    Immigration Judge Herlihy's decision by granting  leave  in  accordance
    with the application.

11. It appears to us that two consequences follow from that.  The first  is
    that the appellant's appeal to this Tribunal must  be  allowed  because
    the Immigration Judge erred in law in concluding that he  was  entitled
    to look  at  the  matter  anew  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case.
    Immigration Judge WL Grant should have appreciated that  the  Secretary
    of State was obliged to carry  out  the  determination  of  Immigration
    Judge Herlihy and to grant the leave sought.  We will therefore  direct
    that the  Secretary  of  State  now  grants  leave  as  sought  by  the
    application made in 2009.

12. The second observation is this.  As we  have  made  clear,  Immigration
    Judge Herlihy did not find that the document was not  a  forgery.   She
    found that the Secretary of State had not established that it was.

13. The conclusion reached in relation to  the  present  application  is  a
    conclusion that binds the Secretary of State's treatment of the present
    application.  Because the appeal is allowed, the Secretary of State  is
    now obliged to grant leave in accordance with that application,  as  if
    it had been granted rather than refused.

14. But if the appellant makes any further application to the Secretary  of
    State or to an Entry Clearance Officer, there seems  to  us  to  be  no
    reason  in  principle  why  they  should  not  consider   whether   the
    application should be  affected  by  their  view  of  the  document  in
    question. If so, as we understand it, there  may  be  circumstances  in
    which there might be discretionary refusal of any  future  application,
    if indeed it can be established that the document in question, used  to
    support the present application, is a forgery.

15. For the reasons we have given, the appellant's appeal is allowed and we
    direct that the Secretary of State grant leave in accordance  with  the
    appellant's application.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 30 November 2011

