

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                    LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 00487 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13 and 14 October 2011                     |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     LZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


(i) There has been much public  expression  of  extreme  homophobia  at  the
highest levels in recent years.

(ii) Male homosexual behaviour is criminalised, but  prosecutions  are  very
rare. Lesbianism is not criminalised.

(iii) Some homosexuals suffer discrimination, harassment and blackmail  from
the general public and the police.  Attempted  extortion,  false  complaints
and unjustified detentions are not so prevalent as to pose a  general  risk.
There are no records of any murders with a homophobic element.   "Corrective
rape" is rare, and does not represent a general risk.

(iv) There is a "gay scene," within limitations.

(v)  Lesbians,  living  on  their  own  or  together,   may   face   greater
difficulties than gay men.

(vi) GALZ (Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe) takes a realistic  view:  Zimbabwe
is "not the worst place in the world to be gay or lesbian  even  though  the
President, government  officials  and  church  leaders  have  whipped  up  a
climate of hysterical homophobia."

(vii) Applying HJ & HT [2010] UKSC 31,  [2010]  Imm  AR  729,  there  is  no
general risk to gays or lesbians.  Personal circumstances  place  some  gays
and lesbians at risk.  Although not decisive on its own,  being  openly  gay
may increase risk.  A positive HIV/AIDS diagnosis  may  be  a  risk  factor.
Connections with the elite do not increase risk.

(viii) The police and other state agents do not provide protection.

(ix) A homosexual at risk in  his  or  her  community  can  move  elsewhere,
either in the same city or to another part of the country.  He or she  might
choose to relocate to where there is greater tolerance,  such  as  Bulawayo,
but the choice of a new area is not  restricted.   The  option  is  excluded
only if personal circumstances present risk throughout the country.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Procedural history

 1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully about 13 years ago.  She overstayed.   She  sought  asylum  in
    2009, based on the risk of persecution as a  lesbian.   The  respondent
    refused the  claim,  holding  that  even  if  the  appellant  did  face
    ostracism from her family and social  discrimination,  that  would  not
    constitute persecution; that there is a homosexual scene  in  Zimbabwe,
    especially in urban areas, from which she  could  derive  support;  and
    that if necessary she could relocate within  Harare,  or  elsewhere  in
    Zimbabwe.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Asylum  &   Immigration   Tribunal.
    Immigration  Judge  Birkby  dismissed  the  appeal   by   determination
    promulgated on 27 January  2010.   She  held  that  although  attitudes
    towards lesbians in some quarters might be significantly  disapproving,
    the appellant would not suffer ill-treatment or persecution as a result
    of her sexuality.

 3. The appellant sought  reconsideration,  arguing  that  the  Immigration
    Judge failed to apply the test of "reasonable discretion", explained in
    XY (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  911  and  MK  (Lesbians)  Albania  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00036.

 4. Under transitional provisions, the application for reconsideration fell
    to be treated as an application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 18 February 2010, permission was granted.

 5. The case came before the Upper Tribunal firstly on  8  September  2010.
    The appellant argued that the  law  had  moved  on,  and  the  test  of
    discretion, which the Immigration Judge overlooked, was not the correct
    criterion.  The Immigration Judge's material error was failure to apply
    the test explained in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31,
    [2010] Imm AR 729, in particular per Lord Hope at paragraph 35 and Lord
    Roger at paragraph 82.  On the findings of fact made by the Immigration
    Judge, the appeal fell to be allowed.

 6.  The  respondent  argued  that  the  background  was  one  of  societal
    disapproval but not persecution.  The tests explained  by  the  Supreme
    Court did not come into play, so there was no error of law material  to
    the outcome.

 7. Reasons for finding legal error in the AIT determination  were  issued,
    dated 19 April 2011. It was held, with no disrespect to the Immigration
    Judge, that she erred by failing to apply the approach explained in  HJ
    & HT.  The appellant's case had to be reheard.  It was identified as  a
    potential Country Guidance case on risk  to  homosexuals  in  Zimbabwe.
    After various further  procedural  hearings  and  directions,  it  came
    before us for such hearing on 13 and 14  October  2011.   This  is  our
    joint determination, to which each of us has contributed.

Expert and background evidence

 8. The appellant filed a report dated 8 July 2011 by Dr  Oliver  Phillips,
    Reader in law at the University of Westminster.  He grew up in Zimbabwe
    in the 1970's, and has  returned  regularly  since.   He  has  been  an
    adviser to and a member of the executive committee of  GALZ  (Gays  and
    Lesbians of Zimbabwe).   (The respondent did not suggest that his views
    are biased by his strong connections with that organisation, and we are
    satisfied that they are not.)  He has published extensively on regional
    social, sexual and criminological issues.  He is a well  qualified  and
    recognised expert.  He was a witness at the hearing.  His evidence  has
    been  of  high  value,  although  we  have  not  accepted  all  of  his
    conclusions.

 9. The appellant also filed a report by Dr L B Aguilar, of the  University
    of St  Andrews,  whose  academic  background  is  in  anthropology  and
    religion.   She  has  researched  and  published  on  southeast  Africa
    (centring apparently on Malawi).  She mentions nine periods of research
    in the region, from 1998 to 2009.  She states  that  she  has  prepared
    numerous  expert  reports  for  the  courts,  for  countries  including
    Zimbabwe.  She did not give oral evidence.

10. The appellant further filed about 100 pages of  newspaper  reports  and
    other information.

11. The respondent filed a bundle comprising some 34 shorter items; a  UKBA
    report of a Fact Finding Mission, 9-12 August 2010; a Country of Origin
    Information Report (COIR), dated 19 August  2011;  and  transcripts  of
    interviews carried out in Harare by the First Secretary of the  British
    Embassy with representatives of three  Zimbabwean  organisations.   The
    interviews were with GALZ on 1 and 3 August 2011, with WOZA  (Women  of
    Zimbabwe Arise) on 23 August 2011, and with ZLHR (Zimbabwe Lawyers  for
    Human Rights) on 26 August 2011.

12. The materials, with references as provided by  the  parties,  are  more
    fully listed in Appendix A.

13. Neither party referred directly to  the  US  State  Department  Country
    Report on Human Rights Practices, Zimbabwe,  2010,  published  8  April
    2011, although it is a source quoted in the background materials  filed
    on both sides, and is in the respondent's bundle.  It seems to  be  the
    main channel for  the  suggestion  that  there  are  any  incidents  of
    "corrective rape".

14. We have taken into account since the hearing a BBC News  report  of  24
    October  2011,  and  representatives'  written  comments  thereon,   as
    explained below.

15. We have identified a further relevant statutory provision of Zimbabwean
    criminal law.  We have not  found  it  necessary  to  ask  for  further
    submissions in light of that section, both because it is  not  critical
    to our eventual findings, and because it speaks for itself.

Terminology

16. In the UNHCR  Guidance  Note  on  Refugee  Claims  Relating  to  Sexual
    Orientation and Gender Identity (21 November 2008, web link at Appendix
    A; not cited by parties) the preferred terminology is "LGBT" so  as  to
    refer not to "homosexuals", but to "lesbians" in the case of women  and
    "gays" in the case of men.  The Note makes it clear  that  the  use  of
    "homosexuals" to include gay women is better avoided.  However, in this
    determination we have had to reflect the language of the  evidence  and
    submissions.  We have thus used "homosexuals" to refer to gay  men,  or
    to homosexuals of either gender, as the context requires.

Anonymisation

17. Before us,  the  appellant  did  not  rely  only  on  general  risk  to
    homosexuals, or to  female  homosexuals.   To  a  greater  extent  than
    before, partly in light of subsequent events in Zimbabwe, she relied on
    her unique circumstances.  Parties agreed that it is not desirable  for
    this determination to make her identity public.  Under rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, we  have  set  out  the
    particular reasons for the decision in her case in Appendix B.  We have
    not included matters likely to identify her in the main  body  of  this
    determination.  Appendix B will therefore not appear  in  the  reported
    determination, and its disclosure is prohibited.

18. To preserve anonymity, we have not applied Practice Statement  3.7  and
    have not incorporated in full the reasons for finding error of  law  in
    the AIT determination.

Some common ground

19. EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), the current
    starting point for Zimbabwean asylum cases, is not concerned with  risk
    to homosexuals.  Neither party asked us to make any finding which might
    be inconsistent with the findings in EM.

20. The background materials and  submissions  disclose  a  large  area  of
    common ground, which we can therefore  summarise  briefly.   There  has
    been much public expression of extreme homophobia at the highest levels
    in recent years.  President Mugabe is most vociferous.  He  has  blamed
    the LBGT community for  Africa's  ills  and  repeatedly  denounced  its
    members as "worse than  pigs  and  dogs."   Prime  Minister  Tsvangirai
    (until recently) did not venture to dissent from  such  rhetoric.   The
    President's main ally in such rhetoric is "Archbishop" Kunonga, who has
    used anti-homosexuality as a prominent theme in splitting the  Anglican
    Communion (from which he has been excommunicated), largely  to  satisfy
    his own greed, with police backing.

21. An example of how the background evidence  demonstrates  a  link  among
    homophobia, political posturing and other motives is  an  excerpt  from
    the Zimbabwean Metro newspaper of  22  September  2011,  filed  by  the
    appellant:

         Gay love row bishop seizes orphanage: A struck-off bishop close  to
         President Mugabe has taken over an  orphanage  of  80  children  in
         protest at gay marriages.  Norbert Kunonga has also seized  schools
         and priests' homes ...

22. There have been no gay marriages in Zimbabwe, either  in  the  Anglican
    Church or elsewhere.

23.  The  law  criminalises  homosexual  behaviour,  at  least  among  male
    homosexuals.  Some homosexuals suffer  discrimination,  harassment  and
    blackmail from some of the general public, and from the police.

The extent of the dispute

24. The dispute between the parties is over the seriousness and  extent  of
    actual  ill-treatment.  Mr  Selway  invited  us  to  allow  the  appeal
    primarily because all homosexuals, male and  female,  are  at  risk  of
    persecution throughout Zimbabwe.  On matters  contentious  between  the
    parties,  he  relied  almost   entirely   on   Dr   Phillips'   report.
    Alternatively,  he  asked  us  to  find  LZ  at  risk  of  persecution,
    throughout the country, in her own circumstances.

25. The respondent invited us to conclude that there  is  no  general  ill-
    treatment of homosexuals, male or female, to a level rising to  a  real
    risk of persecution.  We were also asked to find that LZ is not at  any
    personal risk, and there was therefore no need to consider  relocation.
    On contentious matters, the respondent relied mainly on the COIR and on
    the interviews with GALZ, ZLHR and WOZA.

26. The submissions for the respondent reflected her  current  "Operational
    Guidance Note" (OGN), which is along  the  following  lines.  There  is
    ingrained anti-homosexual  prejudice  and  discrimination,  often  more
    severe against women because of their  lower  social  status.   On  the
    other hand, there is growing tolerance  among  younger  people  and  in
    urban areas.  There may be problems over access to  health  facilities.
    There have been arrests of gay men and gay rights activists, but  these
    are isolated cases.  There  have  been  reports  of  societal  anti-gay
    violence.  GALZ considers it much more difficult for lesbians  to  come
    out.  Difficulties are not generally at the level of persecution or  of
    ill-treatment to Article 3 standards.

The criminal law

27.  It  was  not  disputed  before  us,  and  we  think  it   is   legally
    uncontentious, that  the  existence  of  a  law  penalising  consensual
    homosexual acts does not itself constitute persecution; but if  such  a
    law is routinely enforced, and penalties imposed, that is  persecutory.
    We take that as another starting point.

28. The Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act came into effect in July
    2006.  It includes the following:

         Section 73.  Sodomy


         (1)      Any male person who, with  the  consent  of  another  male
         person, knowingly performs  with  that  other  person  anal  sexual
         intercourse, or any other act involving physical contact other than
         anal sexual intercourse that would  be  regarded  by  a  reasonable
         person to be an indecent act, shall be guilty of sodomy and  liable
         to a fine up to or exceeding level 14 or imprisonment for a  period
         not exceeding one year or both.

29. Thus, sodomy is defined so as to incorporate any consensual sexual  act
    between men.  GALZ state that most cases are dealt with by  the  police
    as non-consensual, although contrary to the  facts.   That  creates  an
    offence equivalent to aggravated indecent assault, attracting the  same
    penalty as rape, a maximum of life imprisonment, although generally  of
    between 7 and 10 years.

30. Dr  Phillips  records  the  prior  common  law  history  of  "unnatural
    offences" in Zimbabwe, derived from the Roman-Dutch law existing at the
    Cape in 1891, and developed through precedent mainly  by  reference  to
    South African cases.  He notes  statutory  provisions  penalising  non-
    consensual sexual acts between women.  He  puts  forward  a  theory  at
    pages 29 and 30 of his report, which is not based  on  statute  or  any
    reported  common  law  cases.    He   considers   that   the   recently
    reconstituted and compliant majority of the Supreme Court would  permit
    the government to prosecute consensual lesbian sex on the basis of  the
    Roman-Dutch common law, notwithstanding that there  has  been  no  such
    charge for over 150 years.


Prosecution

31. Dr Phillips told us that it is not possible to offer any clear idea  of
    how many prosecutions of men for homosexual offences have  taken  place
    in recent years, due to lack of  reporting.   The  last  Supreme  Court
    report he can identify dates from 1991.  It  relates  to  a  consensual
    homosexual  act  in  a  private  place.   A  sentence  of   10   months
    imprisonment with labour was reduced on appeal to  a  small  fine.   Dr
    Phillips considers that most  prosecutions  would  take  place  in  the
    Magistrates Court.  They would never  reach  the  High  Court,  Supreme
    Court or public ear and would go unreported.  Sentences of less than  6
    months are not automatically reviewed in the High Court,  and  are  not
    traceable in public records.  In his report, Dr Phillips says that  the
    continuance of such prosecutions is "clearly illustrated by the  report
    in the press of the appearance in Bindura Magistrates Court of [2  men]
    on charges of sodomy on 19 December 2010.  I am as yet unable to  glean
    any information as to the sentences they received in exchange for their
    guilty pleas."  Updating this in his evidence, Dr  Phillips  said  that
    more recent information is that the  2  men  were  in  fact  acquitted.
    There is confusion over whether guilty pleas had been  tendered,  which
    would appear anomalous, or whether there was a trial.  It is clear from
    all sources, however, that there were no convictions.

32. In May 2010, police with a search warrant  entered  the  GALZ  offices,
    looking for suspected dangerous drugs and pornographic materials.  They
    removed DVDs, 3 computers and other physical  items.   These  have  not
    been returned, although GALZ, through ZLHR, has sought  their  release.
    Two men were detained  during  the  raid.   They  have  been  variously
    described as two employees or members of GALZ, or as one employee and a
    visitor to the premises, who was neither  a  member  nor  an  employee.
    Nothing turns on those minor discrepancies.  The men were detained  for
    a  few  days,  but  released  without  charge.   They  have  not   been
    prosecuted.

33. Various sources, including ZLHR, describe the recent instance of 5 men,
    known homosexuals, who were arrested in a private  home  for  "criminal
    nuisance."  This did not result in any prosecution.

34. GALZ at interview said that  they  were  not  aware  of  any  cases  of
    consenting adults prosecuted for sodomy in 2009, 2010  or  2011.   They
    referred to the Bindura case of 2010.  They described it as a case of a
    male gay couple reported by their  landlady,  resulting  in  acquittal.
    Cases of threatened arrest and complaints to the police, not  resulting
    in prosecution or even in many cases of detention, were said to run  at
    3-4 per month.  There were no current prosecutions.

35. ZLHR were similarly not aware of any convictions for  sodomy  in  2009,
    2010 or 2011.   They  were  aware  of  threats  of  arrest  being  used
    regularly to harass homosexual men and women.

36. In cross-examination, Dr Phillips told us that his information is  that
    the Bindura case was the only  one  to  have  come  in  front  of  that
    Magistrates Court, where several Magistrates sit,  for  several  years.
    He explained that as well as  regional  Magistrates  Courts  there  are
    local Magistrates Courts, where proceedings are summary  and  informal.
    He thought that despite the lack of public records or press  reporting,
    it  remains  possible  that  there  are  prosecutions   of   consensual
    homosexual conduct in those lower courts.  He did not think there would
    be many.

37. Dr Phillips has no record  of  any  case  in  either  South  Africa  or
    Zimbabwe of prosecution of two  women  engaging  in  consensual  sexual
    activity.

38. Dr Phillips constructed a rather ingenious argument on the  possibility
    of prosecution of consensual lesbian activity.   We  were  inclined  to
    agree that it was not  beyond  imagination  that  if  President  Mugabe
    insisted on such a prosecution in some high profile case, the  Attorney
    General and Supreme Court might bend to his will.  As there  had  never
    been such a case, we considered that possibility so remote  as  not  to
    pose a real risk to any Zimbabwean lesbian.

39. We have, since the hearing, noted this  section  of  The  Criminal  Law
    (Codification and Reform) Act:

                 3.  Roman-Dutch criminal law no longer to apply
         (1)  The non-statutory Roman-Dutch criminal law in  force  in  the
         Colony of the Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  10th  June,  1891,  as
         subsequently modified in Zimbabwe, shall  no  longer  apply  within
         Zimbabwe to the  extent  that  this  Code  expressly  or  impliedly
         enacts, re-enacts, amends, modifies or repeals that law.
         (2)  Subsection (1) shall not prevent a court,  when  interpreting
         any provision of this Code, from obtaining guidance  from  judicial
         decisions and legal writings on relevant aspects of(
                 (a)   the criminal law referred to in subsection (1);  or
               (b)     the criminal law that is or was in force in any
country other than Zimbabwe.

40.  That  further  diminishes  any  possibility  of  prosecuting   lesbian
    behaviour.

41. Zimbabwe has a lively press, although largely subservient to  President
    Mugabe.  There are active human rights organisations which  follow  gay
    and lesbian issues, and  publish  reports.   If  consensual  homosexual
    conduct was being prosecuted, even in the  lower  courts  with  minimal
    penalties, we consider that there would have been some press reporting,
    and that organisations like GALZ and ZLHR  would  know  about  it.   Dr
    Phillips frankly accepted that he was proceeding upon  assumptions  and
    not upon available data, and he thought  that  the  incidence  of  such
    prosecution would be low.  The other sources before us,  including  the
    US State Department Country Report, consistently state that there  have
    been no recent prosecutions of consensual homosexual conduct.

42. The only conclusion sensibly available is  that  such  conduct  is  not
    prosecuted to any meaningful extent.

Police detention, and blackmail

43. There is obvious force in the remarks recorded by Dr Phillips  in  1993
    when he interviewed the Director of Public Prosecutions, who is  now  a
    High  Court  Judge.   The  interviewee  opined  that  the  law  against
    homosexual sex "has the main  effect  of  working  as  a  blackmailer's
    charter".  The passage of time, with increasing public  homophobia,  is
    only likely to have made matters worse.

44. We are satisfied from Dr Phillips' report,  and  from  other  evidence,
    that attempted extortion, and  police  detentions  of  homosexuals,  do
    occur.  Such detentions do not result in  prosecutions  for  homosexual
    offending.  GALZ  and  ZLHR  have  devised  successful  strategies  for
    dealing with  blackmail  attempts,  relying  on  the  fact  that  while
    prosecutions for homosexuality are virtually unknown, the penalties for
    blackmail are serious (GALZ website, "The blackmailer's charter").

45. Parties did not direct us to evidence of the numbers of such incidents,
    but we have noted  the  International  Gay  and  Lesbian  Human  Rights
    Commission (IGLHRC)  report  of  15th  February  2011,  filed  for  the
    appellant.  This describes an average of one case per month  coming  to
    attention in 2003, the police being actively involved in half of  them.
    There is no description of how the statistics were obtained.

46. The examples found in the background evidence concern male  homosexuals
    only.  There are no reports of such treatment suffered by lesbians.

47. The practice is common enough for GALZ and ZLHR to have worked out  how
    to deal with it, but we conclude that the evidence does not demonstrate
    instances of attempted extortion, false complaints to the  police,  and
    unjustified detentions which  are  so  prevalent  as  to  constitute  a
    general risk.

Murder

48. Dr Phillips' report at page 61 refers to sometimes  fatal  consequences
    for those perceived to be gay.   In  his  oral  evidence,  however,  Dr
    Phillips accepted that he knew of no murder where homophobia  was  with
    confidence alleged to be the motive. His caveat was that he did know of
    a few instances where a homophobic motive had been suspected  by  GALZ,
    but there had been no direct evidence to that effect.

49. Murders with a homophobic element may of course occur in Zimbabwe,  and
    may not appear as such in any public record.  Neither party referred us
    to any evidence of such events, nor have we found any.  We find nothing
    to support the proposition that this is a real risk to  homosexuals  of
    either gender.

"Corrective rape"

50. This term refers to the practice of homosexuals, both male and  female,
    being raped by persons of  the  opposite  sex  with  the  intention  of
    converting their sexuality.

51. The Appellant relied upon an internet  report  from  SW  Radio  Africa,
    dated  8  April  2010,  by  Violet  Gonda,  "Corrective  rape   against
    homosexuals on the rise in Zimbabwe". The author  cites  the  US  State
    Department Report on Zimbabwe, which appears to  be  the  2009  report,
    published in  April  2010.  She  asserts  that  through  the  guise  of
    corrective rape, lesbian women are raped by  men  to  make  them  enjoy
    heterosexual acts, while gay men are raped by  women,  sometimes  under
    supervision  of  villagers  and  relatives,  to  remove  their   sexual
    orientation. It is asserted that the source shows that some homosexuals
    are forced to marry to encourage heterosexual conduct, while others are
    taught the error of their ways by being raped by family members.

52. The US Department of State Report 2010, published on 8 April 2011, does
    not go quite that far. At Section 6, the report states:

         General homophobia and restrictive legislation  made  it  difficult
         for the LGBT community to feel safe about being  open  about  their
         sexuality in public. Because of significant social  pressure,  some
         families reportedly subjected men and women  to  "corrective"  rape
         and forced marriages to encourage heterosexual conduct: the  crimes
         were  rarely  reported  to  police.  Women,  in  particular,   were
         subjected to rape by male members of their own families.

53. No statistics are given, and no source is identified.

54. The COIR of 19 August 2011 contains  only  the  following  passages  on
    "corrective rape." (The same appeared in the COIR of 25 March 2011.)

        20.33  The Institute  for  the  Democratic  Alternative  for  South
        Africa noted in its States in Transition Observatory (SITO  report)
        - Zimbabwe Government of National Unity Watch, April 2010, dated 14
        May 2010, that: "Corrective rape against gay men and lesbians is on
        the rise. Victims are  particularly  vulnerable  given  the  stigma
        attached to homosexuality in Zimbabwe which makes it difficult  for
        them to report crimes or seek medical attention."


         20.34  An article in New Zimbabwe, titled Interview: GALZ's  Fadzai
        Muparutsa, dated  13  April  2010,  recorded  the  response  of  Ms
        Muparutsa to the question "...has your Association [GALZ]  actually
        received such reports [of "corrective"  or  "curative"  rape]?":  -
        "Yes we have. ... there aren't that many, we can't say it is on the
        increase but what's happened of late is that people are  talking  a
        lot more about it and so people will come to the office and  report
        cases that they have experienced and particularly at the  hands  of
        either their families, because this kind of rape usually happens in
        private spaces, in the homes or in close knit  societies  that  our
        members stay in."

55. Dr Phillips was questioned at some length on this issue.  He  had  only
    ever heard of two examples of "corrective rape" in Zimbabwe, both being
    the rape of lesbian women. He referred to the rape of Ms Chipo  Machida
    in his report because she had made public disclosure of  her  rape,  as
    being at the instigation of her  parents,  and  as  being  intended  to
    result in her conception of a child. He had not referred to  the  other
    example, and did not wish to name the woman concerned, because she made
    the disclosure to him in confidence.

56. Dr Phillips says in his  report  that  Ms  Machida  believes  that  her
    experience is not exceptional amongst  the  lesbians  that  she  knows.
    However, in his oral evidence he told us that he did not believe  there
    to be such a "practice" or "culture" in any area of Zimbabwe, or within
    any  ethnic  community  in  Zimbabwe.   He  distinguished  between  the
    situation in Zimbabwe and in South Africa, because  in  the  latter  it
    could  properly  be  said  that  there  is  such  a  practice  in  some
    communities.

57. We think that through Dr Phillips' close contacts with GALZ  and  ZLHR,
    and the nature of his research,  he  would  hear  of  any  examples  of
    "corrective rape"  known  to  Ms  Muparutsa  (the  GALZ  representative
    interviewed above), and if there has been a real rise in this practice,
    he would be well aware of it.

58. From the references parties made to the sources before us, from our own
    examination of  them,  and  from  the  evidence  of  Dr  Phillips,  our
    assessment is that "corrective rape" is rare.  We accept that  it  does
    happen, and of its nature must often be a hidden crime, but it does not
    represent a real risk to homosexuals of either gender.

Dr Aguilar's report

59. The report (undated) runs to 7 pages.  Dr Aguilar explains that in both
    Shona and Ndebele culture, an individual's ties to family and community
    are paramount, whether the individual is Christian or not.  Those  ties
    are developed through marriage and  through  procreation  of  children.
    Marriage of its young women may be an important economic  consideration
    for a family, because the receipt of "bride price" in turn  allows  its
    young men to marry.

60. Dr Aguilar's opinion is that homosexuality within such a culture  is  a
    denial of the cycle of life, and of fertility. Thus  it  is  viewed  as
    unnatural and outside social norms, but also as harmful  and  dangerous
    to the wellbeing of the extended family, because it places the  lineage
    at risk.

61. Dr Aguilar's description of the general background is  consistent  with
    the report by Dr Phillips, and with the other sources.

62. Presumably the report was publicly  funded,  and  the  author  and  the
    appellant's solicitors thought at the outset that it might be  of  some
    assistance.   We were shown the relevant email exchange.  On  21  April
    2011 the author accepted instructions on the  express  basis  that  she
    would not give oral evidence.  While she explains  how  she  knows  the
    region, Dr Aguilar does not tell us  whether  she  has  ever  lived  in
    Zimbabwe,  or  even  visited.   Her  footnotes  suggest  that  she  has
    undertaken  some  direct  research  with  individuals  and  groups   in
    Zimbabwe, but details of those conversations are not provided.  Lacking
    such references, and given her non-availability to  be  questioned,  we
    are unable to ascertain who she consulted, or when.  We note  that  her
    answer to  the  question  whether  there  is  criminal  prosecution  of
    homosexuality in Zimbabwe is based on a well  known  reported  case  in
    Malawi.  We find it strange that an expert should be unwilling to  have
    her evidence and opinions tested at a hearing.  In submissions, neither
    party suggested that this report helps to resolve any issue before  us.
    It has played no significant part in reaching our conclusions.

The WOZA interview

63. WOZA was formed in 2003 to represent women's interests in Zimbabwe.  It
    currently has some 75,000  members,  spread  around  the  country.   It
    appears to us to be a responsible and  reliable  source.  Some  of  the
    information it provided at interview is worth setting  out  at  length,
    because it is in point, and is not generally available.

64. GALZ and ZLHR are also significant and reliable sources, but they  have
    specialised interests, and are tiny by comparison; only a  few  hundred
    members.  There are, however,  no  significant  contradictions  in  the
    information provided by the three organisations.

65. These are excerpts from the interview conducted by Mr Marshall  of  the
    British Embassy, Harare, with an official of WOZA on  23  August  2011.
    (The record has been edited for grammatical consistency only.)

        Q22.  Are the younger generation more accepting of gays/lesbians?


        A.  It is difficult to say as most  Zimbabweans  including  younger
        people are more interested in  fundamental  issues  such  as  food,
        housing, education and jobs. Generally Zimbabweans do not  tend  to
        openly discuss their sexuality.


        Q25.  Is it socially acceptable for two men to live together? Would
        they experience societal discrimination as perceived gays?


        A.  Generally it would be acceptable for two men to live  together,
        and it would be assumed they were relatives, friends, or  from  the
        same village.  It  would  not  necessarily  be  assumed  they  were
        homosexual.


        Q26.     Is it socially acceptable for two women to live  together?
        Would they experience societal discrimination as perceived gays?


        A.  Generally  it  would  be  acceptable  for  two  women  to  live
        together, and similar  to  men,  it  would  be  assumed  they  were
        friends,  relatives,  or  from  the  same  village.  It  would  not
        necessarily be assumed they were homosexual.


        Q28.     In general, are younger women who are not yet settled more
        at risk, or does the risk increase with age?


        A.   Perceptions  and  expectations  are  changing  in   Zimbabwean
        culture, across both urban and rural societies. In the  past  women
        would have been expected to marry young and produce a  family,  but
        the onset of HIV/AIDS pandemic has seen an increase in young widows
        and the early death of young women leaving orphaned children. Women
        are now being encouraged to delay marriage and sexual  activity  to
        lessen the risk. WOZA  has  done  a  great  deal  of  work  in  the
        communities educating women on their rights and value in society.


        Q30.     Is there any information about whether open  or  perceived
        lesbians are at risk in Zimbabwe?


        A.  It all depends upon the individual. Whilst high profile persons
        perceived to be gay might be at risk from  increased  interest  and
        speculation on their sexuality, primarily in  the  media,  ordinary
        persons are less likely to be at similar risk or risk of violence.


        Q31.  Whilst the greatest risk is in the metropolitan area, outside
        the cities does gossip about a  woman  with  no  children  or  male
        friends (unless there is an obvious good reason)  entail  risk,  or
        additional risk?


        A.  We do not believe this to be the case.


        Q34.  If a woman has no male friends, what is the reaction of local
        men? Would it be assumed by the wider community that a lack of male
        friends suggest that a  woman  is  sexually  "available"?  Would  a
        rejection of advances by men be accepted, or is there a chance of a
        violent response? What type of response would a woman get  -  would
        she be able to walk  away,  or  would  there  be  a  likelihood  of
        violence or even murder?


        A.  It would  depend  upon  the  woman's  activities.  If  a  woman
        selected a number of  sexual  partners,  she  might  be  viewed  as
        promiscuous. It is unlikely any rejection of sexual advances  would
        result in physical violence, but there might be some verbal abuse.


        Q35.     Is it likely that someone would  lose  their  job  and  be
        asked/forced to leave their home if they were perceived to  be  gay
        or lesbian?


        A.  It could depend upon the nature of the employment. If a  person
        were employed in the civil service or in a government job, then  it
        is very possible they might  lose  their  jobs  if  their  employer
        became aware the individual was homosexual. It might be less likely
        in other jobs. WOZA is not aware of a person  losing  accommodation
        because of their sexual orientation.


        Q36.  Do we have any information on whether rejection of suitors by
        single women would be a risk factor?


        A.  It would depend upon individual circumstances, but generally it
        would be unlikely this would put the woman  at  increased  physical
        risk.


        Q37.     Because the risks arise from perceived as well  as  actual
        lesbian sexual orientation, does internal relocation enhance safety
        or not?


        A.  Internal relocation from rural to urban locations might be more
        successful as it would be likely there are larger  gay  communities
        in the urban  areas.  Relocation  from  urban  to  rural  would  be
        unlikely to succeed as there would be no open gay community.


        Q38.      Are newcomers in rural communities subject to speculation
        about  their  sexuality  (derived   from   asking   questions   and
        observation)?  In this  case,  would  they  be  at  risk  of  being
        identified as lesbians or gays?


        A.  The most likely reaction to newcomers to rural areas  would  be
        curiosity. It is unlikely speculation  would  be  made  upon  their
        sexual orientation.


        Q39.     Are women expected to become  sexually  active  early  and
        remain so into their sixties, unless there is an obvious reason why
        they do not currently have a partner such as recent widowhood?


         A.  Zimbabweans both in the urban and rural areas are becoming more
        cautious about  their  sexual  activity  since  the  onset  of  the
        HIV/AIDS pandemic.

The gay scene

66. There was debate before us as to whether  anything  in  Zimbabwe  could
    properly be described as a gay community, or gay venue.

67. GALZ is able to organise some social events for its members in  Harare.
    There are two annual functions that have been  held  for  a  number  of
    years. One is timed to observe the international  Gay  Pride  month  of
    June. The other, home grown, event is  "ZimPride",  or  "The  Jacaranda
    Festival", over a week in October, culminating in  the  Miss  Jacaranda
    Queen Drag Pageant. To date, despite difficulties, this has  been  held
    in a public hall.

68. The International Gay Guide, Spartacus, 2009 edition, states that there
    were two gay friendly nightclubs in the Borrowdale area of Harare.

69. Dr Phillips denied that Harare ever had a gay bar or gay club, although
    he  accepted  that  there  were  historically  bars  and  clubs   where
    homosexuals were at least tolerated. He  considered  that  difficulties
    would arise for the owners and operators of  such  businesses  if  they
    permitted overt displays of affection such as kissing, and so behaviour
    was moderated accordingly.

70. A BBC article dated 7 August 2007 describes "The Book Caf�"  in  Harare
    as the "epicentre of Harare's alternative culture". That venue has also
    historically been acknowledged by GALZ itself as a gay friendly  venue.
    The only  evidence  that  we  have  seen  of  this  venue  experiencing
    difficulties with the authorities is a report on the  African  Activist
    website dated  26  June  2011,  which  carried  an  article  originally
    published by Bulawayo24 News:

         Zimbabwe police are investigating Book Caf� in Harare after a group
         of LGBTI persons showed up for a 4 June concert by afro-pop  artist
         John Pfumojena. Some members of the group were dressed in drag  and
         showed public signs of affection. Criminal Investigation Department
         (CID) spokesperson Inspector Zimbili said, 'The law is  very  clear
         on that matter; if there was a gay parade or festival at that mall,
         we are going to carry [out] a full investigation.'

71. An official of GALZ volunteered to the UKBA Fact Finding  Mission  2010
    that Bulawayo is more open  and  tolerant  and  has  a  very  different
    atmosphere from Harare, with a gay nightclub in the middle of town.  Dr
    Phillips told us that he was unable to provide any specific  assistance
    in relation to Bulawayo, because although he had regularly visited  the
    city, he had not spent any significant periods of time  there.  He  was
    prepared to accept that Bulawayo would be a more tolerant society  than
    Harare.

72. At  the  end  of  2004  there  were  9  different  regional  groups  or
    associations affiliated with GALZ. There is no  evidence  that  any  of
    these regional groups have subsequently ceased to function. It  follows
    that in these nine towns or cities there  are  some,  although  perhaps
    limited,  opportunities  for  homosexuals  to  meet  and  socialise   -
    Bulawayo;   Chipinge;   Chitungwiza;   Marondera;   Masvingo;   Mutare;
    Penhalonga; and Victoria Falls.

73. It may be that this evidence of a  community,  with  regional  centres,
    lies behind the claim in a news article published  by  The  Zimbabwean,
    dated 18 April 2011, to the effect that Zimbabwe has a flourishing  gay
    community.

74. It was Mr Selway's position that there was no  gay  scene,  because  no
    individual could ever risk being identified as gay.  We  are  satisfied
    that is too simplistic an approach, not borne out by the evidence.  The
    degree of openness with which homosexuals may live is not as in Western
    Europe or North America, but it is rather more  than  Dr  Phillips  was
    prepared  to  acknowledge,  particularly  among  the  professional  and
    educated classes, and in the urban centres  of  Harare  and,  more  so,
    Bulawayo.  There is a limited "gay scene."

Women on their own

75. Our understanding of the position of women on their own in Zimbabwe  is
    derived mainly from the evidence of Dr Phillips.  It  is  confirmed  by
    the other sources before us, and brought up to date  in  light  of  the
    information from WOZA.

76. Historically, women were expected to become sexually active  early  and
    to remain so into their sixties. Social attitudes  are  changing  as  a
    result of HIV/AIDS, so that Zimbabwe is more accepting of  delay  by  a
    woman to the start of her sexual activity, and self-restriction of  the
    number of sexual partners she may take.

77. The extended family of a woman traditionally had an  economic  interest
    in her availability for marriage.  The division between the position of
    a woman in a polygamous cultural marriage, and a single woman who lives
    alone as an individual's mistress, is not clear cut.  The  position  of
    the latter may with time be indistinguishable by society from  that  of
    the former. Zimbabwean society does not discriminate  against  a  woman
    who chooses to take the role of a mistress, and a large number of women
    do.  There are, of course, many monogamous married couples,  but  there
    has been historically a significant number of mature women  not  living
    in a monogamous relationship.

78. Historically a single woman living alone was at risk of the  perception
    that she was a prostitute, a mistress, or a lesbian, but  that  too  is
    changing as a result of HIV/AIDS. Accordingly, lesbians who are  either
    naturally discreet, or  who  are  willing  to  present  a  heterosexual
    narrative for family or societal reasons, are unlikely to be identified
    as such.

79. An economically active lesbian is at  less  risk  of  perception  as  a
    lesbian because she is more likely to be able to afford to  live  in  a
    low density housing area, and so to enjoy a measure of protection  from
    public scrutiny of her  lifestyle  and  circumstances,  which  a  woman
    living in a high density housing area would not be able to enjoy.

80. The perception that a woman is a lesbian may lead to discrimination  or
    harassment from some individuals, but not generally to violence.  There
    is a higher level  of  tolerance  of  homosexuality  within  Zimbabwean
    society than government rhetoric would suggest.

81. Where a real risk of persecution or serious harm  is  established,  the
    police do not offer lesbians any sufficient protection.

82.  GALZ  is  a  long  established  organisation,  with  nine   affiliated
    organisations across Zimbabwe,  whose  existence  is  tolerated.  If  a
    lesbian is willing to join the organisation (which can be done on  line
    without visiting Harare) GALZ is able to provide some support  to  her,
    including practical support in providing  access  to  lawyers  (through
    ZLHR), and to doctors and clinics which are not homophobic.

83. ZLHR have had considerable success in dealing with cases  of  blackmail
    referred to them by GALZ.  Thus although there is a small risk  that  a
    woman perceived to be a lesbian might face  an  attempt  at  blackmail,
    there is a means of redress.

Prime Minister Tsvangirai's remarks on 24 October 2011

84. Dr Phillips' report points out  at  pp.  35-36  that  one  of  the  few
    constitutional issues on which  President  Mugabe  and  Prime  Minister
    Tsvangirai have agreed is that the  proposed  new  constitution  is  to
    exclude any explicit provision of rights for gays and  lesbians.   This
    approach may be a pragmatic political necessity binding the MDC, but it
    reflects the strictures on Zimbabwean public  debate  on  such  issues.
    President Mugabe's posturing on the issue and his identification of any
    other  view  as  alien,  colonial  and  western  made  it   practically
    impossible for anyone publicly to take  a  more  liberal  and  tolerant
    position.

85. We were persuaded by Dr Phillips' analysis of the public debate; but it
    has since moved on.

86. After the hearing, the respondent drew our attention to a BBC news item
    of 24 October 2011:

         Zimbabwe's  Prime  Minister  Morgan  Tsvangirai  has  reversed  his
         position on gay rights, saying he now wants them enshrined in a new
         constitution.  He told the BBC that gay rights were a "human right"
         that conservative Zimbabweans should respect.

         ...  Mr Tsvangirai told BBC's Newsnight programme that there was  a
         "very strong cultural feeling" against homosexuality  in  Zimbabwe,
         but he would defend gay rights if he became President.

         ... "It's a very controversial subject in my part of the world.  My
         attitude is that I hope the constitution will come out with freedom
         of sexual orientation, for as long as it does  not  interfere  with
         anybody," he told Newsnight's Gavin Esler.  "To me,  it's  a  human
         right," he said.

         Zimbabwe's long-time leader Mr Mugabe - a  practising  Christian  -
         once  said  gays  were  "worse  than  pigs  and   dogs",   sparking
         international condemnation.

         In March 2010, Mr  Tsvangirai  said  gay  rights  was  not  up  for
         discussion in Zimbabwe.  "I totally agree with the  president,"  he
         said at the time. Mr Tsvangirai's U-turn suggests that he now wants
         Zimbabwe to adopt a liberal policy, similar to that of neighbouring
         South Africa.  But he will face strong resistance from  Mr  Mugabe,
         who will exploit Mr Tsvangirai's U-turn  to  drum  up  support  for
         himself in the run-up to the election...

87. The respondent copied this to Mr Selway.  He had no  objection  to  the
    news item being admitted into evidence.  He submitted in  writing  that
    it was only  a  small  step  in  the  right  direction,  and  that  the
    Commission on the Constitution had "no intention of granting rights  to
    LGBT people .... Further, it is highly unlikely that [Mr  Tsvangirai's]
    words will have any ... impact on the deeply entrenched homophobia that
    is evident in all walks of life in Zimbabwe."

88. We recognise that in making this a public issue, Mr Tsvangirai's  words
    may have the short  term  effect  of  provoking  even  more  homophobic
    rhetoric.  However, we think it also shows the underlying reality  that
    the general public is not as hostile to homosexuals as the  President's
    political  bombast  suggests.  The  news  item  has  not  altered   our
    conclusions, but it tends to reinforce them.

News item, 15 August 2011

89. Mr Parkinson drew our attention to a news item which was in the bundles
    of  both  sides,  from  Zimbabwean  News  Online  of  15  August  2011,
    headlined:

         The assistant editor  from  H-Metro  faces  dismissal  after  being
         caught red-handed bonking a male hooker during a Presidential  trip
         to Windhoek.


90. This is a story, in rather lurid terms, of a favoured journalist  whose
    turn it was to join the Presidential entourage on a foreign  trip,  and
    who had caused similar embarrassment previously.  It is speculated that
    he now faces the sack.

91. Mr Selway accepted that this might  incidentally  reveal  a  degree  of
    practical tolerance in elite circles.  He argued that we could not draw
    any general conclusion from one such example.

92. We agree that such a report  cannot  by  itself  lead  to  any  overall
    finding.  We note that even  if  the  journalist  concerned  previously
    escaped any consequences of such behaviour becoming public, he may have
    reached the limits.  However, we do find this another  example  of  the
    gulf between rhetoric and reality.

HIV/AIDS

93. RS and Others (Zimbabwe - AIDS) Zimbabwe CG [2010] UKUT 363 (IAC) found
    that a  significant  number  of  people  are  receiving  treatment  for
    HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe, and a Zimbabwean returnee will not succeed  in  a
    claim for international protection on  the  basis  of  a  diagnosis  of
    HIV/AIDS unless the case crosses the threshold identified in N  v  SSHD
    ([2005] UKHL31, N v UK  ECHR  26565/05,  2008).   RS  also  found  that
    although there is some evidence of discrimination  in  access  to  AIDS
    medication and food, it is not such as to show  a  real  risk  of  such
    discrimination.  We have not been shown any  more  recent  evidence  to
    indicate any change in these matters.

94. Mr Selway in his written argument invited us to find that even if there
    were no general risk of persecution of homosexuals, the fact  of  being
    both homosexual and suffering from HIV/AIDS would give rise to a  risk,
    when coupled with discrimination in access to medication and food.

95. This point was not developed by reference to evidence on  either  side.
    It does not arise on the facts of the present case.  There is  evidence
    that GALZ can assist where necessary in identifying sympathetic medical
    professionals.

96. We cannot exclude HIV/AIDS as a factor  in  other  cases,  but  nothing
    before us suggests that homosexuality and a positive diagnosis, without
    more, would found a claim for protection.

Return from the UK

97. Mr Selway invited us to hold that lesbians and gays returning from  the
    UK "... could be considered to carry back their gay infection from  the
    colonial oppressors," and so might be at the  same  risk  as  returning
    political activists.

98. This proposition derives from the fact that time spent in  the  UK  has
    been found to be among potential  risk  factors,  and  from  the  anti-
    western aspect of anti-homosexual discourse.  It  is  speculative.   We
    have not been referred to any evidence that time  abroad  has  worsened
    the situation of any homosexual in Zimbabwe, and we have not identified
    such evidence amongst the documents before us.  We decline to make  the
    finding sought.

General risk to homosexuals

99. We have tried to approach the evidence and submissions so as to resolve
    the case by following HJ & HT.  Lord Hope said at paragraph 35:

        This brings me to the test that should  be  adopted  by  the  fact-
        finding tribunals in this country... It is necessary to proceed  in
        stages.


             (a) The first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether  the
        applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
        orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as  a  member  of
        the particular social group. But I would regard this  part  of  the
        test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
        at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
        past history shows that this is in fact the case.


        (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which  are
        directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of  the
        inquiry is directed to what will happen in  the  future.  The  Home
        Office's Country of Origin  report  will  provide  the  background.
        There will be little difficulty in holding that in  countries  such
        as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are
        persecuted and that persecution is something that may reasonably be
        feared. The question is how each applicant, looked at individually,
        will conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
        he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will  come
        in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he  conducts
        himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
        degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
        aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
        even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
        persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
        entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
        concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
        no part in this inquiry.


        (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able
        to do in the country of his nationality everything that he  can  do
        openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test. As
        I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was  not  directed  to
        reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
        be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
        Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that  he  can
        live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
        do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to  everyone  the
        human rights standards that are applied by  the  receiving  country
        within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
        happen in the country of origin.


        (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
        conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
        consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
        social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
        choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
        asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
        concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
        persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
        well founded.


         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
        founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has,  the  causative
        condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426,  para  5  will  have
        been established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum.

100. Lord Rodger said at paragraph 82:

        When an applicant applies for asylum  on  the  ground  of  a  well-
        founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
        first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
        gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
        his country of nationality.


        If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on
        the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would  be
        liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.


        If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
        applicant would do if he were returned to that country.


        If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
        to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
        persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
        "discreetly".


        If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
        would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
        on to ask itself why he would do so.


        If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
        discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
        live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
        his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
        be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
        persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
        them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
        persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
        that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.


        If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
        reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
        fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
        openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
        application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
        he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
        defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
        right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
        persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
        freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
        receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
        applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
        country of nationality should have afforded him.

101. Mr Selway argued that the  situation  of  homosexuals  in  Zimbabwe  is
    closely comparable to that in Jamaica, set out in SW (lesbians - HJ and
    HT applied) Jamaica CG [2011] UKUT 00251 (IAC), and that we should make
    similar findings.

102. SW found that Jamaica is a deeply homophobic society, where  lesbianism
    (actual or perceived) brings a risk of violence, including  "corrective
    rape" and even murder.

103. We are unable to uphold this submission.  The history  and  culture  of
    Jamaica and Zimbabwe are very  different.   The  public  expression  of
    homophobia in Zimbabwe is relatively recent and politically motivated -
    more of a rabble-rousing distraction.  As Dr  Phillips  explained,  the
    historical background is  indifference  rather  than  homophobia.   The
    phenomenon does not have the same deep  roots.   The  clear  danger  of
    violence to homosexuals in  Jamaica  is  not  paralleled  in  Zimbabwe.
    Conclusions cannot be mapped across without evidence from one continent
    to another.

104. Dr Phillips described to us the ways in which GALZ is very  careful  to
    operate within the law.  He accepted, however, that if President Mugabe
    wished to take stern action against the organisation, or even to  close
    it down, legal niceties would not prevent him.  GALZ leads an uncertain
    existence, but it carries on within a  degree  of  tacit  official  and
    social tolerance.

105. We have recognized  that  Dr  Phillips  has  an  expert  knowledge  and
    understanding of Zimbabwean society and culture in general, and of  the
    historical situation of homosexuals in particular.  His analysis of the
    less obvious social forces at work is persuasive.  We accept that  some
    gay men are harassed and blackmailed,  and  that  some  gay  women  are
    pressurised to engage in sexual relations and to  marry,  without  many
    such cases emerging in reported cases or published statistics.  On  the
    other hand, we think there is a gap in the  evidence  which  shows  the
    conclusions reached by Dr Phillips to be  too  sweeping.  (As  we  have
    noted, he fairly modified some of his conclusions during his  evidence,
    partly in the light of more up to date information  he  had  received.)
    At page 91, among his conclusions, Dr Phillips says,  "The  authorities
    in Zimbabwe continue to pose a real threat to homosexuals in  Zimbabwe,
    not least through their refusal to  offer  them  ready  access  to  the
    protection of the police."  However, to find a direct threat  from  the
    authorities  goes  significantly  further  than  the  interviews   with
    respected in-country human rights organisations and the other  evidence
    before us.  We agree with Dr Phillips about lack of protection; but the
    way he poses his conclusion, in that context, is significant.

106. The argument for the appellant, and  the  ultimate  conclusions  in  Dr
    Phillips' report, fall down on the absence of evidence that either  the
    authorities or non-state actors persecute homosexuals in Zimbabwe to  a
    significant extent.  Extortion, sometimes with  police  connivance,  is
    the best documented risk, but even that is not very common, and it  can
    be dealt with.  We conclude that the  formality  of  the  law  and  the
    vehemence of public rhetoric are not matched by reality.

107. The worsening economic collapse of Zimbabwe  from  about  2000  led  to
    large scale emigration, the need for remittances being a  major  driver
    (see the summary in the COIR at 27.05-07).  It occurred to us that  one
    reason for the relative lack of evidence  that  homosexuals  are  badly
    treated might be that their disadvantages led them to leave to an  even
    greater extent than other elements of the population.  However, if that
    were so we would expect to hear it said, loudly, by human rights groups
    in and out of the country.  The absence of  such  evidence  shows  that
    homosexuals, although subject to some disapproval  and  discrimination,
    have not found this so endemic or  oppressive  that  they  abandon  the
    country in significant numbers.

108. GALZ describes Zimbabwe as "not the worst place in the world to be  gay
    or lesbian even though the President, government officials  and  church
    leaders have whipped up a climate of hysterical homophobia."   That  is
    an admirably phlegmatic and realistic view.

109. We are unable to accept that homosexuals  are  being  persecuted  as  a
    generality when concrete examples are few, and when that standpoint  is
    not supported by  the  best  placed  local  observers  (other  than  Dr
    Phillips, and we have explained  why  we  do  not  entirely  share  his
    conclusions).

110. We have further and better evidence than was before  Immigration  Judge
    Birkby in the AIT, both on the country situation and on the appellant's
    individual circumstances.  The evidence does not support the conclusion
    that the Zimbabwean  authorities  persecute  homosexuals.   Homosexuals
    mainly enjoy tacit tolerance, as does GALZ.  The cases of HJ & HT arose
    from Iran and Cameroon.  Unlike those countries,  and  unlike  Jamaica,
    Zimbabwe is not, on all the evidence to which we have been directed,  a
    country where a finding that a person is gay dictates that  persecution
    is reasonably to be feared.

111. This case does not concern an openly gay person.   Such  a  case  would
    have to be assessed on its own facts.  HJ & HT makes it clear that  the
    test is not  whether  persecution  may  be  avoided  by  behaving  more
    discreetly.  A case might be based partly on habits acquired under  the
    greater freedom of life abroad.  On our findings, being openly gay does
    not translate into a real risk, but it  might  well  be  a  significant
    factor.

Sufficiency of protection

112. On this issue there is no  difficulty.   The  sources  agree,  and  the
    respondent accepts, that anyone  who  is  at  risk  of  persecution  in
    Zimbabwe as a homosexual,  male  or  female,  will  not  receive  legal
    sufficiency of protection from the  police  or  other  state  agencies.
    Resort to such agencies may even make matters worse.
Elite connections

113. For reasons given in Appendix B, we find that the  appellant  would  be
    personally discreet in Zimbabwe, by choice.  Nevertheless,  her  sexual
    identity, in the context of her family connections among the Zimbabwean
    elite, gives rise to a risk.  (There were no findings  on  this  family
    relationship in the AIT determination.)

114. We do not conclude that, in general, connections with the  elite  raise
    the threat to a homosexual.  The reverse is more  likely.   Cases  like
    the present will be the exception, not the rule.

Internal relocation

115. Given the absence of general risk, a homosexual at local  and  personal
    risk  in  his  or  her  community  can  move  elsewhere  without   much
    difficulty.  That might be within the same city, or in another part  of
    the country.  He or she might choose to relocate where there is greater
    tolerance, such as in Bulawayo, but the choice of a  new  area  is  not
    restricted.  The option is  excluded  only  if  personal  circumstances
    create a risk throughout the country (as is the case  for  the  present
    appellant).

Country guidance

116. We draw together our conclusions, as  follows.   There  has  been  much
    public expression of extreme homophobia at the highest levels in recent
    years.  Male homosexual behaviour is criminalised, but prosecutions are
    very rare. Lesbianism is not  criminalised.   Some  homosexuals  suffer
    discrimination, harassment and blackmail from the  general  public  and
    the police.  Attempted  extortion,  false  complaints  and  unjustified
    detentions are not so prevalent as to pose a general risk.   There  are
    no records of any murders with a homophobic element.  "Corrective rape"
    is rare, and does not represent  a  general  risk.   There  is  a  "gay
    scene," within limitations.  Lesbians, living on their own or together,
    may face greater difficulties than gay men.  GALZ (Gays and Lesbians of
    Zimbabwe) takes a realistic view: Zimbabwe is "not the worst  place  in
    the world to be gay or lesbian even though  the  President,  government
    officials and church leaders have whipped up a  climate  of  hysterical
    homophobia."  Applying HJ & HT, there is no general  risk  to  gays  or
    lesbians.  Personal circumstances place some gays and lesbians at risk.
     Although not decisive on its own, being openly gay may increase  risk.
    A positive HIV/AIDS diagnosis may be a risk factor.   Connections  with
    the elite do not increase risk.  The police and other state  agents  do
    not provide protection.  A homosexual at risk in his or  her  community
    can move elsewhere, either in the same city or to another part  of  the
    country.  He or she might choose to relocate to where there is  greater
    tolerance, such as Bulawayo, but the  choice  of  a  new  area  is  not
    restricted.  The option is  excluded  only  if  personal  circumstances
    present risk throughout the country.

The appeal of LZ

117. The determination of the AIT is set  aside.   We  remake  the  decision
    thus:  the appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.

                                             [pic]


                               Hugh Macleman
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                    APPENDIX A

   Expert Report by Dr  Oliver  Phillips,  'The  Risk  for  Lesbians  and/or
Homosexuals on Return to Zimbabwe.'

Expert Report by Dr Laurel Birch Aguilar,  'Local  Beliefs  in  Relation  to
Attitudes toward Homosexuals in Zimbabwe and in this Region of Africa.'

UNHCR Guidance Note on Refugee Claims Relating  to  Sexual  Orientation  and
Gender     Identity     (21      November      2008, available      at:
http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/48abd5660.html

Other sources (with references as provided by the parties) in  approximately
chronological order:

Contact Online Weblog, 'Provincial Leaders Tell Harare  Bishop  to  Resign',
18 October 2007.

'Behind the Mask (South Africa),  'The  position  of  lesbian  and  bisexual
women', 13 June 2008.

SW Radio Africa article, 'Renegade Bishop Kunonga drives  Anglicans  out  of
Church,' 24 November 2009.

UK Foreign & Commonwealth  Office  report,  'Human  Rights  and  Democracy,'
2010.

The Herald newspaper article, 'Zimbabwe: President, PM speaks on  Gays,'  26
March 2010.

Independent newspaper article, 'Zimbabwe's Leaders   Unite  to  Dismiss  Gay
Rights,' 27 March 2010.

Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ), 'Unwarranted Arrests  of  LGBT  people
on the increase: Detention, Harassment and Intimidation of GALZ members',  1
April 2011.

Report from SW Radio Africa (UK), ''Corrective rape' against homosexuals  on
the rise in Zimbabwe', 8th April 2010.

Refugee Documentation Centre  (Legal  Aid  Board,  Ireland)  report,  'Legal
status  of  lesbians  in  Zimbabwe?  Penalties  if  caught?  NGOs  assisting
lesbians? What is the government's and society's  attitude  in  relation  to
this issue?' 11th May 2010.

TalkZimbabwe blog, 'Gay Rights Dismissed  in  New  Constitution,'  23rd  May
2010.

Front Line Ireland article, 'Zimbabwe: Detention of human  rights  defenders
Ms Ellen Chademana and Mr Ignatius Muhamba, members of Gays and Lesbians  of
Zimbabwe (GALZ),' 25th May 2010.

BBC News Africa article, 'Zimbabwe police free  gay  rights  activists,'  27
May 2010.

Pink News article, 'Robert Mugabe  says  no  to  gay  rights  in  Zimbabwe's
constitution,' 19 July 2010.

Voice of America report, 'Zimbabwe President Mugabe  Pours  Fuel  on  Debate
Over Homosexual Rights, 19 July 2010.

UKBA  Report  of  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Zimbabwe,  Country  of  Origin
Information Service, 9 - 12 August 2010.

NewsDze-Zimbabwe article,  'Mugabe  and  Dealer  Bishop  of  Ecuador,'  26th
September 2010.

Amnesty International Annual Report on Zimbabwe, 2011.

Human Rights Watch Report on Zimbabwe, January 2011.

OGN: Zimbabwe April 2011:  'Gay  men,  Lesbians,  Bisexual  and  Transgender
Persons.'

International Gay and  Lesbian  Human  Rights  Commission  (IGLHRC)  report,
'Nowhere to Turn: Blackmail and Extortion  of  LGBT  People  in  Sub-Saharan
Africa (Excerpt - Blackmail in Zimbabwe: Troubling Narratives  of  Sexuality
and Human Rights)', 15th February 2011.

New York Times article, 'Mugabe Ally  Escalates  Push  to  Control  Anglican
Church,' 29th March 2011.

US Department of State Human Rights Report on Zimbabwe, 8 April 2011.

International  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual,  Trans  and  Intersex   Association
(ILGA), 'State-sponsored Homophobia 2011: Zimbabwe', 16 May 2011.

Amnesty International, 'Zimbabwe briefing to the  pre-session  working-group
of the UN committee on the elimination  of  discrimination  against  women,'
June 2011.

GALZ article, 'Police given seven days to release seized  GALZ  assets,'  11
July 2011.

African Activist article, 'A  proposal  to  Decriminalise  Homosexuality  in
Zimbabwe,' 11 July 2011.

British Embassy Harare interview with Gay and Lesbians of  Zimbabwe  (GALZ),
3 August 2011.

GALZ  article,  'Exclusive  interview  with  the  Sunday   mail   reporter's
comments,' 7 August 2011.

African Activist, 'Five Men Arrested in Zimbabwe for Being  Gay',  9  August
2011.

African Activist, 'Mugabe "Blows His Top" Over Gay  Journalist',  15  August
2011.

UKBA Country of Origin Information Report  (COIR)  on  Zimbabwe,  19  August
2011.

Article, 'H-Metro assistant editor allegedly caught in  gay  romance  during
Presidential trip in Namibia' from the  Zimbabwe  News  Online  website,  15
August 2011.

Freedom House, 'Freedom in the World - Zimbabwe,' 18 August 2011.

British Embassy Harare interview with Women of  Zimbabwe  Arise  (WOZA),  23
August 2011.

British Embassy Harare interview with  Zimbabwe  Lawyers  for  Human  Rights
(ZLHR), 26 August 2011.

SW Radio Africa (UK), 'Anglican priest seriously beaten by Kunonga mob',  26
August 2011.

Foreign & Commonwealth Office Travel advice on Zimbabwe, 31 August 2011.

Time report, 'Mission to Zimbabwe,' 8 September 2011.

Times report, 'Gift of Hope makes daunting  Trip  Worthwhile,'  8  September
2011.

Daily Telegraph article, 'Mugabe-backed Bishop Seizes Church  Property',  10
September 2011.

GALZ article, 'GALZ hosts Sylvia Tamale,' 12 September 2011.

GALZ  article,  'Gender  department,'  from  the  website,  printed  on   20
September 2011.

GALZ article, 'Skill for life/safety net' from the website,  printed  on  20
September 2011.

GALZ on 'membership' from the website, printed on 20 September 2011.

GALZ on 'Zimbabwe Human Rights  Scene'  from  the  website,  printed  on  20
September 2011.

GALZ on 'health' from the website, printed on 20 September 2011.

GALZ on 'GALZ and the LAW' from the website, printed on 20 September 2011.

GALZ on  'The  blackmailers'  charter'  from  the  website,  printed  on  20
September 2011.

GALZ on 'ZIMPRIDE' from the website, printed on 20 September 2011.

GALZ on 'Maurice Appeal' from the website, printed on 20 September 2011.

GALZ on  'Constitutional  Submissions'  from  the  website,  printed  on  20
September 2011.

Printout from GayZIM website, printed on 20 September 2011.

Article, 'Lesbians and Gay rights in  Zimbabwe,'  by  Leane  Renee,  printed
from www.wcl.amercian.edu website on 20 September 2011.

Metro newspaper article, 22nd September 2011, 'Gay Love  Row  Bishop  seizes
Orphanage'.

African Activist report, 'Gays and Lesbians of  Zimbabwe  (GALZ)  Speak  Out
About Attack on Lesbian', 22 September 2011.

International Organisation for Migration, 'Facts and Figures  on  Zimbabwe,'
printed from website on 26 September 2011.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination  against  Women
- signatories and date of ratification;  African  Commission  on  Human  and
People's Rights 'Protocol to the  African  Charter  on  Human  and  People's
Rights on the Women in Africa.'

Pink News article,  'Zimbabwean  leader  Robert  Mugabe  calls  Britain  gay
filth.'

International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission  Report,  'Nowhere  to
Turn.'

Wikipedia Article, 'LGBT Rights In Zimbabwe'.
