

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Wusa (para 159A(ii): "Connection") Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00482 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2011                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Macleman

                                   Between

                      THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TAIWO APOME WUSA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adetayo Ayodele Adeniyi, the appellant's employer



The requirement of a connection between employer and employee  in  paragraph
159A(ii) of the Immigration Rules, when it applies, is a  requirement  of  a
connection going beyond that of employment.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos has permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal against the decision of Immigration Judge Kempton allowing the
    appeal of Ms Wusa, whom we  shall  call  "the  claimant",  against  his
    decision on 12 November 2010 refusing her entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom as a domestic worker.  Before  us,  as  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the claimant was represented by her employer, Mr Adeniyi, who
    was able to describe the relevant facts.

 2. The claimant is employed as a domestic worker in  a  house  in  Nigeria
    which belonged to the father of Mr Adeniyi's wife.   His  wife  is  the
    oldest of the family.  Mr Adeniyi told us that her five siblings  still
    live in the house.  Mr Adeniyi's wife came to the United  Kingdom,  and
    he followed her.   That was in 2005, and that was the  last  time  that
    either he or his wife lived in the house.  They returned  in  2006  for
    about two weeks, and in 2009 for about two weeks.  In  2006  they  took
    steps to employ a housekeeper, and they employed  the  claimant.   They
    had not previously met her: the relationship is purely that of employer
    and employee.  Mr Adeniyi now seeks to be  able  to  have  her  as  his
    domestic help in the United Kingdom, in particular because of the  help
    she will be able to give while his son is growing up here; the claimant
    has not yet met his son.

 3. In order to succeed in this appeal, the claimant needed to  show  that,
    at the date of the decision against which  she  appeals,  she  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  159A  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395:

        "Requirements for leave to enter as a domestic worker in a  private
        household


        159A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
        the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private household  are
        that he:
                  i) is aged 18-65 inclusive;
                 ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for one year or
                     more  immediately  prior  to  application  for   entry
                     clearance under the same roof as his employer or in  a
                     household that the employer  uses  for  himself  on  a
                     regular basis and where there is evidence  that  there
                     is a connection between employer and employee;
                iii) that he intends to travel to the United Kingdom in the
                     company of his employer,  his  employer's  spouse  [or
                     civil partner] or his employer's minor child;
                 iv) intends to work full time as a domestic  worker  under
                     the same roof as his employer or in a  household  that
                     the employer uses for himself on a regular  basis  and
                     where there is evidence that  there  is  a  connection
                     between employer and employee;
                  v) does not intend to take employment except  within  the
                     terms of this paragraph; and
                 vi)  can  maintain  and  accommodate  himself   adequately
                     without recourse to public funds; and
                vii) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry
                     in this capacity."

 4. The claimant's difficulties centre on sub-paragraph (ii).  There is  no
    doubt that she had not been employed for a year "under the  same  roof"
    as her employer.  The question is whether she had been employed  for  a
    year or more in a household that he (or he and his wife,  because  they
    are jointly her employer) uses for himself  on  a  regular  basis,  and
    where there is evidence of a connection between employer and  employee.



 5. The Immigration Judge said that there was a connection  "by  virtue  of
    the availability of  the  payslips",  that  is  to  say  the  documents
    apparently evidencing the  claimant's  pay  as  employee.   So  far  as
    concerns the other  requirement,  the  Immigration  Judge  ignored  the
    various authorities on the meaning of this paragraph of the rules.  She
    said "loosely, his [that is to say, the employer's] use  of  the  house
    has been regular and the intention is to be regular.  The  sponsor  has
    been the employer for over four years and paid  the  appellant's  wages
    regularly.  I consider that looking at the whole circumstances of  this
    case, the appellant has been working in a household which  the  sponsor
    as employer uses regularly."

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal set out the authorities
    on the meaning of "household" and "regularly": he  cited  JF  (Domestic
    Servant) Philippines [2008] UKAIT 00085,  NG  (Bulgaria)  [2006]  UKAIT
    00020 and BO (Nigeria) [2007] UKAIT 00053.

 7. Mr Adeniyi's submission to us was that he regards the house in  Nigeria
    as his household or one of his households.  He is responsible  for  the
    people that live there.  But although on that basis  the  claimant  has
    been a member of his household for five years now, he was not  able  to
    tell us very much about her.  In particular, he thought that she gave a
    lot of her 10,000 Naira per month wage to family members,  whereas  her
    application form says that she does not give any of her wage to  family
    members; and, bearing in mind that, under her contract  of  employment,
    he provides her with accommodation and food, he was unable to  say  how
    her living expenses of 600 Naira per month, set out in her  application
    form, arise.

 8. As JF holds, "household" is not synonymous with "house".  The house  in
    Nigeria may well belong to Mr Adeniyi and his wife: that does not  mean
    that it is their household.  There is a household  there:  but  in  our
    judgement it cannot be said that it is theirs or that they use it on  a
    regular basis.  They have slept there for only one month in total since
    they effectively settled in the United Kingdom five years  ago.   Their
    visits are neither reasonably frequent nor are they  on  the  basis  of
    habitual use.  JF decided that the visits  would  need  to  have  those
    characteristics in order to be "regular".  But even if "regular"  meant
    "at precisely  defined  intervals",  their  visits  do  not  meet  that
    requirement.

 9. That is sufficient to dispose of this appeal,  but  we  must  say  also
    something about the requirement that there  be  a  "connection  between
    employer and employee".  The Immigration Judge evidently  thought  that
    nothing more was required than the connection which was the employment.
     That cannot be right.  Paragraph 159A is perfused with the requirement
    of employment: the connection between employer  and  employee  must  be
    something over  and  above  that  arising  from  the  employment.   The
    connection between employer and employee  is  not  required  where  the
    employee has lived under the same roof as the employer for a period  of
    at least one year, although, of  course,  employment  still  is.   What
    clearly  is  required  is  some  tie  going  further  merely  than  the
    contractual one of employment, where  a  domestic  worker  seeks  entry
    clearance other  than  on  the  basis  of  previous  co-residence.   We
    hesitate to give examples, for fear of prejudicing  future  cases,  but
    clearly a person who has acted as nanny to one child  of  a  particular
    employer might be able to show such  a  connection  in  relation  to  a
    subsequent  child.   What  is  clear  is  that  no  connection  outside
    employment exists in the present case.  That is a  further  reason  why
    the claimant's appeal cannot succeed.

10. Mr Adeniyi told us that he thought he and his wife had done  everything
    that they ought to do in terms  of  the  advice  given  on  the  UKBA's
    website.  We are concerned with  applying  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    order to determine whether the decision was, or was not  in  accordance
    with them.   For the reasons we have given it is clear to us  that  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  was  in  accordance   with   the
    Immigration Rules.  The  claimant's  application  had  to  be  refused,
    because she  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  those  rules.   The
    Immigration Judge erred in her approach to the Rules and to the meaning
    of the terms in paragraph 159A (ii).  We set aside  her  determination.
    We  re-make  the  Tribunal's  decision.   The  claimant's   appeal   is
    dismissed.













                                                 Signed




                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

