
[pic]
I

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


          Patel (consideration of Sapkota - unfairness) India [2011] UKUT
00484(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                        SANDEEPKUMAR MANHARBHAI PATEL
                          HIRALBEN HITENPHAI PATEL
                                MASTER PATEL

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1) There is no substantive segregation  of  considerations  going  to  an
      extension of stay and removal  where  the  appellant  seeks  leave  to
      remain outside the rules on 395C factors and these are  considered  on
      their merits with the consequence that the respondent  states  removal
      will follow even if  powers under s 47 of the Immigration, Nationality
      and Asylum Act 2006 are not formally used when the decision is made to
      refuse to vary leave to remain.


   2) The decision in Sapkota [2011] EWCA Civ 1320 is based on a public  law
      duty to exercise s.47 powers where fairness requires it, having regard
      to the factors  considered  in  Mirza  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  159  and  TE
      (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174. It does not  amount  to  an  inflexible
      rule that the power must always be exercised.

   3) There was no unfairness where the Secretary of  State  and  the  judge
      considered the factors relevant to  intended  removal  in  the  appeal
      against the decision to refuse to vary leave.

   4) It would be irrational to afford weight as a compassionate  factor  to
      the first appellant's desire to continue  to  live  and  work  in  the
      United Kingdom when his leave had been as a working holiday-maker  and
      he had obtained that leave by misrepresenting his true intentions.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1.   The first appellant is an Indian national born in 1984. In July 2006
      he married the second appellant.  The third appellant is  their  child
      born in July 2010 in the United Kingdom.


   2.   This an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  given
      on 13 July 2011 dismissing  the  appeal  of  each  of  the  appellants
      against a refusal of extension of leave to remain  on  an  application
      for leave made outside the rules and on the basis of human rights.


   3.   In 2007 the first appellant applied for entry clearance as a working
      holiday-maker  and  the  second  appellant  applied  for  one  as  his
      dependant.  The application was refused in May  2008.  They  appealed.
      The Judge who heard the appeal was impressed by the testimony  of  the
      appellants' sponsor who was settled in the United Kingdom. Despite the
      doubts expressed  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  the  judge  was
      satisfied that the appellant genuinely intended entry  for  a  working
      holiday and intended to return to  India  at  the  conclusion  of  the
      visit.


   4.    In March 2009 the first two appellants entered the  United  Kingdom
      with a two year visa as working holiday-makers. On 26  February  2011,
      they  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
      circumstances outside the Immigration Rules.


   5.   The application was supported by  a  statement  made  by  the  first
      appellant noting the birth of their son in July 2010  and  making  the
      following points:



           i) The United Kingdom was his only home and he had no connection
              whatsoever with India.
          ii) He asked for leave to remain on compassionate grounds outside
              the Rules and believed he qualified for grant  for  leave  to
              remain as he had been present in the United Kingdom  for  two
              years.
         iii) Since arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellants  had
              established a private life here and  rooted  themselves  here
              and consider it to be their only home. They have  eroded  all
              ties with their country of origin.
          iv) The appellants have integrated into  British  culture  having
              lived in the United Kingdom for such a prolonged period.
           v)  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  provides  a  concession  to  such
              individuals  who  have  their   private   and   family   life
              established in the United Kingdom and the appellant  and  his
              family deserve to be granted permanent immigration status  as
              they fall within the criteria of Article 8.
          vi) The first appellant and his  family  are  law-abiding,  self-
              sufficient and not a burden on the State. It would cause them
              problems if their life were to be interrupted as they have  a
              significant network of friends in the United Kingdom.
         vii) When he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  the  first  appellant
              severed all connections with India, a poor country. He has no
              job or home there in India and cannot go back.
        viii) Each of the factors set  out  under  paragraph  395C  of  the
              Immigration Rules  HC 395 should be taken into account.


      The decision of the Secretary of State

   6.    This application was refused in May 2011 and detailed  reasons  for
      refusal were given in a letter written earlier dated  30  March  2011.
      This is a lengthy letter setting out the case law on Article 8 and the
      author's  conclusions  that  nothing  had  been  put  forward  in  the
      application to justify exceptional leave to remain. It  is  sufficient
      here to note that the decision letter:-


              i. stated that it was intended to  remove  the  appellants  to
                 India at the conclusion of the appeal;
             ii. took account of all the factors  relied  on  by  the  first
                 appellant in his witness statement and representations made
                 and  the discretionary factors to be considered in  removal
                 cases under paragraph 395 of the Immigration Rules;
            iii. recognised that the best interests of the  third  appellant
                 child and the duty to promote  the  welfare  of  the  child
                 under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
                 2009 were expressly addressed.


   7.   Although the decision letter stated  that  the  Secretary  of  State
      intended to remove all of the appellants in the event  that  they  did
      not make a voluntary departure upon the conclusion of their  variation
      of leave appeal, the immigration decision giving rise  to  the  appeal
      was a refusal to vary leave and not a decision to remove.


   8.   There was an appeal against this refusal to Judge Brown on  11  July
      2011. The first appellant raised for the first time a  claim  that  he
      would be at risk if  returned  to  India  because  of  alleged  sexual
      infidelity by his wife. The Judge did not  accept  this  evidence  and
      made adverse findings on the credibility of the first appellant  as  a
      witness as he was entitled to for the reasons he gave.


   9.   The Judge concluded that the  first  appellant's  intention  was  to
      migrate to the United Kingdom, by obtaining a  working  holiday  visa.
      His declared intention to return to India made  at  the  time  of  the
      application was false. Their subsequent life in the United Kingdom has
      been based on that false representation.   He  found  that  there  was
      nothing to prevent a return to India; there was no  interference  with
      family life in the intended removal as the family were  being  removed
      together; removal would have no effect on the child as he would be  in
      the care of his parents who had resources and education and  would  be
      able to look after him.


  10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted three grounds:

           i)  The  Judge  erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal  because  the
              respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law
              through a failure to give effect to a statutory duty under s.
              55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
          ii) The judge's decision was inconsistent with the  judgement  of
              the Court of Appeal in Mirza and others [2011] EWCA Civ 159.
         iii) The judge erred in dismissing the appeal under Article 8.


  11. Following the grant of permission to appeal, on 15 November  2011  the
      Court of Appeal in Sapkota and KA  (Pakistan)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1320
      applying the decision in Mirza concluded that:


           i) a failure by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  removal
              decision  under  s.  47  of  the  Immigration,   Asylum   and
              Nationality Act 2006 at the same time or shortly after making
              a decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  was  or  could  be
              unlawful; and
          ii) the Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider the legality of the
              Secretary of State's action by reference to  the  failure  to
              make a removal  decision  in  the  course  of  its  statutory
              jurisdiction  under  ss.  82  to  86  of   the   Nationality,
              Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


  12. The decision in  Sapkota  played  an  important  part  in  Mr  Malik's
      submissions   before us. He submitted that as  there  was  no  removal
      decision taken in this case the Secretary of State's decision refusing
      leave to remain was unlawful and the First-tier Judge erred in law  in
      failing so to decide as such.


  13. Mr Saunders for the respondent disagreed and resisted this  appeal  on
      the basis that in this case the appellant had a  right  of  appeal  in
      which he was able to ventilate every  issue  that  he  raised  in  his
      grounds of appeal including the compassionate  factors  said  to  have
      arisen  from  his  length  of  residence  and  connections  here.  The
      Secretary of State  intended  to  make  a  removal  decision  and  had
      therefore taken all  factors  into  account  that  would  need  to  be
      considered before making such a lawful decision.


  14. We must first decide whether there was an error of  law  made  by  the
      judge below and whether if there was an error it was  a  material  one
      justifying the re-making of the decision. In considering these matters
      we must decide whether the decision of the Secretary of State was  not
      in accordance with the law for either of the reasons  claimed  in  the
      grounds.


  15. We understand that the grounds of appeal before us feature in a number
      of cases before  the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal.  We  hope  our
      analysis of the case law may  therefore  be  of  assistance  to  other
      judges dealing with similar grounds.


   The decision in Sapkota


  16. The principal issue before the Court of Appeal in these combined cases
      was, jurisdiction. Lord Justice Aikens giving  the  majority  judgment
      discussed this at [54] and [112] and  concluded  that  an  immigration
      decision can be impugned as not in accordance with the law pursuant to
      s. 84(4)(e) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  He
      further concluded that it  could  be  irrational  or  unfair  for  the
      Secretary of State not to make a removal decision in  response  to  an
      application for leave to remain.


  17. He reviewed and followed the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Mirza
      where it concluded that a decision to refuse leave to remain taken  in
      isolation of consideration of whether the person concerned should also
      be removed from the United Kingdom was capable of  being  an  unlawful
      decision. Treating the matter in isolation may prevent  the  applicant
      obtaining a rounded decision on his whole future status in the  United
      Kingdom and may also prevent the Tribunal  being  able  to  deal  with
      every aspect of the case. These included discretionary  factors  under
      paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules.


  18. The second issue dealt with was the merits of the segregation issue in
      the particular cases in hand. The reasoning is much shorter: [113]  to
      [115] of the judgment.  The conclusion  that  it  was  unfair  not  to
      consider the issues together was not opposed by the Secretary of State
      in the light of the decision in Mirza. It is  clear  that  as  regards
      unfairness it is the principle in Mirza that is being applied  but  no
      indication that it is being extended. At  [113]  the  Court  indicates
      that "segregation" in practice meant the failure to consider paragraph
      395C issues. It noted that effect  could  be  given  to  the  one-stop
      principle by using the powers available  since  April  2008  under  s.
      47(1) of the 2006 Act giving the  Secretary  of  State  the  power  to
      decide that a person whose leave to remain has  been  extended  by  s.
      3C(2)(b) or 3D(2)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971  "is  to  be  removed
      from the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions to be given  by
      an immigration officer if and when the leave ends".


  19. Lord Justice Aikens concluded at [114]:

         "In my view the effect of [45] in Mirza is that the  burden  is  on
         the SSHD to initiate the process of dealing with the two  decisions
         together by an invitation to the applicant, at the time a 'one stop
         notice' is issued with the variation decision, to make  submissions
         as to why removal should  not  follow  a  refusal  to  vary  leave.
         Although the decision on the issue of extending the leave to remain
         in both the present cases were taken before this  court's  decision
         in  Mirza,  that  cannot  alter  the  result  if   there   are   no
         countervailing factors. After all, the same  position  obtained  in
         Mirza itself, but the appeals were still allowed".


  20. The third issue was whether a failure to apply the law  correctly  was
      therefore a violation of Article 8. The Court of Appeal  rejected  the
      submission that there would always be a violation of Article  8  if  a
      removal decision was not taken at the same time.


   The illegality of segregation


  21.  Given that the conclusion of illegality was unopposed in  Sapkota  it
      is necessary  to  examine  the  earlier  decisions  discussed  in  the
      judgement for a deeper understanding of why it is  generally  unlawful
      for the Secretary of State to segregate variation of leave and removal
      decisions.


  22. The starting point is the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JM
      (Liberia) [2010] EWCA Civ 1402; [2007] Imm  AR  293.  Here  the  court
      overruled previous Tribunal learning and concluded that a human rights
      claim within the  meaning  of  s.  84(1)  of  the  NIAA  2002  can  be
      ventilated on an appeal against a refusal to grant leave to remain.

  23. Lord Justice Laws concluded that a broad reading should  be  given  to
      s.82(2)(d) NIAA 2002 and that a refusal of leave decision could be  an
      immigration decision "in consequence of which the appellant's  removal
      would be unlawful  under  the  Human  Rights  Act."  He  reached  that
      conclusion having regard to the policy of the Act which included  one-
      stop appeals. Another material consideration to the  construction that
      both the appellant and the Secretary of State supported was at [18]:


         "It seems to me be wrong in principle that the  price  of  getting
        before an independent Tribunal, for a judicial decision on a  Human
        Rights claim should be the commission of  a  criminal  offence  and
        other associated legal prohibitions.  But  that  seems  to  be  the
        immediate effect of the AIT's conclusion."


  24. It was this last observation that was cited with by Sedley LJ  in  the
      case of TE (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174;[2009]  INLR  558.   In  that
      case an appellant whose variation for leave appeal  had  been  refused
      wanted broader considerations taken into account.  She challenged  the
      decision of a Senior Immigration Judge sitting in  the  AIT  that  she
      could not rely on paragraph 395C unless  or  until  the  Secretary  of
      State took a removal decision.  It  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State that decisions to  refuse  to  vary  leave  and  or
      remove could be taken in close proximity to each other  but  that  was
      not the policy then adopted.


  25.  When pressed why this was so, counsel  for  the  SSHD  suggested  the
      reason was a risk that removal may not be effected speedily after  the
      combined decision  and  accordingly  a  fresh  decision  for  opposing
      removal might arise with the passage of time.  To  this  Lord  Justice
      Sedley said at [18]:


        "This seems to  me  both  a  counsel  of  despair  and  a  somewhat
        eccentric approach to public policy.  The state has,  or  ought  to
        have, an interest in not multiplying administrative proceedings and
        appeals, especially where the facts and issues  overlap  and  where
        segregating  them  creates  uncovenanted   difficulties   for   the
        individual.  If, by inviting submissions as to why  removal  should
        not follow if the application for variation of leave is refused,  a
        comprehensive decision can be arrived at and if necessary appealed,
        there can be few cases in which this would not be the right  course
        to take.  The possibility of new grounds for non-removal arising is
        an ever-present one which a two-stage approach cannot eliminate".


  26. Lord Justice Lloyd considered that it would not always be unlawful and
      irrational to leave the paragraph 395C exercise  until  the  stage  of
      removal even if it had been asked for earlier but said at [56]:


         "On the one hand, it would not have been unlawful, in the sense  of
         irrational, for the Respondent to leave the paragraph 395C exercise
         until the stage (if it arrived) at which the Appellant is liable to
         be removed, even if it had been asked for earlier.   On  the  other
         hand, if the point had been raised at the  outset,  it  would  have
         been a sensible decision to undertake that exercise at that earlier
         stage, especially in the light of the  similarity  of  the  grounds
         which, it seems, would be relied on under the  paragraph  to  those
         relevant on the human rights and asylum grounds as such, and  given
         that the Respondent could have taken a decision in principle  about
         removal, to take effect subject to the outcome of  the  appeal,  if
         she had not been persuaded by  the  factors  relied  on  under  the
         paragraph."


  27. We note, therefore, that both judges concluded that the AIT  had  been
      wrong to conclude that as  a  matter  of  law  consideration  of  395C
      factors by a judge had to await a removal  decision,  particularly  if
      there were factors that could only be considered under this  paragraph
      rather than under the concept of private life within  the  meaning  of
      Article 8 ECHR.


  28. The next case of relevance is AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA  Civ  1076;
      [2010] 2 All ER 21 where  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  the
      Tribunal was obliged to consider submissions made by the appellant  in
      response to a one-stop notice even if they went  beyond  matters  that
      had been considered  by  the  SSHD  in  the  immigration  decision  in
      question.


  29. The case of Mirza itself was a judicial review of a decision  made  by
      the  SSHD  refusing  to  consider  discretionary   395C   factors   on
      consideration of an application for variation  of  leave.  The   court
      approved the decision of the AIT in EO (Turkey)  [2007] UKAIT 00062 to
      the effect that an exercise of discretion under paragraph 395C  was  a
      discretion under the Rules and on appeal it was open  to  a  judge  to
      conclude that the discretion should have been  exercised  differently.
      Having reviewed evidence filed as to why the policy of  the  Secretary
      of State generally preferred to make separate decisions, it  concluded
      that this was unjustified segregation. Where  the  applicant  had  not
      already breached the law by remaining without authority (contrast  the
      case of R (on the application of Daley-Murdock) [2011] EWCA Civ  161),
      the SSHD should  exercise  her  powers  to  ensure  that  removal  and
      extension decisions were taken at the same time or in close proximity.
      An applicant who had reasonable submissions to advance  in support  of
      an application to remain outside the rules should not have to commit a
      criminal  offence  in  order  to  have  that  claim  examined  by   an
      independent judge.


  30.  Our understanding of the  public  law  principles  developed  in  the
      authorities leading up to Sapkota that must now be applied  by  judges
      determining immigration appeals is the following:-

   i) The legitimacy of segregating decisions  on  extensions  of  leave  to
      remain with decisions on removal is a question of the fair exercise of
      public law powers rather  than  a  matter  of  statutory  construction
      turning a power to refuse  leave  at  or  shortly  after  a  variation
      decision into an invariable duty to do so.
  ii) Segregation means a failure to apply the broad discretion in  intended
      removal cases to a situation where a person has  no  claim  to  remain
      under the strict provisions of the Immigration Rules but has a case to
      make for leave to remain for a limited or  indefinite  period  outside
      the rules.
 iii) A refusal by the Secretary of  State  or  the  Tribunal  judiciary  to
      consider the broader claims at the time when an appeal with  leave  to
      remain can be brought is unfair because it requires such a  person  to
      overstay and commit a criminal offence and then  make  representations
      that raise a human rights claim  in  order  to  obtain  a  pre-removal
      appeal.
  iv) In Mirza the Court of Appeal was  confronted  with  a  policy  of  the
      Secretary of State not to consider the two decisions together in order
      to encourage voluntary departure, despite the evidence that those  who
      considered they had a claim worth considering would prefer to run  the
      risks of criminality, illegality and irregular status in order to wait
      for an opportunity to make them. Such a policy was unlawful.


  31.  We do not find that Sapkota or Mirza requires  us  to  conclude  that
      whether or not there had been segregation in fact, and irrespective of
      whether  the  decision  maker  has  considered  395C  factors,  it  is
      invariably unlawful in the absence of special  justification  for  the
      SSHD to exercise powers to authorise the issue of  removal  directions
      either under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 or within the
      very short time available when it is possible to do under s.47 of  the
      2006 Act.


  32. Indeed we would be rather concerned if matters had gone that far.  For
      every person whose real claim is one outside the rules, there are many
      who merely want to a decision in accordance with the Rules  and  would
      either voluntarily depart or make a fresh application if  that  appeal
      were to be unsuccessful. Further, the developing jurisprudence of  the
      Upper Tribunal has moved beyond the proposition that human rights only
      arise  on  removal  decisions,  to  cases  where  variation  of  leave
      applications may need to take into account a wide variety  of  aspects
      of  private  life  under  Article  8  rights,  thereby   enabling   an
      independent assessment of this claim  to  remain  without  the  person
      concerned running the risk of breaking the law.

Application of the Sapkota principles

  33. However, in our judgment the above  principles have no purchase on the
      procedure adopted  by the Secretary of State  in  this  case  for  the
      following reasons:-


           i) The first appellant was able to  make  his  claim  to  remain
              outside the Rules  in  his  variation  application  and  draw
              attention to the provisions of paragraph 395C in doing so. He
              did not have to run the risk of criminal overstay in order to
              do so or obtain an appeal against the consequent refusal.
          ii) The decision maker  did  not  segregate  issues  relating  to
              refusal of leave to remain from those  relating  to  intended
              removal and did not refuse to consider  factors  relating  to
              removal. Indeed, were the  decision  expressly  engaged  with
              paragraph 395C and  the  representations  entirely  based  on
              compassionate factors outside the Rules. In substance it is a
              s. 47 decision even if not stated to be such in form.
         iii) The fact that no formal s.47 decision has been made  has  had
              no impact on the reasoning of the decision maker who explains
              clearly that if there is no voluntary departure following the
              determination of the appeal, the family will be removed.
          iv) For the reasons given  below  we  have  no  doubt  that  upon
              receipt of this decision and  the  expiry  of  the  time  for
              permission to appeal the Secretary of State will do what  she
              has said she will do  and  remove  this  family  as  a  unit,
              probably now exercising powers under s.10 of the 1999 Act  as
              s.47 would no longer be apposite.
           v) The Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that  nothing
              had  been  submitted  to   suggest   that   there   was   any
              compassionate circumstance to justify leave to remain outside
              the Rules.  The appellants never had any expectation of being
              allowed to remain in the UK other than for a working  holiday
              for the limited period of two years  with  a  clear  duty  to
              return to their country at the end of that time. It  was  not
              suggested in the representations that there had been a change
              of circumstance since arrival that had led  to  a  change  of
              plan as regards future residence.


  34.  Mr Malik submitted that the failure to make a formal removal decision
      in this case was contrary to the one-stop principles of the  statutory
      scheme  because despite the terms  of  the  letter  delay  may  accrue
      between the conclusion of the  appeal  and  the  actual  making  of  a
      decision during which fresh family life or relevant circumstances  may
      accrue.  This is a  curious  echo  of  the  submissions  made  by  the
      Secretary of State in TE (Eritrea). For  the  same  reasons  given  by
      Sedley LJ we consider this a counsel of despair. Mr Saunders  informed
      us that the Secretary of State is now obliged to await the outcome  of
      this appeal as the s.47 window of opportunity has passed. She has  the
      power to make the decision promptly thereafter and would  be  able  to
      certify any human rights representations as without foundation in  the
      light of the Tribunal's consideration of the factors.  We further note
      that in the light of the First-tier judge's findings of fact the first
      appellant could be treated as a person who had obtained leave to enter
      by deception.


  35. In addition to non-segregation of the extension/removal question,  the
      decision- maker expressly directed himself  to  the  question  of  the
      welfare of the third appellant and the best interests  of  the  child.
      The decision letter states in terms:


         "A fundamental feature of any removal decision where it may  affect
         children is the importance and the best interest of the welfare  of
         children. That has been  paramount  and  primary  consideration  in
         Article 8 assessment and failure to  do  so  will  violate  Article
         8(2). There is positive duty under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009 as to safeguard and promote the welfare of
         the children and also take the view into account.


         These circumstances must surely include in most cases the  adequacy
         of reception and care arrangements for the child in  the  receiving
         country. In regards to  the  above  statement  the  child  is  well
         protected in the sense that he is with the biological  parents  and
         will be returned to his parent country or origin as a family unit.


         When the family is removed the child Master Patel will  be  removed
         together  the  biological  parent  as  a  family  unit".   (grammar
         uncorrected)


  36. This self-direction was express and comprehensive. It was too generous
      to the appellants in referring to the interests  of  the  child  being
      paramount.  Such  interests  are  not  paramount  in  the  immigration
      context, rather they should be considered as a primary  consideration.
      Otherwise the self-direction was a clear and sensible  explanation  of
      why the child's interests required him to be removed with his parents.



The decision of the Immigration Judge


  37. We will now consider the decision of the Immigration Judge.   We  note
      that the judge's notes suggest  that  the  appellants'  representative
      instructed by his present solicitors submitted at the  outset  of  the
      appeal that only Article 8 was concerned in this appeal.  However,  we
      also note that the first appellant's evidence suggested that he and/or
      his wife may be at harm from relatives in India  engaging  Article  3.
      The judge rejected  the  first  appellant's  evidence  of  the  second
      appellant's alleged infidelity that was said to be the  basis  of  the
      fear. It is not suggested that he erred in law in so doing.  This  was
      the only evidence relied on as a change of circumstance  since  coming
      to the United Kingdom other than the birth of the child.


  38. Having dismissed the Article 3 claim on credibility  the  judge  dealt
      with Article 8. He was right to conclude that the intended removal  of
      the appellants as a family unit  involved  no  interference  with  the
      right  to  respect  for  family  life.  The  family  were  all  Indian
      nationals; none had any leave to remain or basis of  claim  under  the
      Immigration Rules. They were being removed together.  There  were  two
      aspects to the private life relied on.

  39. The first is the interests of the third appellant.   He  was  thirteen
      months old at the time of the hearing before the judge and  spent  all
      his short life in the company of his parents. There was nothing in the
      representations, evidence or submissions deployed before the judge  to
      suggest that removal represented any risk to  his  welfare,  once  the
      allegation of infidelity had  been  rejected  as  it  was.   Like  the
      decision maker before him, the judge  fully  understood  the  guidance
      given in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, but  was  entitled  to  conclude
      that removal would have no practical effect on him.

  40. Contrary to the representations of the appellants, a two year stay  as
      a working holiday is a short period and wholly insufficient of  itself
      to suggest that strong ties have been laid down by a child  of  tender
      years. The UT has recently reviewed the case law in MK (best interests
      of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC). This review notably  includes
      consideration of the case of AJ (India) [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1191.  This
      case makes the point that express reference to the s.55  duty  is  not
      necessary if the substance of the duty has been  considered.  Although
      the judge did not specifically refer to the duty under s.55 (which  is
      indeed not directed to him but the immigration official)  as  we  have
      noted the decision maker did,  and  the  substance  of  the  duty  was
      considered both by the judge and the decision-maker.

  41. As to the private life of the appellants  by  long  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom, the Immigration Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
      any private life established during the course of their residence  did
      not  require  respect  or  was  not  being  interfered  with  by   the
      immigration decision.  Again the period of residence is short. It  was
      permitted only on the basis of the first appellant's  assurances  that
      he intended a holiday only. The judge found that those assurances were
      false and if the truth had  been  known  he  should  never  have  been
      permitted to enter the United Kingdom in the first place for the  very
      reasons that led to the ECO's refusal of the application.

  42. A submission that a person who obtained entry  and  residence  on  the
      basis of a false  representation  that  he  was  seeking  an  extended
      holiday should be permitted to stay  on  the  basis  that  he  had  an
      expectation of making his life here is a remarkable one.  In any event
      no evidence of particular friendships, ties or other  important  links
      that would be lost if the appellants were to return to India was given
      to the Secretary of State or  the  judge  and  no  evidence  has  been
      submitted before us.  Friendships and  relations  with  distant  adult
      family members can be maintained by  correspondence,  telephone  calls
      and mutual visits. They do not give  rise  to  a  right  of  entry  or
      residence or a right to respect  for this private life by non-removal,
      save in unusual circumstances of necessary dependency.

  43.  It is perhaps of some relevance that despite the assertions of  total
      integration into the British way of life,  the  first  appellant  gave
      evidence through an interpreter.  Although his sponsor  had  given  an
      address in North London, the appellants  lived  on  the  south  coast.
      Neither had established any strong links through specialist employment
      in the United Kingdom.  There was simply no case to be made  for  stay
      outside the rules on this basis.

  44. On the above basis, there was  probably  no  need  for  the  judge  to
      consider justification of any interference, as the immigration  action
      was insufficiently serious in its context to amount to an interference
      with private life  meriting  respect.  Nevertheless  he  did  so.  The
      economic order of  society  is  promoted  by  immigration  control  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules and  such  other  statements  of
      policy  and  practice  as  are  considered  appropriate  to   regulate
      admission. The Immigration Rules include  the  general  balance  under
      paragraph  395C  that  has  been  considered  in  this  case.  It   is
      accordingly appropriate and proportionate to remove those who  do  not
      qualify for admission unless there are compelling  family  or  private
      life considerations that outweigh the public interest. For reasons  we
      have already noted there were none.


Error of law

  45. Before us, Mr Malik advances two grounds  to  support  the  contention
      that the judge made errors of law. It is said that he failed to decide
      that the variation  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
      because:-


           i) It was not based on an assessment of  the child's best
              interests in accordance with s.55;
          ii) It was a segregated decision because a decision to remove had
              not been made at the same time as the decision to vary.


  46. We reach two conclusions. First, from the record of proceedings it can
      be determined that no submissions were made  to  the  Judge  that  the
      decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  on  either  head.  The
      concluding submissions were entirely directed to  the  merits  of  the
      case. Where the appellant is legally represented, it is  difficult  to
      complain that the decision was wrong in law where the complaint  is  a
      failure to address an issue that was never raised when it  could  have
      been. The absence of reasoning on the issue is understandable.


  47. Secondly, we have in any event carefully  examined  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision for ourselves, in the light  of  the  submissions  we
      have heard. We conclude that these submissions are wrong in  point  of
      fact. The decision-maker  did  consider  removal  and  the  principles
      relevant to removal as he was asked to by the appellant. The  decision
      maker fully considered s.55  and  the  best  interests  of  the  child
      principle.  The  decision  was  taken  with  due  regard  to  the  two
      circumstances that must be  considered  in  such  cases.   In  summary
      measuring the decision against the public law  principles  established
      by the Court of Appeal we conclude:-

              i. It was taken in accordance with the statutory scheme.
             ii. It was not unfair in excluding any consideration  on  which
                 the appellants sought to rely.
            iii. It was based on a decision to remove in  the  event  of  no
                 voluntary  departure  and  took  express  account  of   the
                 considerations and overall balance set out in rule 395C.
             iv. There was no segregation of extension issues  from  removal
                 issues.
              v. The decision was rational in substance; it was at least one
                 that  a  reasonable  decision-maker  could   have   reached
                 properly directing him or herself as to the nature  of  the
                 discretion to be exercised and the factors relevant to  the
                 lawful exercise of that discretion.


      It was therefore not unlawful by reason of a failure to have regard to
      relevant   circumstances or having regard to irrelevant ones.  We  are
      satisfied that the  judge  at  appeal  would  have  reached  the  same
      conclusion had he been asked to consider the matter.

  48. We recognise that the judge did not make reference to the exercise  of
      discretion under paragraph 395C even  though  the  decision-maker  had
      done so. For the reasons set out in EO (Turkey) and Mirza, a judge has
      the statutory  jurisdiction  to  decide  that  discretion  as  between
      compassionate circumstances and the public interest in removal  should
      have been exercised differently.


  49.  It is best practice in a case such as the  present  where  the  whole
      context of the application and decision on extension of stay  is  that
      the appellant should not be removed because of compassionate  factors,
      for the judge to indicate that he has taken these factors into account
      even if no submissions expressly citing the paragraph have been made.

  50. However, we do not consider  that  this  was  an  error  of  law.  The
      appellant's submissions at the appeal were  made  in  the  context  of
      Article 8 private life.  The range  of  circumstances  that  could  be
      relevant to Article 8 are wide.  We recognise that  they  can  include
      cases where there has been substantial residence for the  purposes  of
      obtaining an important recognised educational qualification  that  has
      been frustrated by some marginal slip in the application form or  data
      provided: see  CDS (PBS "available" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT  305
      (IAC). This case is very  far  from  such  a  case.  Here,  the  first
      appellant never qualified for any class  of  claim  for  an  extension
      under the rules. We note that in the general  run  of  cases,  factors
      that are  relied  on  as  compassionate  ones,  length  of  residence,
      connections with the UK, impact of removal on child and family members
      are all well within the ambit of Article 8 and  a  number  of   judges
      have remarked on the fact that compassionate factors can be Article  8
      ones. It would only be  a  case  where  a  factor  relied  on  by  the
      appellant fell outside the scope of Article 8 that a failure to  refer
      expressly to paragraph 395C would be  material.  There  were  no  such
      factors in this case.


  51. In any event we have considered whether even if it could be said  that
      the failure to refer to a Rule not cited in submissions was  an  error
      of law, it could conceivably be said to be  material  in  the  present
      case. We are satisfied it cannot. The judge read the  decision  letter
      that explains paragraph 395C has been considered but  there  were  not
      sufficient  compassionate  factors  to  balance  against  the   public
      interest. We agree with the decision-maker and the judge that  nothing
      had  been  presented  that  was  either  capable  of  amounting  to  a
      compassionate factor  that  could  outweigh  the  normal  course.  For
      reasons already noted the residence of the appellants was  both  short
      and  an  abuse  because  it  was  based  on  the   first   appellant's
      misrepresentation of his intentions. To have afforded  any  weight  to
      such a factor would have been perverse.

  52. In summary we conclude:

           i) There has been no error of law made by the Secretary of State
              in the way she made this decision.
          ii) There has been no error of law  made  by  the  judge  in  his
              consideration of the matters raised in the  appeal  from  the
              Secretary of State's decision.
         iii)  Even  if,  the  judge  should  have  referred  expressly  to
              paragraph 395C there were  no  factors  capable  of  carrying
              weight in the context of that paragraph as the decision maker
              had notice and every relevant factor had been  considered  in
              the context of Article 8.
          iv) If we had remade the decision for  ourselves  we  would  have
              dismissed it on the basis of our conclusion that none of  the
              matters advanced were capable of carrying any weight.

               This appeal is dismissed.



                                 Signed


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber







