
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                   Given orally on 05    |
|                                   |October 2016 and                         |
|                                   |promulgated on 15 November 2016          |
|On 05 October 2016                 |                                         |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                   The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
 The Hon Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                   Between

                              Thajudheen Elayi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, of counsel, instructed by JS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


Justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen to be done.

                                  DECISION

 1. The decision on behalf of the Secretary of State giving  rise  to  this
    appeal was made on 26 January 2015.  By this decision the Secretary  of
    State refused the application of  the  Appellant  Thajudheen  Elayi,  a
    citizen of India now aged 28 years, for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The Secretary of State's decision was made under the discrete regime of
    the  Immigration  Rules  constituted  by  Appendix  FM  Section  S-LTR,
    specifically Rule S-LTR.2.2.   The  decision  letter  recites  evidence
    available to the Secretary of State that the Appellant  had  previously
    undergone an English language proficiency test.  The  letter  continues
    stating that the organisation ETS had  conducted  a  review  of,  inter
    alia, the Appellant's test.   ETS,  it  is  said,  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's test certificate had been "obtained through deception."

 3. The date of the test is stated to  be  19  October  2011.   This  is  a
    reference to the first of  the  two  dates  upon  which  the  Appellant
    evidently underwent the testing.  The letter states that as a result of
    the information provided by ETS the Appellant's scores from  that  test
    had been "cancelled."  Although the decision letter does not spell this
    out with absolute clarity it is tolerably clear, and we so  hold,  that
    the decision was  made  under  paragraph  2.2(a)  rather  than  (b)  of
    paragraph S-LTR of Appendix FM of the Rules.

 4. Thus, in summary, the basis of the decision was that the Appellant,  in
    making his application  for  leave  to  remain,  had  relied  on  false
    information, representations or documents, namely his TOEIC proficiency
    certificates.  We deduce from the  evidence  that  the  application  in
    question was that dated 21 December 2011 when the  Appellant  submitted
    an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.

 5. We have concluded that this appeal succeeds on the  following  grounds.
    The first relates to the conduct of the hearing by the Judge  at  first
    instance.  This conduct is described in the Appellant's further witness
    statement dated 08 September 2015 and specifically paragraph 2 thereof.
      In  this  document  the  Appellant  describes  conduct   which   may,
    uncontroversially,  be  described  as  unconventional  and  unorthodox.
    There is no dispute about what  is  recounted  in  this  statement  and
    indeed it is corroborated by the Appellant's spouse in her separate and
    further witness statement.

 6. In summary, the Judge (a) engaged in a private  conversation  with  the
    Appellant's representative (b) in the  absence  of  the  other  party's
    representative (c) in the precincts of the court room (d) partly out of
    sight and earshot of the Appellant and his  spouse  (e)  in  a  setting
    other than that of bench/bar (f) before the Appellant's  hearing  began
    (g) relating to the Appellant's case and,  finally,  (h)  the  contents
    whereof,  other  than  a  question  about  the  Appellant's   religious
    adherence, itself an improper enquiry made in this  fashion,  were  not
    divulged to the Appellant.

 7. The principles to  be  applied  to  these  undisputed  facts  are  well
    established.  They are set out in  inter  alia  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in Alubankudi [2015] UKUT 542 (IAC).  As that  decision  makes
    clear, appearances are of elevated importance in matters of this  kind.
    The prism to be applied is that of the hypothetical observer,  formerly
    known as the officious bystander.  We refer particularly to [14]:

         "The interface between the judiciary  and  society  is  of  greater
         importance nowadays than it has ever been.  In both the conduct  of
         hearings and the compilation of judgments, Judges must  have  their
         antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences.   Judges  must
         be alert to the  sensitivities  and  perceptions  of  others.   The
         interaction of  most  litigants  with  the  judicial  system  is  a
         transient one and it is of seminal importance  that  the  fairness,
         impartiality and detached objectivity of the judicial office holder
         are manifest from beginning to end."

 8. We conclude without hesitation that the undisputed conduct of the Judge
    offends  against  the  principles  rehearsed  in  Alubankudi.   It  was
    manifestly not redeemed by the religious adherence issue raised by  the
    Judge during the hearing.  The appearance  of  fairness  principle  was
    very clearly contravened.  The  hypothetical  observer  would,  in  our
    judgement, be gravely disturbed by  the  events  under  scrutiny.   The
    crucial elements of a due, orderly and impartial judicial process  were
    all lacking.

 9. There is no scope in the present case for the view  an  unfair  hearing
    having been found to  have  taken  place  this  error  of  law  may  be
    immaterial, as other judgements of this Tribunal make  clear.   See  in
    particular MM v SSHD [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC), at [14] - [18].  The  issue
    is whether the hearing was fair.  Once it is decided that  the  hearing
    was unfair the error of law is automatically a material one, unless the
    context is one of the greatest rarity.  That also has consequences  for
    the final order which we shall make.  This is the first  error  of  law
    which requires the determination of the First-tier Tribunal to  be  set
    aside.

10. The second error of law is also of an elementary kind  and  dimensions.
    In the Secretary of State's decision there was a failure  to  recognise
    that  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  2011  leave  to   remain
    application  had  contravened  a  provision  of  the  Rules,  namely  a
    requirement of candour and honesty, did  not  lead  inexorably  to  the
    further conclusion that the application  had  to  be  refused.   Rather
    there was a discretion to be exercised.   The  terms  of  the  decision
    letter make clear that the decision maker did not appreciate this.  The
    rejection of the application was considered to be obligatory, a  matter
    of course rather than  a  matter  of  discretion.   The  error  of  law
    committed by the Judge was to fail to recognise the  presence  of  that
    error in the impugned decision.

11. This is entirely without prejudice  to  Mr  Malik's  separate  argument
    relating to the construction of the Rule and in particular how  one  is
    to construe the terms "the applicant" and "the application".  We do not
    need to determine that interesting argument in this particular case.

12. The third identifiable  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  determination
    relates to his treatment of the so-called "generic" evidence.  This  is
    identifiable in  the  penultimate  sentence  of  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination.  There the  Judge  makes  a  rather  bare  and  sweeping
    statement: "The Home Office have access to  all  appropriate  data  and
    enquiries which were undertaken internally by ETS".  We all  know  this
    to be manifestly unsustainable.  This assessment is  made  irresistibly
    by virtue of this Tribunal's decision in  the  case  of  SM  and  Qadir
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC), at [63] especially, when the so-called "generic"
    evidence was examined in  some  detail  giving  rise  to  the  findings
    rehearsed.  It matters not that SM and Qadir post-dated the decision in
    the present case.  The inexorable conclusion is that the Judge erred in
    law in this rather unparticularised and  unreasoned  statement  in  the
    determination.

13. Finally, we turn to the issue of materiality as regards the second  and
    third errors of law which we  have  diagnosed.   An  error  of  law  is
    material if its avoidance could have led to a  different  outcome.   An
    appellate court or tribunal in applying this  test  must  be  confident
    that the outcome at first instance would have been  unchanged  had  the
    error of law been avoided.  We do not have that degree of confidence as
    regards  either  the  second  or  third  grounds  upon  which  we  have
    determined that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside.

    Notice of Decision

14. For the reasons given our order is as follows:

 a) We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 b) Having regard to the first ground  upon  which  we  have  done  so  the
    Appellant was denied a fair hearing and that consideration per se makes
    it appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal rather than
    to retain it in this forum for the  purpose  of  a  fresh  hearing  and
    decision.

 c) Thirdly and finally we direct that the case be heard by  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 12 October 2016


