
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ABUL MIAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr N Ahmed (of Counsel), instructed by Eurasia Legal
                  Services.


Conduct of pre-decision interviews

(i)  A decision that a  marriage  is  a  marriage  of  convenience  for  the
      purposes of regulation 2(1)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2006 is a matter of some moment.  Fairness  requires
      that the affected person must be alerted to the essential elements  of
      the case against him.

(ii) In addition, those involved must be alert to the question  of  whether,
      in an unusual or exceptional case, anything further is required in the
      interests of fairness. There may be  difficult,  borderline  cases  in
      which fairness will require identification of the third  party.  These
      do not admit of general guidance or resolution and  will  have  to  be
      addressed  on  a  case  by  case  basis,  guided  by  the  overarching
      requirement of fairness and balancing all interests in play.

     The making of the decision on the application

(iii)    The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  making  process  includes  a
      process whereby comments, or opinions, of an interviewing officer  are
      conveyed to the decision maker.  In  the  generality  of  cases,  this
      practice will not contaminate the  fairness  of  the  decision  making
      process. The duty of the decision maker is to  approach  and  consider
      all of the materials with an open mind and  with  circumspection.  The
      due discharge of this  duty,  coupled  with  the  statutory  right  of
      appeal, will provide the subject with adequate protection.

     Disclosure

(iv) However, the document enshrining  the  interviewer's  comments  -  Form
      ICV.4605 - must be disclosed as a matter  of  course.  An  appellant's
      right to a fair hearing dictates this course. If, exceptionally,  some
      legitimate concern about disclosure, for example, the protection of  a
      third party, should arise, this should be proactively brought  to  the
      attention of the Tribunal, for a ruling and directions.  In  this  way
      the  principle  of  independent  judicial  adjudication  will  provide
      adequate  safeguards  for  the  appellant.  This  will   also   enable
      mechanisms such as redaction, which in practice one  would  expect  to
      arise with extreme rarity, to be considered.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         Introduction

 1. By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State") the Appellant  herein,  dated  02
    July 2013, the application of the Respondent, a national of Bangladesh,
    aged 44 years, for a right of residence in the capacity of spouse of  a
    EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    refused.   The basis of the refusal was the assessment of the Secretary
    of State's officials that the marriage under scrutiny was considered to
    be one of convenience. The Respondent's ensuing appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") succeeded.   The Secretary of  State  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The main question raised by this appeal  is  an  interesting  one,  the
    answer whereto could potentially affect the conduct  of  interviews  in
    contexts other than that under consideration.   It  may  be  summarised
    thus: is a decision by the Secretary of  State  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations")  that
    a marriage is one of convenience vitiated by procedural unfairness and,
    thereby, erroneous in law where the decision  making  process  includes
    comments, or opinions, of  the  interviewing  officer  adverse  to  the
    subject's case which  are  conveyed  to  the  decision  maker  but  are
    withheld from the  subject?  Thus  formulated,  this  appeal  raises  a
    classic question of common law procedural fairness. This is essentially
    the issue on which the FtT allowed the appeal and upon which permission
    to appeal was granted.

 3. The subsidiary question raised by this appeal is also of some interest,
    as it bears on the Secretary of State's duty to the First-tier Tribunal
    under Rule 13 of the Asylum and Immigration Procedure Rules  2005.   It
    may be framed thus: does the duty under Rule 12 encompass a requirement
    to disclose Form ICD4605, the "Interview Summary Sheet", in every  case
    of this nature? The consequences of the new FtT  procedural  rules  are
    addressed in [20] infra.

    The EEA Regulations 2006

 4. For present purposes, it suffices to note that one aspect of the scheme
    of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  is  to
    confer a right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  spouses,  if
    certain conditions are satisfied.  Under Regulation 7, a  spouse  falls
    within the definition of  "family  member".    Pursuant  to  Regulation
    11(2), where the spouse is not an EEA national he/she has a right to be
    admitted to the United Kingdom if married  to  an  EEA  national.   The
    spouse thus admitted has the opportunity to  pursue  acquisition  of  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
    the provisions of Regulation 15.  In the context of the present appeal,
    one of the key provisions is Regulation 2(1):


         " 'Spouse' does not include  .........


         (a) A party to a marriage of convenience ..... "

     The phrase "marriage of convenience" is not defined.   The  purpose  of
    this discrete provision is clear:  it is designed to prevent  abuse  of
    the rights and privileges available under the 2006 Regulations by those
    who contract sham marriages.

 5. Directive 2004/38/EC, the relevant measure of  EU  law,  regulates  the
    right of citizens of the Union and their family  members  to  move  and
    reside freely within the territory of the Member States.   Thus  it  is
    underpinned by citizenship of the Union and  the  associated  right  of
    free movement.  It seeks to promote family unity  by  facilitating  the
    free movement of family members who  are  not  nationals  of  a  Member
    State.  It creates a  right  of  residence,  subject  to  a  series  of
    conditions and qualifications.  The Directive  balances  a  variety  of
    aims, including that of avoidance of  the  imposition  of  unreasonable
    burdens on the social assistance  system  of  the  host  Member  State.
    Notably, marriages of convenience are addressed under the rubric "Abuse
    of Rights", in Article 35, which provides:

       "Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse, terminate
       or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive  in  the  case  of
       abuse of rights or fraud, such as  marriages  of  convenience.   Any
       such measures shall be proportionate and subject to  the  procedural
       safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31."

    The topic of marriages of convenience has been considered by the  Upper
    Tribunal in Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - Marriage  of  Convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  There it was held that there  is  no  initial
    burden on a claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA  national
    is not one of convenience.  However, there is an evidential  burden  on
    the Claimant to address evidence justifying reasonable  suspicion  that
    the marriage in question was undertaken for the predominant purpose  of
    securing residence rights.

    The European Commission Handbook

 6. The mischief of marriages of convenience in the EU  is  highlighted  in
    the European Commission Handbook addressing this topic. The stated  aim
    of this guidance is to assist national authorities to  "  .....   fight
    abuses of the right to free  movement  ....  addressing  the  issue  of
    alleged  marriages  of  convenience  between  EU  citizens  and  non-EU
    nationals in the context of EU law on free movement  of  EU  citizens."
    It contains the following definition, which seems to be harmonious with
    Article 35 of the Directive:

         "For the purposes of Directive  2004/38/EC,  the  notion  of  abuse
         refers to an artificial  contract  entered  into  solely  with  the
         purpose of obtaining the right of free movement and residence under
         EU law which, albeit formally observing the conditions laid down by
         EU Rules, does not comply with the purpose of those rules."

    In this respect, the new Handbook  replicates  the  earlier  Commission
    guidelines of 2009.

 7. Given  the  subject  matter  of  this  judgment,  the  section  in  the
    Commission's Handbook  dealing  with  investigation  techniques  is  of
    interest.  It  describes  simultaneous  interviews  or   questionnaires
    (involving the two parties to the marriage),  document  and  background
    checks, inspections by relevant authorities and Community-based  checks
    as the main investigation techniques  employed  throughout  the  Union.
    Interestingly, it formulates the threshold for  interviewing  suspected
    spouses in the following terms:

         "As any other  investigation  technique,  interviews  of  suspected
         spouses should only be launched where national authorities - on the
         basis of  the  information  available  and  using  the  double-lock
         safeguard mechanism - consider that their serious doubts about  the
         genuineness of the marriage have not been sufficiently dispelled."

    Interviews  are  considered  to  be  "the  most  effective   technique"
    available for verifying whether a spouse has provided  non-conflicting,
    consistent and correct information about the other spouse,  their  past
    relationship and future plans.  National authorities are encouraged  to
    deploy questionnaires in this process.  Notably, the guidance  contains
    the following statement:


         "Contradictions, inconsistencies, lack of  detail  and  implausible
         statements which are relevant for the  decision  making  should  be
         identified and explicitly put to the interviewed spouses."

    Here one finds clear echoes of the common law principle  that  decision
    making processes of this genre must be procedurally   fair,  reflecting
    the latin maxim audi alteram partem.  The guidance, unsurprisingly,  is
    not  prescriptive  regarding  the  necessary  level  of  disclosure  to
    suspects.






    The Secretary of State's Decision


 8. In the "Notice of Immigration Decision" [Form ECD.3125], the Respondent
    was informed that his application had  been  refused  because  his  EEA
    family member (viz his spouse) had failed to provide evidence of  being
    a qualified person under regulation 6  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    Notice further stated that this refusal was not considered  to  violate
    the Respondent's rights under Article 8 ECHR.  It was accompanied by  a
    document entitled "Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter".   This  rehearses  a
    lengthy series of the questions put to the Respondent and his  asserted
    spouse during separate interviews and their recorded answers,  followed
    by this assessment:

         "It is evidently clear from the information that you and  your  EEA
         Sponsor provided during your interview with  this  department  that
         you are not in a genuine or subsisting relationship with  your  EEA
         Sponsor and your marriage to her is one of convenience."

    In the next paragraph, the inconsistent answers given by the Respondent
    and  the  spouse  to  questions  about  their  employment  status  were
    instanced as a further justification for doubting their credibility.


    The First Issue

 9. The first of the two questions identified  above  raises  an  issue  of
    fairness.  In this context, the  fairness  under  scrutiny  is  of  the
    procedural, not the substantive, variety.   In  a  celebrated  passage,
    Lord Mustill, having described the  requirements  of  fairness  in  any
    given context as "essentially an intuitive  judgment",  formulated  the
    following six general principles:

         "(1) Where an Act of Parliament confers  an  administrative  power,
             there is a presumption that it will be exercised in  a  manner
             which is fair in all the circumstances.


         (2)  The standards of fairness are not immutable.  They may  change
             with the passage of time, both in the  general  and  in  their
             application to decisions of a particular type.


         (3)  The principles of fairness are  not  to  be  applied  by  rote
             identically in every  situation.   What  fairness  demands  is
             dependent on the context of the decision and  this  is  to  be
             taken into account in all its aspects.


         (4)  An essential feature of  the  context  is  the  statute  which
             creates the discretion, as regards both its language  and  the
             shape of the legal and administrative system within which  the
             decision is taken.


         (5)  Fairness will very often require that  a  person  who  may  be
             adversely affected by the decision will have an opportunity to
             make representations on  his  own  behalf  either  before  the
             decision is taken  with  a  view  to  producing  a  favourable
             result, or after it is taken, with a  view  to  procuring  its
             modification, or both.


         (6)  Since the  person  affected  usually  cannot  make  worthwhile
             representations without knowing what factors may weigh against
             his interests fairness will very  often  require  that  he  is
             informed of the gist of the case which he has to answer."

    (R - v - Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  ex  parte  Doody
    [1994] 1 AC 531, at  [14])  Throughout this passage, there is a  strong
    emphasis on context, prompting reference to  the  memorable  and  pithy
    formulation of Lord Steyn:


         "In law context is everything."


         (R (Daly) - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 2
         AC 532, at  [28])

10. The reach and potency of the requirement of procedural fairness in  the
    realm of  administrative  decision  making  are  a  reflection  of  the
    citizen's right to a fair  hearing,  which  is  one  of  the  strongest
    principles of the common law.   R - v - Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, ex parte Fayed [1996]  EWCA  Civ  946,  which  concerned  a
    naturalisation decision, provides a graphic illustration.  The impugned
    decision was made under section 6 of the British Nationality Act  1981.
    Section 44(2) of the Act provides:

         "The Secretary of State, a Governor or  a  Lieutenant-Governor,  as
         the case may be, shall not be required to assign any reason for the
         grant or refusal of any application under this Act the decision  on
         which is at his discretion ....."

    The Applicants' applications  for  naturalisation  were  refused.   The
    refusals were unreasoned.  In their judicial  review  challenges,  they
    complained that they were entitled to a fair  decision  making  process
    which had been vitiated by a failure to alert them to the case  against
    them and the absence of reasons  for  the  impugned  decisions.   Their
    challenges succeeded and they secured the remedy of orders quashing the
    Secretary of State's decisions.  The Administrative  Court  ruled  that
    section 44(2) did not displace the common law requirement of procedural
    fairness.  Lord Wolff MR stated, at 238:


         "English law has long attached the greatest importance to the  need
         for fairness to be observed prior to the exercise  of  a  statutory
         discretion .....


         It  would  be  surprising  if  it  was  the  implied  intention  of
         Parliament that the lack of a requirement to  give  reasons  should
         have the effect of avoiding the requirement to  give  notice  of  a
         possible ground for refusing an application ....


         In many situations, the giving of notice of areas of  concern  will
         do no more than identify possible rather than the actual reasons."

    Phillips LJ, the second member of the majority,  coined  the  "duty  of
    disclosure" in describing the right of the subject to be alerted to the
    case against him: p 252. The Court held that section 44(2) did not over-
    ride this duty.  Per Phillips LJ, at 253:


         "The duty of disclosure is calculated to ensure that the process by
         which the Minister reaches his decision is  fair.  It  enables  the
         party affected to address the matters  which  are  significant  and
         thus help to ensure that the Minister reaches his  decision  having
         regard to all the relevant material."

    Both members of the majority highlighted  the  elevated  importance  of
    this requirement in the particular decision making context, considering
    it more important than a requirement  to  provide  reasons.   Thus  the
    fifth and sixth of Lord Mustill's precepts were given full effect.

11. In another context not far removed  from  that  of  the  present  case,
    namely the decision making of Entry  Clearance  Officers  in  visitors'
    visa applications, the Upper Tribunal has recognised the importance  of
    a fair decision making process. In T (Entry Clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]
    UKUT 00483 (IAC), it was held that,  as  a  prerequisite  to  a  lawful
    decision, Entry Clearance Officers may, in certain circumstances,  have
    to undertake enquiries, resolve disputed issues of fact and,  possibly,
    conduct interviews: see [34] - [37].  As  this  decision  demonstrates,
    there are close bonds between the citizen's right to  a  fair  decision
    making process and the  authority's  duty  to  take  into  account  all
    material information and considerations.  Due enjoyment  of  the  right
    facilitates fulfilment of the correlative duty.

12. What are the main features of the context of the decision making  under
    scrutiny in the present appeal?  Fundamentally, what is at stake is the
    entitlement of the person  concerned  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom, where the status of permanent residence can be pursued. If the
    decision is in the affected person's favour, this entitlement is  given
    effect.  If the decision is otherwise, this entitlement is negated  and
    the person must leave the United Kingdom.   The  decision  also  has  a
    direct impact on the other party  to  the  marriage.   Furthermore,  an
    assessment that the marriage was one of convenience is a matter of some
    moment. It is tantamount to a decision that the marriage was undertaken
    for improper motives, designed to secure,  dishonestly,  a  status  and
    associated advantages to which the  affected  person  was  not  legally
    entitled.  This will be a significant blot on the person's  immigration
    history and could operate to his detriment in the future.

13. These features of the context point decisively to the proposition  that
    the affected person must be alerted to the essential  elements  of  the
    case against him.  This places the spotlight firmly on the pre-decision
    interview which, it would appear, is an established part of the process
    in cases of this nature.  The interview is the  vehicle  through  which
    this discrete duty of  disclosure  will,  in  practice,  be  typically,
    though not invariably or exclusively, discharged.  In this  forum,  the
    suspicions relating to the genuineness of the marriage  must  be  fully
    ventilated.  This will entail putting  to  the  subject  the  essential
    elements of any evidence upon which such suspicions are based. In  this
    way the subject will be apprised of the case against him and will  have
    the opportunity to make his defence, advancing such representations and
    providing such  information,  explanations  or  interpretations  as  he
    wishes.  Adherence to these basic requirements  should,  in  principle,
    ensure a fair decision making process in the generality of  cases.   In
    order to cater for the unusual or exceptional case, those  involved  in
    the decision making process must always be alert  to  the  question  of
    whether, in the interests of fairness, anything further is required.

14. Where there is a legitimate requirement to protect the  identity  of  a
    third party, for example an informant  (in  the  general  sense),  this
    should  be  capable  of  achievement  without  compromising  the  basic
    requirements of a fair decision making process.  Thus the substance  of
    the information supplied by the third party will normally  have  to  be
    disclosed  to  the  interviewed  person.   There  may   be   difficult,
    borderline cases in which fairness might require  identification  of  a
    third party. It  is  conceivable  that  the  interviewee  may  find  it
    difficult to make a worthwhile response in ignorance of the identity of
    the third party.  This could arise, for  example,  where  the  response
    would be that the allegations in question are unreliable or fabricated,
    for whatever reason, or ill motivated. A response of this  kind  could,
    conceivably, be directly related to the identity  of  the  third  party
    concerned. Furthermore, there may be cases in which the  precise  words
    of a report, or allegation, may have to be disclosed.  I draw attention
    to these issues because they were debated briefly during submissions at
    the hearing.  They do not admit of general guidance or  resolution  and
    will have to be addressed on a  case  by  case  basis,  guided  by  the
    overarching requirement of fairness  and  balancing  all  interests  in
    play.

15. The analysis above demonstrates that, in the context of a  marriage  of
    convenience enquiry under the 2006 Regulations, the key requirement  of
    a fair decision making process is disclosure to the  "suspect"  of  the
    substance of the case against him.  This means, in practice,  that  the
    interview will invariably occupy a position of  pivotal  importance  in
    the process.

16. In the present case, there is no complaint about disclosure.  It is not
    argued that, when interviewed, the substance of the  case  against  the
    Respondent was not put to him.   Rather,  the  complaint  is  that  the
    interviewer's comments and opinions, which were critical of and adverse
    to the Respondent, should not have been conveyed to the decision maker.
     I consider that the merits of this contention are to be  evaluated  by
    applying the test of whether this rendered the decision making  process
    procedurally unfair.  In the abstract, one can conceive of cases  where
    comments of this kind might distort what had been transacted during the
    interview.  For example, the Respondent's responses might not be fairly
    summarised.   Alternatively,  the  comments  might   relate   to   some
    information or evidence adverse to the Respondent but  not  brought  to
    his attention.  In each of these illustrations, the safeguard  for  the
    Respondent is that it will be possible to demonstrate subsequently to a
    tribunal, on appeal, that the misdemeanour  in  question  occurred  and
    there will be independent judicial adjudication of whether the decision
    making  process  was  fair  and,  hence,   lawful.    None   of   these
    illustrations applies in the present case.

17. Insofar as Mr Ahmed submitted that the comments  and  opinions  of  the
    interviewing officer should never be considered by the decision  maker,
    I cannot agree.  The interviewer will normally  be  well  equipped  and
    placed to express relevant views, particularly where  the  same  person
    has, separately, interviewed the two parties  to  the  marriage.   More
    specifically, the interviewer will be uniquely placed to comment on the
    subject's presentation, reactions and  demeanour  generally.   This  is
    illustrated  in  the  present  case,  in  the  interviewing   officer's
    description of his "impression"  that  the  wife  was  evading  certain
    critical questions.  There is no challenge to the  bona  fides  of  the
    interviewer.  Where the interviewer elects to include  comments  and/or
    opinions in the materials conveyed to the decision  maker,  the  latter
    will not, of course, be bound by them.  I consider that the duty on the
    decision maker is to approach and consider all of the materials with an
    open mind and with circumspection.  The due  discharge  of  this  duty,
    coupled with the statutory right of appeal, will  provide  the  subject
    with adequate protection.

18. It is also important to recognise the public interest in play in  cases
    of this kind.  It is contrary to the public interest that marriages  of
    convenience should go undetected.  The public  interest  requires  that
    such marriages be exposed where possible and that the parties be denied
    the rights flowing from genuine marriages.   The  fulfilment  of  these
    public interests is promoted by ensuring that the decision maker is  as
    fully equipped as possible. This discrete goal is, in turn, promoted by
    the mechanism of conveying to  the  decision  maker  the  interviewer's
    assessment of the interviewees.

19. Thus I answer the first of the questions raised in this appeal  in  the
    following way:

    (a)  In the present case, the communication to the  decision  maker  of
         the interviewer's assessment of the genuineness of the Respondent's
         marriage did not render the decision making process  unfair.  Hence
         the impugned decision was lawful.

    (b)  In the generality of cases, this practice will not contaminate the
         fairness of the decision making process.

    The Rule 13 Issue

20. I turn to consider the second of the question raised  by  this  appeal.
    Rule 12 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    ("the 2005 Rules") provides that upon receipt of a  Notice  of  Appeal,
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  FtT")  shall  serve  same  upon   the
    Respondent (the Secretary of State) as soon as reasonably  practicable.
    Rule 13 provides:

         "(1) When the Respondent is served with  a  copy  of  a  Notice  of
             Appeal, it must ...  file with the Tribunal a copy of -


             (a)  the notice of the decision to which the Notice of  Appeal
                  relates and any other document  served  on  the  Appellant
                  giving reasons for the decision;


               b) any -


                  (i)   statement  of  evidence  form   completed   by   the
             Appellant; and


                  (ii) record of an interview with the Appellant,


                  in relation to the decision being appealed;


               c) any other unpublished document which is referred to  in  a
                  document  mentioned  in  (a)  or  relied   upon   by   the
                  Respondent; and


               d) the notice of  any  other  immigration  decision  made  in
                  relation to the Appellant in respect of  which  he  has  a
                  right of appeal under section 82 of the 2002 Act."

             [My emphasis.]


    By Rule 13(2), the Secretary of State must  also  file  any  additional
    documents required by directions given by the Tribunal.  All  documents
    filed must also be served on the Appellant.

21. The requirement to make disclosure (formerly discovery) of all material
    documents  in  a  party's  possession,  custody  or  power  is  a  long
    established feature of most litigation contexts.   It  is  an  integral
    part of the administration of justice.  It is a duty owed to  both  the
    other party and the court or  tribunal  concerned.   It  is  rooted  in
    fairness and the rule of law itself.   In  the  particular  context  of
    judicial review proceedings, Sir John Donaldson MR stated in R  -  v  -
    Lancashire County Court, ex parte Huddleston [1986] 2 All  ER  941,  at
    944:

         "Certainly it is for the applicant to  satisfy  the  Court  of  his
         entitlement to judicial review and it  is  for  the  respondent  to
         resist his application, if it considers it to be unjustified.   But
         it is a process which falls to be conducted with all the cards face
         upwards on the table and the vast majority of the cards will  start
         in the authority's hands".


         [My emphasis.]

    This has also been formulated as a duty of candour: see  Tweed  -  v  -
    Parades Commission (Northern Ireland) [2006] UKHL 33, at [54], per Lord
    Brown.  Asylum, immigration and kindred appeals are a species of public
    law proceedings, in which the parties are the citizen (on the one hand)
    and the State (on the other).   I consider that these duties apply with
    full force in the context of such appeals. To suggest  otherwise  would
    be inimical to the administration of justice.   Rule  13  of  the  2005
    Rules is to be construed and applied accordingly.

22. The representatives of both  parties  were  agreed  that  the  document
    enshrining  the  interviewer's  comments  -  Form  ICV.4605  -  is  not
    routinely disclosed in appeals of this kind.  The practice  appears  to
    be irregular and inconsistent.   I  consider  that  fulfilment  of  the
    duties identified above requires disclosure of this Form as a matter of
    course. The Claimant's right to a fair  appeal  hearing  dictates  this
    course. If, exceptionally, some legitimate  concern  about  disclosure,
    for example the protection of a third party, should arise, this  should
    be proactively brought to the attention of the Tribunal, for  a  ruling
    and directions.  In this way  the  principle  of  independent  judicial
    adjudication will provide adequate safeguards.   It  will  also  enable
    mechanisms such as redaction, which in practice  one  would  expect  to
    arise with extreme rarity, to be considered.

23. While, there may be cases  where  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  non-
    disclosure of this document did not contaminate  the  fairness  of  the
    tribunal's decision making process, one would expect these to be rare.

24. The rules governing proceedings in the FtT have just changed, with  the
    introduction  of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014,   in  operation  from  20
    October 2014.  Within the new regime, rule 24 is the equivalent of  the
    former rules 12 and 13.  While there are some  linguistic  adjustments,
    these are slight.  The essence  and  substance  of  the  new  rule  are
    unchanged.  Accordingly, the approach set out in [22] above will apply.
     I also draw attention to the new rule 23, which subjects the Secretary
    of State to specific disclosure obligations in cases involving  appeals
    against refusal of entry clearance.  The main difference  is  that  the
    Secretary of State's response to a Notice of  Appeal  must  include  "a
    statement of whether the Respondent opposes the Appellant's  case  and,
    if so, the grounds for such opposition".  Otherwise, rules  23  and  24
    are materially indistinguishable. The principles rehearsed  above  will
    apply to this discrete class of appeals also.

    Decision

25. I have rejected the contention that the Secretary of  State's  decision
    making process was  unfair  and,  hence,  unlawful  by  virtue  of  the
    interviewer communicating adverse comments and opinions to the decision
    maker. Thus the Secretary of State's decision was  in  accordance  with
    the law, from which it follows that the decision of the  FtT  to  allow
    the Respondent's appeal cannot be upheld.

26. Thus I set aside the decision of the FtT and  remit  the  appeal  to  a
    different constitution of the FtT for the purpose of  deciding  on  the
    merits the issue  of  whether  the  marriage  in  question  is  one  of
    convenience and making a fresh decision.

                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 01 October 2014

