
[pic]


                               Upper Tribunal
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Bah) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00518 (IAC)

                       Judicial review Decision Notice


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                 The Queen (on the application of Hawa Bah)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent



     Application for judicial review: substantive decision and judgment

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives,  Mr  D  O'Callaghan  of  Counsel  instructed  by
Sutovic & Hartigan Solicitors on behalf of the applicant and Ms J  Anderson,
of Counsel instructed by the Government Legal Department on  behalf  of  the
respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London, on 24 July 2015


                                  Judgment
                      (Handed down on 7 September 2015)

Judge Gill:

 1. The applicant has been granted permission to apply for judicial  review
    of the decision of the respondent of 28  November  2013  by  which  she
    granted the applicant 30 months' discretionary leave to  remain  (DLR).
    The applicant contends that the respondent unlawfully failed  to  grant
    her indefinite leave to remain  (ILR).  The  parties  agreed  that  the
    questions that arise in this case are as follows:

    (i)  Did the respondent make a clear unambiguous promise to review  the
        applicant's case before July 2011?

     If she did  not  make  a  clear  unambiguous  promise  to  review  the
        applicant's case before July 2011, Mr O'Callaghan accepted that the
        applicant's judicial review claim cannot succeed.

    (ii) If the respondent made a clear unambiguous promise to  review  the
        applicant's case by July 2011, did she make such a promise to do so
        before 20 July 2011?

    (iii)     If the respondent made a clear unambiguous promise to  review
        the applicant's case before 20 July 2011,  does  para  4.2  of  the
        respondent's Discretionary Leave Policy, version 6  (hereafter  the
        "DLP"), which was  in  place  from  24  June  2013,  apply  to  the
        applicant? Alternatively, does  the  applicant  have  a  legitimate
        expectation that para 4.2 of the DLP will be applied to her and ILR
        granted?

    (iv) If the respondent made a clear unambiguous promise to  review  the
        applicant's case 'by July 2011' but it was not a promise to  do  so
        before 20 July 2011, was it unlawful for the respondent not to have
        considered,  as  a  matter  of  fairness,  whether   her   residual
        discretion should be applied in the applicant's favour and  ILR  be
        granted to her?

 2. The relevant part of the DLP reads as follows:


          4 Duration of grants of Discretionary Leave
           . The duration of Discretionary Leave granted will be determined
             by a consideration of the individual facts  of  the  case  but
             leave should not normally be granted for more than  30  months
             (2.5 years) at a time.


           . Subsequent periods of  leave  can  be  granted  providing  the
             applicant continues to meet the relevant criteria.


           . From 9 July 2012 an applicant normally needs  to  complete  at
             least  120  months,  (i.e.  a  total  of  10  years   normally
             consisting of four 2.5 year periods of  leave),  before  being
             eligible to apply for settlement. Separate arrangements  exist
             for cases granted 3  years  DL  prior  to  9  July  2012.  See
             Transitional Arrangements below.


          4.2 Exceptional circumstances


           . Where removal is no longer  considered  appropriate  following
             consideration of the exceptional factors set out in  Paragraph
             353B of the Immigration Rules and the guidance in  Chapter  53
             of the EIG, 30 months DL should be granted, unless one of  the
             following situations applies:
                  Where the UK Border Agency (as  it  was)  made  a  written
                  commitment that a case would be considered  either  before
                  20 July 2011 or before 9 July 2012, but failed to  do  so,
                  and later decides that a grant is appropriate;
                  Where the UK Border Agency (as it  was)  made  a  decision
                  either before 20 July 2011 or before 9 July  2012  that  a
                  grant of leave on the grounds then listed  in  Chapter  53
                  was not appropriate, but after that  date  carried  out  a
                  reconsideration of that decision and - on the basis of the
                  same evidence - decides  that  the  earlier  decision  was
                  wrong and leave should have been granted.


           . Where the above applies and the relevant date  was  before  20
             July 2011 - Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) outside the Rules
             should be granted. This is because prior to 20 July  2011  ILR
             was normally  granted  to  cases  which  met  the  exceptional
             circumstances in Chapter  53  of  the  EIG.  Where  the  above
             applies and the relevant date was before 9 July 2012, 3  years
             DL should  be  granted,  with  the  person  normally  becoming
             eligible to apply for settlement after two periods of 3  years
             DL. This is because between 20 July 2011 and 9 July  2012  the
             UK Border Agency granted 3 years DL  in  cases  that  met  the
             exceptional circumstances in Chapter  53  of  the  EIG.  These
             cases will normally be eligible to apply for settlement  after
             6 years.

 3. The significance of 'July 2011'  and  '20  July  2011'  arises  in  the
    following way. The applicant's case  was  reviewed  by  the  respondent
    under her 'case resolution programme', also often referred  to  as  the
    'legacy programme'. This was an operational programme launched  by  the
    UK Borders Agency on 25 July 2006 to resolve a  backlog  of  unresolved
    asylum claims made prior to 5 March 2007 and which led to  the  setting
    up of a directorate called the 'Case Resolution Directorate'. It is not
    necessary for me to  describe  the  legacy  programme  in  detail.  The
    programme is described and discussed in several judgments; for example,
    the judgments in R  (Geraldo)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  2763  (Admin),  R
    (Hamzeh) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 4113 (Admin), R (Jaku and  others)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 605 (Admin) and SH (Iran) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1469.

 4. In Geraldo, the applicants argued that the review  decisions  in  their
    cases should have been made by 19 July 2011. They sought to argue:  (i)
    historic injustice; (ii) that they had a  legitimate  expectation  that
    their cases would be concluded or considered by  19  July  2011;  (iii)
    that  there  had  been  illegality  based  on  unlawful  delay  by  the
    respondent failing to review their cases by 19 July 2011; and (iv) that
    the failure to grant ILR was inconsistent with  the  rationale  of  the
    legacy programme. None of the claimants in Geraldo  received  a  letter
    which said anything more than "we aim to deal with your  case  by  July
    2011" (see [91] and [93] of Geraldo, relevant  extracts  of  which  are
    quoted at [20] below).

 5. In Geraldo, King J held, inter alia,  that  the  respondent  had  acted
    lawfully in granting the three claimants DLR as she had not been  under
    any legal duty to consider their applications  under  the  government's
    legacy programme by a particular date. King J  observed  that  a  claim
    based  on  legitimate  expectation  could  not  be  established  absent
    evidence of a clear unambiguous statement of practice or  promise  from
    which it would be contrary to the principles of good administration for
    the respondent to resile. Absent such a clear unambiguous statement  of
    practice  or  principle,  the  only  legitimate  expectation  that  the
    claimants had was to have their cases determined under the then current
    law and policy.

 6. Mr O'Callaghan accepted that, if the applicant's case falls within  the
    generality of the cases considered in Geraldo, then her judicial review
    claim cannot succeed. In that event,  the  parties  agreed  that  there
    would be no need for me to consider  questions  (ii)-(iv),  since  this
    case does  not  raise  issues  which  are  of  general  application  or
    assistance.  However,  he  suggested  that  it  would  nevertheless  be
    appropriate for me to summarise  the  submissions  of  the  parties  on
    questions (ii)-(iv).

 7. As will become apparent, I have concluded that the respondent  did  not
    make a clear unambiguous promise to the applicant that her  case  would
    be reviewed within any time frame or 'by 20  July  2011'  or  'by  July
    2011', for reasons given  below.  Nevertheless,  I  agree  that  it  is
    appropriate for me to summarise  the  submissions  of  the  parties  on
    questions (iii)-(iv) for the record, although in view of my  conclusion
    on question (i), I have not  gone  into  any  significant  detail;  for
    example, concerning the jurisprudence on legitimate expectation and the
    detailed conclusions in the cases  in  which  the  respondent's  legacy
    programme has been considered.

 8. At this point, it is convenient to refer to the report of Mr. John Vine
    CBE QPM, Independent Chief Inspector of Borders  and  Immigration,  for
    March - July 2012, entitled: 'An inspection of the UK  Border  Agency's
    handling of legacy asylum and migration  cases'  (hereafter  the  "Vine
    report"). The applicant relies upon [7.30]-[7.46] of  the  report  (set
    out in the  Appendix  to  this  judgment)  as  well  as  the  following
    paragraph in the 'Foreword' from Mr. Vine, in particular,  the  text  I
    have underlined:

         The implementation of a policy change in July 2011 to grant legacy
             asylum applicants Discretionary Leave for  three  years  (where
             removal from the UK was  not  considered  appropriate),  rather
             than ILR as had been the  case  previously,  was  also  flawed.
             Exceptions  allowing  for  the  continued  grant  of   ILR   to
             applicants whose cases the Agency had promised  to  resolve  by
             July  2011  were  not  initially  in  place,  nor   were   they
             communicated effectively to staff. This  adversely  affected  a
             number of applicants,  including  former  unaccompanied  asylum
             seeking children, whose cases should have been dealt with in  a
             timely fashion. These applicants were  not  at  fault  for  the
             significant delays in their cases. It should make no difference
             whether they had been in contact with the Agency themselves, or
             whether any contact was via their legal representatives or  MP,
             or whether litigation was contemplated or pending.  I  consider
             that applicants who had been told  that  their  case  would  be
             dealt with by July 2011 had a reasonable expectation that their
             cases would have been resolved by that date. It was  reasonable
             for them to expect that, if a decision to grant had  been  made
             in the stated time, the policy applied would  be  the  relevant
             policy at the date of decision, which would have resulted in  a
             grant of ILR.

     Relevant background

 9. The applicant is a national  of  Guinea.  She  entered  the  UK  on  20
    February 2007 and claimed asylum on 21 February 2007. Her asylum  claim
    was refused on 4 April 2007. Her appeal was dismissed on 5  June  2007.
    She exhausted her appeal rights on 20 November 2007. Her case  fell  to
    be reviewed under the legacy programme by two  routes.  The  first  was
    that she had claimed asylum prior to 5 March 2007. The second was that,
    on 7 March 2008, she made further  representations.  She  received  the
    letter dated 18 December 2009 from the respondent, quoted at [11] below
    (hereafter the "applicant's 2009 Letter"). The respondent  granted  her
    discretionary leave for a period  of  30  months  by  letter  dated  28
    November 2013, served on 11 December 2013.

10. The applicant lodged her claim for judicial review against the decision
    of 28 November 2013 on 27 February 2014. Permission was refused on  the
    papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson. At the hearing of  the  renewed
    application  for  permission,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey   granted
    permission stating that it was arguable that the  "particular  wording"
    in the applicant's 2009 Letter did not amount to an  'aim  letter'  but
    was a commitment.  Judge  Storey  considered  that  the  DLP  at  [4.2]
    envisaged that some 'commitment letters' were sent during the  relevant
    period.

     Submissions

      Submissions  on  question  (i):   Did  the  respondent  make  a  clear
    unambiguous promise to review the applicant's case before July 2011?

11. The applicant contends that the respondent did make a clear unambiguous
    promise in her particular case, that her case  would  be  reviewed  'by
    July 2011'. In this respect, reliance is placed on the applicant's 2009
    Letter, the relevant part of which reads:

         On the 19th July 2006, the  Home  Secretary  made  a  statement  to
        Parliament about the then Immigration and Nationality Directorate's
        (IND) legacy of electronic and paper records relating to unresolved
        asylum cases. The aim is to resolve all of these  case  records  by
        July 2011.

         Further information can be found at the UK Border  Agency  website,
        under http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/asylum/oldercases/

         Cases will be considered in line with  various  priorities  by  the
        Case Resolution Directorate (CRD). Cases will not be considered out
        of turn unless there are  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
        quicker resolution of the case.

         Unfortunately we can not give any further  indication  as  to  when
        your case will be considered and dealt with accordingly, other than
        within the deadline of July 2011. However, I can confirm that  your
        case has been allocated to CRT L8.

12. Mr O'Callaghan submitted that, when read as a  whole,  the  applicant's
    2009 Letter was not an 'aim' letter but a 'promise' letter.  The  words
    'your', 'will', 'be'  and  'within'  are  to  be  given  their  natural
    meaning. The word 'will' confirms  an  inevitable  event  and  'within'
    establishes that an act will take place before the end of a  period  of
    time. The word 'your' individualises a promise made. They do not  state
    an aim, as the words 'will', 'be' and 'within' cannot equate  on  their
    ordinary meaning to an 'aim'.  The  applicant's  2009  Letter  did  not
    amount to a promise that priority may be given to the applicant's case.
    Rather, the applicant's 2009 Letter confirmed that a decision  will  be
    taken and that it would be taken before the identified deadline of July
    2011. The promise  made  was  clear,  unambiguous  and  devoid  of  any
    relevant qualification.

13. Mr O'Callaghan submitted that the applicant's 2009 Letter could not  be
    a pro forma or standard letter because  it  was  not  being  replicated
    generally. In Geraldo, none of  the  claimants  received  a  letter  in
    similar terms.

14. Mr O'Callaghan accepted that the date of 20 July 2011 did not have  any
    significance until shortly before the change in policy. The policy  was
    changed 11 days before the  end  of  July  2011.  In  Geraldo,  King  J
    accepted that the change in policy was not  connected  to  the  aim  to
    resolve legacy cases by any  deadline  of  July  2011.  Mr  O'Callaghan
    acknowledged that the respondent contends that she  did  not  have  any
    deadline. He also accepted that King J found in Geraldo that there  was
    no deadline. However, he submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    nevertheless used the word 'deadline' in the applicant's  2009  Letter.
    Accordingly, as a matter of fairness, it was necessary to resolve  what
    was meant by 'deadline' in the applicant's 2009 Letter.

15. In R (Kadyamarunga) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 301 (Admin), Green J appeared to
    suggest that, in 2006, the respondent did send  out  letters  giving  a
    commitment to 'conclude' cases by 20 July  2011.  To  this  extent,  he
    accepted that Kadyamarunga was inconsistent with Geraldo.  However,  he
    pointed out that the judgment in Kadyamarunga had not been appealed  by
    the Secretary of State.

16. Although Mr O'Callaghan accepted that it was highly  unlikely  that  in
    2006, the respondent was sending letters mentioning a  deadline  of  20
    July 2011, he submitted  that  the  Vine  report  does  show  that  the
    respondent was issuing  individual  commitments  even  before  mid-July
    2011, when the date of 20 July 2011 became significant as the  date  of
    the policy change.

17. Furthermore, Mr O'Callaghan asked  me  to  compare  the  terms  of  the
    applicant's 2009 Letter with the terms of the examples taken from stock
    letters in the Vine report. There is one example at para 7.41  and  one
    in table 24 at para 7.42 of the Vine report, relevant extracts of which
    are as follows:

         7.41:         We plan to do this within  five  years  or  less.  We
                 will prioritise those who may pose a risk  to  the  public,
                 and then focus on those who can  be  more  easily  removed,
                 those receiving support,  and  those  who  may  be  granted
                 leave. All cases will be dealt  with  on  their  individual
                 merits.

         7.42 (table 24):

              1.  On 19 July 2006, the Home Secretary made  a  statement  to
                 Parliament about the then  UK  Border  Agency's  legacy  of
                 electronic and paper records relating to unresolved  asylum
                 cases. He stated that the aim  was  to  clear  these  cases
                 within five years or less,  namely  by  July  2011.  I  can
                 confirm that your client's case falls  into  this  category
                 but I cannot give any indication at this stage when it will
                 be actioned. We will contact your client when your client's
                 case comes up for decision.

              2.  Please send  your  photographs  and  any  other  documents
                 along with the completed form sent with this letter, to the
                 address at the top of  this  letter.  You  should  do  this
                 within 21 days from      the above  date.  If  you  do  not
                 return the documents requested above, we will consider your
                 case   on the documents available to us.

              3.  We ask that you do not make routine telephone  or  written
                 enquiries about the progress of your case, as this  diverts
                 our resources from resolving cases.  We  will  not  confirm
                 receipt of your reply to this letter  or  receipt  of  your
                 photographs. Should  we  require  any  further  information
                 about your case, a UKBA colleague will contact you.

18. These were just two examples of stock letters. Mr O'Callaghan submitted
    that  the  terms  of  these  letters  were  very  different  from   the
    applicant's 2009 Letter that the applicant received.

19. Ms Anderson submitted that my decision as to  whether  the  applicant's
    2009 Letter gave the applicant a  clear  unambiguous  promise  must  be
    informed by what is known about the legacy programme, as found  in  the
    judgments in Geraldo, Hamzeh and  SH  (Iran)  and  Jaku,  amongst  many
    others. She  submitted  that  the  Vine  report  is  not  a  source  of
    government policy: Jaku at [52].

20. Ms Anderson referred me to the fact  that  the  Court  in  Geraldo  had
    copies of letters to individuals which specifically mentioned the  date
    of 19 July 2011 (at [90-91]) and yet King J found (at  [104])  that  it
    was impossible to read into the  words  an  unambiguous  commitment  to
    'conclude' the cases by a specific  date  such  as  19  July  2011.  In
    Geraldo, the letters read, insofar as relevant  as  follows  ([91]  and
    [93]):

        ... The aim is to resolve these case records in five years or less,
        and by 19 July 2011

     and

        The aim is to resolve these case records by July 2011.

21. Ms Anderson drew attention to the fact that the  opening  paragraph  of
    the applicant's 2009 Letter mentioned the 'aim' of 'resolving  all  ...
    records by July 2011'. She submitted that the subsequent  paragraph  in
    which the words 'will' and 'deadline' were used referred  back  to  the
    'aim' in the first paragraph. The paragraphs in  between  informed  the
    applicant, in essence, that, if she had exceptional  circumstances  for
    her case to be considered out of turn, she would  have  to  inform  the
    UKBA. The next paragraph informed  her  that  no  'further  indication'
    could be given save that her case fell within the generality of cases.

22. Ms Anderson submitted that the applicant had to show that there was  an
    intention on the part of the respondent to  give  a  clear  unambiguous
    promise. She submitted that there was no such intention.

23. In reply, Mr O'Callaghan submitted that the opening  paragraph  of  the
    applicant's 2009 Letter stated a general aim but  went  on  to  give  a
    specific promise.

    Submissions  on  question  (ii):    If  the  respondent  made  a  clear
    unambiguous promise to review the applicant's case by  July  2011,  did
    she make such a promise to do so before 20 July 2011?

24. If I were to decide that the applicant's 2009  Letter  shows  that  the
    respondent had made a commitment that the  applicant's  case  would  be
    considered 'by  July  2011',  then  the  applicant  contends  that  the
    respondent's commitment was to make a decision before 20 July 2011.  In
    this respect, she relies upon the following:

     i)  The last five lines  of  the  Foreword  in  the  Vine  report  (the
        underlined  text  at  [8]  above),  which  needs  to  be  read   in
        conjunction with paras 7.30 onwards of the report, set out  in  the
        Appendix to this judgment.

     ii) The judgment of Green J in Kadyamarunga, in  which  (the  applicant
        contends) Green J was satisfied on the evidence  before  the  Court
        that the respondent was sending  letters  in  which  she  committed
        herself to resolve the case in question within  5  years,  i.e.  by
        July  2011.  In  Kadyamarunga,  the  letter  said  to  contain  the
        commitment to review the claimant's case by 20 July 2011 could  not
        be produced for the hearing; it was believed that  the  letter  had
        been lost.  Green J accepted the evidence of the claimant that  she
        "absolutely recall[ed] without  any  doubt"  that  she  received  a
        letter from the respondent "sometime around 2006" advising her that
        "a decision would be made with regards to our case by 20 July 2011"
        ([28] of Kadyamarunga). Green  J  considered  that  the  claimant's
        evidence established that this was exactly  the  sort  or  type  of
        letter that might very well have been sent in or about  2006;  that
        it was clear  that  the  Border  Agency  was,  in  or  about  2006,
        proffering written  commitments  that  cases  would  be  considered
        before 20 July 2011; and that as of 2006, the  Border  Agency  was:
        (a) seeking to resolve matters within 5 years, i.e. by  July  2011;
        and (b) tendering written commitments to that effect.

25. Relying upon the judgment in R (Delipalta and others)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department) [2014] EWHC 4218  (Admin)  at  [28],  Ms
    Anderson submitted that the Vine report was not binding. Its remit  was
    to report on administrative efficiency.  It cannot be authoritative  on
    issues before the courts, including issues of fairness.

26. Furthermore,  what  the  Chief  Inspector  said  at  [7.31]  about  the
    rationale for the change  in  policy  in  July  2011  was  rejected  in
    Geraldo: King J accepted the Secretary of  State's  evidence  that  the
    change in policy was not connected  to  the  legacy  cases.  The  Chief
    Inspector attempted (at [7.39]-[7.40]) of the Vine report to expand the
    exceptions provided for at para  4.2  of  the  DLP  on  the  ground  of
    fairness. However, this was also rejected by King J in Geraldo, at [67]-
    [75]. Instead, King J (at [79]) accepted the evidence of Mr Neil Parkin
    (a grade 7 civil servant in the Asylum Policy Unit of  the  Immigration
    and Border Policy Directorate of the Home  Office)  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, that the timing of the introduction of  the  DLP  (20  July
    2011) was not linked to any specific end date for the legacy  programme
    such as 19 July  2011;  that  the  introduction  of  the  DLP  was  not
    predicated  on  an  assumption  that  the  legacy  programme  had  been
    completed and that the rationale for the introduction of  the  DLP  was
    the application of key principles for the  reform  of  the  immigration
    cases that cases should be decided upon the  basis  of  the  individual
    merits according to the law and policy in place  at  the  time  of  the
    decision and was part of a larger revision of overall leave policy.

27. Ms Anderson submitted that Kadyamarunga was a decision  on  the  facts.
    Green J accepted the evidence of the claimant in that case that she had
    received a letter in which a clear unambiguous promise was  given  that
    her case would be decided  by  20  July  2011.  On  that  basis  alone,
    Kadyamarunga should not be followed.

28. In any event, to the extent that it was found in Kadyamarunga that  the
    Secretary of State was sending  letters  in  2006  in  which  she  gave
    commitments to review cases by 20 July 2011, Ms Anderson submitted that
    Green J had misconstrued the evidence and that his decision  could  not
    bind a subsequent court. For example, in the  final  two  sentences  of
    para 23, Green J said that, where a decision maker  had  made  a  clear
    promise to do something by a particular date, it  may  be  unlawful  to
    apply a new policy to 'old' circumstances, whereas King J  was  careful
    to make it clear that it is not  that  the  deleted  policy  was  being
    applied but that it was taken into account in applying the new  policy.
    Ms Anderson submitted that, furthermore, it was not  possible  for  the
    decision maker to  write  a  letter  in  2006  (when  the  claimant  in
    Kadyamarunga said she received her 'commitment letter')  committing  to
    take a decision by 20 July 2011 given that the date of 20 July 2011 was
    not thought about in 2006.

    Submissions  on  question  (iii):   If  the  respondent  made  a  clear
    unambiguous promise to review the applicant's case before 20 July 2011,
    did para 4.2 of the DLP, which was in place from 24 June 2013, apply to
    the applicant?

29. If I were to decide that the commitment made by the respondent  in  the
    applicant's 2009 Letter was a commitment to review the applicant's case
    before 20 July 2011, then Mr O'Callaghan submitted that  the  applicant
    fell within the terms of para 4.2 of the DLP. In that event, the remedy
    sought is for the decision  to  be  quashed  on  the  ground  that  the
    applicant comes within para 4.2 of the DLP,  a  material  consideration
    which it is said the respondent had failed to consider in the  exercise
    of her discretion.

30. For the respondent, Ms Anderson submitted that the  decision  to  grant
    the applicant DLR in November 2013  took  into  account  the  delay  in
    reviewing her case. However, Mr O'Callaghan drew my  attention  to  the
    fact that there was no evidence from the respondent that the  applicant
    was granted DLR because of the delay in her case.

31. Ms Anderson submitted that the exceptions in para 4.2 of the  DLP  were
    brought in to prevent challenges by a narrow category of  people,  i.e.
    those who were given written unambiguous commitments in  the  Secretary
    of State's responses to pre-action protocol letters  (PAP  letters)  or
    judicial review proceedings  or  letters  from  claimants'  Members  of
    Parliament, that their cases would be reviewed by a relevant  date.  Ms
    Anderson's position as to whether this exception to the DLP was limited
    to  the  three  categories  just  mentioned  changed  as  the   hearing
    progressed, her final position being that the exception was not limited
    to these three categories but it was limited to those who had  received
    commitments shortly before the change  of  policy  in  July  2011.  She
    submitted that it was a matter  for  the  court  in  the  instant  case
    whether the exception should be extended.

32. Ms Anderson submitted  that,  even  if  the  respondent  made  a  clear
    unambiguous promise to review the applicant's case 'by July 2011'  (or,
    for that matter, before 20 July 2011 i.e.  question  (iv)  below),  she
    could not have a legitimate  expectation  in  December  2009  that  the
    policy would not change.

33. Ms Anderson also referred me to the fact that the judgment  in  Geraldo
    also recorded that the cases that were decided later had the benefit of
    delay and a more favourable policy because the  period  of  significant
    residence was reduced from ten years/fourteen years to six years  which
    could be significant. She submitted that the applicant cannot  seek  to
    take advantage of a favourable change (namely,  the  reduction  in  the
    period of significant residence  to  six  years)  without  the  adverse
    change, i.e. as to the nature of the leave granted (whether DLR or ILR)
    and the duration of the grant of leave, if DLR.

    Submissions  on  question  (iv):   If  the  respondent  made  a   clear
    unambiguous promise to review the applicant's case 'by July  2011'  but
    it was not a promise to do so before 20 July 2011, was it unlawful  for
    the respondent not to have considered as a matter of  fairness  whether
    her residual discretion should be applied in the applicant's favour and
    ILR be granted to her?

34. If I were to decide that the respondent gave an unambiguous promise  to
    review the applicant's  case  'by  July  2011'  but  did  not  give  an
    unambiguous promise to do so by  20  July  2011,  then  Mr  O'Callaghan
    submitted that fairness dictates that the  respondent  should  consider
    the exercise of her residual discretion in the applicant's  favour  and
    grant her ILR.

35. In this regard, reliance is placed upon the report of Mr. Vine in which
    he drew attention to the fact that  those  individuals  who  cooperated
    with the respondent's request not to contact her department  lost  out,
    in that, they did not get written commitments as did those, or some  of
    those, who sent the respondent 'chaser' letters or sent PAP letters  or
    issued judicial  review  proceedings  or  contacted  their  Members  of
    Parliament.

36. Mr O'Callaghan submitted that the respondent  had  failed  to  consider
    this aspect  of  the  Vine  report  in  the  context  of  her  residual
    discretion. Essentially,  the  argument  advanced  on  the  applicant's
    behalf amounts to this: it is unfair that she lost on having a  written
    commitment sent to her that the review of her case would  be  completed
    by July 2011 or 20 July 2011 simply because she did what she  had  been
    requested to do, whereas those who had taken such action received  such
    commitments.

37. Mr O'Callaghan asked me to quash the decision on the  ground  that  the
    respondent had failed to take into account  a  relevant  consideration,
    i.e. the fact that the Vine report states that the Secretary  of  State
    should consider acting fairly to this group of  people  who  were  told
    that a decision would be made by July 2011 and who did not contact  the
    Secretary of State as they had  been  requested.  If  the  decision  is
    quashed, the respondent would have to  take  another  decision  on  the
    applicant's case. She may  then  grant  ILR,  although  Mr  O'Callaghan
    acknowledged that she is not obliged to do so.

38. Ms Anderson submitted that the argument that general  fairness  towards
    applicants who had acceded to the Secretary of State's request  not  to
    contact the department about their cases  required  the  respondent  to
    consider her residual discretion was rejected in Geraldo. She submitted
    that the Secretary of State always has a residual discretion  to  grant
    ILR in individual cases. Geraldo records the evidence of Mr. Parkin (at
    [73]) who referred to a residual discretion to depart from  policy  'in
    compelling' exceptional circumstances.

39. Mr O'Callaghan accepted that,  in  Geraldo  and  in  Jaku,  the  Courts
    rejected the argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
    unfair. However, he asked me to bear in  mind  that  the  claimants  in
    Geraldo and Jaku did not receive clear unambiguous promises. There  was
    no evidence in the instant case  as  to  why  the  applicant  had  been
    granted DLR; in particular, there was no evidence that she was  granted
    DLR only because of the delay in her case. In any event, the  applicant
    had been living in the UK for 4 years by July 2011.

     Assessment

40. My answer to question (i) is a very clear "No". In the applicant's 2009
    Letter, the respondent did not make  a  clear  unambiguous  promise  to
    review the applicant's  case  before  July  2011.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows:

41. The opening paragraph of the letter clearly referred to  the  'aim'  of
    resolving 'the case records' by July 2011. The applicant was then  told
    in clear terms that cases would not be taken out of turn  unless  there
    were exceptional circumstances justifying a quicker resolution  of  the
    case.  This   paragraph   is   immediately   followed   by   the   word
    'unfortunately' which was plainly, intended, in my judgement, to convey
    that the decision maker was aware that he was conveying news  that  the
    applicant might find disappointing, i.e. that he knew of no exceptional
    circumstances justifying a quicker resolution of her case than the time
    frame for the generality of cases being  those  that  fell  within  the
    general 'aim' in the first paragraph. This ties in with the use of  the
    word  'further',  again  referring  back,  in  my  judgement,  to   the
    information already conveyed in the first paragraph.

42. I do not accept that the words: 'your', 'will',   'be'  and  'deadline'
    made this letter a letter by which a  specific  promise  was  given  to
    review the case by July 2011.  Mr O'Callaghan's submissions (summarised
    at [12] above) ignore the remainder of the letter. Furthermore, it  was
    decided in Geraldo that there was in fact no deadline. I  therefore  do
    not accept the submission that any significance could be given  to  use
    of the word 'deadline' in the applicant's 2009 Letter, as contended  on
    the applicant's behalf. In my judgement, the  word  'deadline'  in  the
    third paragraph of the letter plainly referred back to the 'aim' in the
    first paragraph of resolving cases by July 2011.

43. It is clear from the letters considered in Geraldo (at [91]-[93])  that
    there were variations in wording in the general 'aim' letters that were
    sent. The  applicant's  2009  Letter  is  another  example  of  such  a
    variation. No more and no less. The examples at [7.41]  and  [7.42]  of
    the Vine report (quoted at [17] above) are two more such examples.

44. Judgments of the High Court are not, strictly speaking, binding on  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  although,  of  course,  they   are   persuasive.   Mr
    O'Callaghan accepted that Green J appeared to suggest  that,  in  2006,
    the respondent did send out letters giving a commitment to 'conclude' a
    case by 20 July  2011  and  that,  to  this  extent,  Kadyamarunga  was
    inconsistent with Geraldo, which is also a judgment of the  High  Court
    and therefore also persuasive. As Geraldo has been upheld by the  Court
    of Appeal, Geraldo is plainly  to  be  preferred  where  there  is  any
    conflict.

45. In any event, it is plain that Green J accepted the subjective evidence
    of the claimant in that case that she  "absolutely  recall[ed]  without
    any doubt" that she received a letter  from  the  respondent  "sometime
    around 2006" advising her that "a decision would be made  with  regards
    to our case by 20  July  2011"  ([28]  of  Kadyamarunga).   That  is  a
    sufficient basis to distinguish Kadyamarunga  from  the  instant  case,
    even if it were not the case that Geraldo is to be  preferred  even  if
    there is any conflict between the two judgments.

46. For all of these reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  applicant's  2009
    Letter was a letter falling within  the  generality  of  'aim  letters'
    considered in Geraldo.

47. Mr O'Callaghan and Ms Anderson agreed that, if I were  to  decide  that
    the respondent did not make any commitment or  promise  to  review  the
    applicant's case before 'July 2011', i.e. if I were to decide that  the
    respondent did no more than convey to the applicant that her case  fell
    within the generality of cases which the respondent aimed to resolve by
    July 2011, there would be no need for  me  to  consider  the  remaining
    arguments.

48. However, as I have heard submissions from the parties,  I  shall  offer
    some brief observations.

49. I accept Ms Anderson's submission that the Vine Report is not  binding.
    Its remit was to report on  administrative  efficiency.  It  cannot  be
    authoritative on issues before the courts: Delipalta at [28]. The Chief
    Inspector's opinion in the final two sentences of  the  paragraph  from
    the Foreword quoted at [8] above, that applicants who were  told  their
    cases would be dealt with by July 2011  had  a  reasonable  expectation
    that their cases would be resolved by that date, cannot  be  reconciled
    with  Geraldo.   I  further  agree  with  Ms   Anderson's   submissions
    summarised at [26] above. There is no need to repeat them.

50. Thus, even  if  I  had  decided  (which  is  not  the  case)  that  the
    applicant's 2009 Letter recorded a clear  unambiguous  promise  by  the
    respondent to review the applicant's 'by July 2011', there  would  have
    been no basis for concluding that the promise made was  to  review  her
    case by 20 July 2011. The answer to question (ii) would have been "No",
    in any event.

51. The short answer to question (iii) is that King J rejected  in  Geraldo
    that  there  were,  or  should  be,  any  other  exceptions  where  the
    individuals in question had not received a  clear  unambiguous  promise
    that their cases would be dealt with by  20  July  2011.  I  also  note
    that, at [126] of Geraldo, King J said that there was  no  evidence  or
    other material put before  the  Court  in  that  case  to  support  the
    proposition that there was any undertaking given  whether  peculiar  to
    legacy cases or generally, not to alter the guidance in Chapter  53  of
    the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance or policy or practice on  the
    length of leave to be granted upon a successful application of  Chapter
    53 and that there was no evidence of any promise not to introduce a DLP
    under Chapter 53 during the lifetime of the legacy programme. The  only
    expectation such individuals had was that a decision would be  made  in
    their cases on the basis of the law and policy applicable at  the  date
    of the decision. Fairness did not require anything else.

52. I do not need to decide whether the exception in para 4.2  of  the  DLP
    should  be  extended  to  include  individuals  who  received  a  clear
    unambiguous promise that his or her case would be  reviewed  under  the
    legacy programme by 20 July 2011 in circumstances where the letter  was
    not written in response to a PAP letter or judicial review  proceedings
    or letters from his or her Member of Parliament.

53. Again, the short answer to question (iv) is that  King  J  rejected  in
    Geraldo similar arguments based on fairness as regards  applicants  who
    had acceded to the Secretary of State's  request  not  to  contact  the
    department about their cases and who were said to have  lost  out.  The
    Secretary of State does have  a  residual  discretion  to  depart  from
    policy in 'compelling' exceptional circumstances, as recorded  at  [73]
    of Geraldo. However, King J did not see this as a reason  for  quashing
    the decisions made in the cases of the individual claims, all  of  whom
    had received general 'aim' letters.  There is no reason to do  anything
    different in the case of the applicant  who  also  received  a  general
    'aim' letter.

Decision:

The application for judicial review is dismissed.




[pic]

Signed                              Date: 7 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
                  APPENDIX - EXTRACTS FROM THE VINE REPORT

     July 2011 Policy change - Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) to
     Discretionary Leave (DL)

 7.30 On 20 July 2011 the Agency changed its policy in relation to the type
     of leave that it would grant under Paragraph 395C of  the  Immigration
     Rules.60 This resulted  in  legacy  asylum  applicants  being  granted
     Discretionary Leave for three years where it  was  considered  removal
     from the UK was not appropriate. This was a change from  the  previous
     position where Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) was routinely  granted
     in asylum cases  where  a  decision  was  made  not  to  remove  under
     Paragraph 395C.

 7.31 The rationale for this policy change was that as the vast majority of
     legacy cases had now been cleared, it was  no  longer  appropriate  to
     grant ILR. The change was also justified on the basis  that  remaining
     legacy cases should not be treated more favourably than  refugees  who
     were normally granted five years' limited leave. The Agency recognised
     this policy change increased the risk of litigation  and  told  us  it
     considered the potential impact in detail when the  change  was  made.
     This included the need to provide for certain exceptions  whereby  ILR
     could still be granted. While we make no comment  on  the  new  policy
     itself, we identified that the exceptions were not in place  when  the
     change took effect, nor were they subsequently clearly communicated to
     staff.

 7.32 The  Agency  planned  to  allow  CAAU  caseworkers  to  retain  their
     discretion to grant  ILR  in  cases  where  it  had  'made  a  written
     commitment that a case would be considered before 20th July 2011,  but
     had failed to do so, and the Agency later decided  that  a  grant  was
     appropriate'.

 7.33 The Agency intended that  this  exception  would  address  situations
     where granting DL would  be  unfair.  However,  when  the  operational
     guidance was issued on 20 July 2011,61 caseworkers were  not  informed
     of this exception - indeed the guidance stated that:

         'Where, as a result of considering the factors set out  in  53.1.2,
         (the relevant factors set in  Paragraph  395c  of  the  Immigration
         Rules) removal is not considered appropriate, a maximum of 3  years
         Discretionary Leave (DL) should be granted.'

 7.34     On  the  same  day,  an  email  was  circulated  to  CAAU  senior
 caseworkers and above, setting out that:

         'With immediate effect from this morning we can  no  longer  grant
        ILR following consideration of Chapter 53.'

 7.35    An attachment to this email reinforced this message, stating:

         'Section 53.1.1 will be amended to  include  a  line  stating  that
         where, as a result of considering the factors  set  out  in  53.1.2
         (relevant factors in Paragraph 395C),  removal  is  not  considered
         appropriate, a maximum of 3 years Discretionary Leave  (DL)  should
         be granted. To be clear, from 20 July 2011, ILR should no longer be
         granted in any cases as a result  of  considering  the  factors  in
         53.1.2.'

 7.36    On 1 August 2011  revised  training  material  was  circulated  to
      senior caseworkers in CAAU. This made  no  mention  of  any  exception
      which  allowed  caseworkers  to  continue  granting  ILR  in   certain
      circumstances.

 7.37 We were told that this exception was excluded  from  the  Agency-wide
      guidance because it was only applicable to asylum legacy cases managed
      through CAAU, and not those cases decided under the New Asylum  Model.
      Instead, the policy change was supported by local guidance, which  was
      issued specifically to senior caseworkers  within  CAAU  (who  provide
      guidance and advice to case workers), setting out the exception  under
      which they could grant ILR.

 7.38    While the exception was considered prior to 20 July 2011,  it  was
      not actually approved until the last week in August.  This  meant  the
      exception was not in place at the time the policy was  changed.  While
      the exception originally referred to a 'written commitment' being made
      in individual cases, we noted that senior  caseworkers  in  CAAU  were
      subsequently told on the 29 July 2011 that this discretion would  only
      apply in cases where individual written commitments had been given  in
      response  to  Pre  Action  Protocol  letters,  Judicial   Reviews   or
      correspondence from MPs. This mitigation flowed  from  work  that  the
      Policy Unit had undertaken to mitigate risks  linked  to  this  policy
      change, which stated:

         'CAAU report a number of cases were given an undertaking by CRD (in
         relation to PAPs, JRs or MPs' correspondence) that a decision would
         be made on their case by a date pre-dating the  change  in  policy,
         but the undertaking has not been met. We will seek  to  distinguish
         these cases and grant ILR on the basis that it is in  line  with  a
         previous undertaking. We recommend that we adopt this approach'.

 7.39    We noted that this risk mitigation plan went on to state that  the
      Agency 'would defend challenges from older cases where the above  does
      not apply'. From other written chains of evidence that we examined, it
      was clear that this aspect of the risk mitigation plan  was  based  in
      part on earlier evidence from CAAU. This set out that CAAU  wanted  to
      distinguish cases given an undertaking by CRD in relation to PAPs, JRs
      or MPs' correspondence, granting ILR on the basis that it  had  failed
      to meet an earlier undertaking to make a decision prior to July 2011.

 7.40    This approach excluded other types of written  communication,  for
      example from legal representatives (otherwise than in the  context  of
      litigation)  or  applicants  themselves,  including  complaints.   The
      written commitment had to have been given in individual  cases,  which
      therefore excluded those applicants who were sent letters and who were
      told to wait their turn for a decision by CRD.  These  applicants  had
      sometimes waited over a number of years, due to the priority order  in
      which CRD was working through asylum legacy cases. This  disadvantaged
      applicants who were compliant and who had to wait for their case to be
      considered and had a reasonable expectation that a decision  would  be
      made by the summer of 2011.

 7.41    This was a serious omission, because  in  many  of  the  cases  we
      sampled, we found that applicants or their legal  representatives  had
      been in contact with the Agency  about  their  asylum  claims  over  a
      number of years, sometimes repeatedly (Figure 17  refers).  They  were
      encouraged by the Agency not to contact it once they had provided  the
      additional information requested, because of the way  the  Agency  was
      prioritising its workload, which was set out  originally  in  the  IND
      Review:

         'We plan to do this within five years or less. We  will  prioritise
         those who may pose a risk to the public, and then  focus  on  those
         who can be more easily removed, those receiving support, and  those
         who may be granted leave. All cases will be  dealt  with  on  their
         individual merits'.

 7.42    This approach saw hundreds of thousands of letters being sent  out
      to applicants and their legal representatives during the  lifetime  of
      CRD, reminding them of the Agency's intention to conclude  all  legacy
      cases by July 2011. These letters were of particular  significance  to
      those applicants who were in contact with  the  Agency  and  complying
      with Agency requests, who were given an expectation that  their  cases
      would be concluded by July  2011.  Figure  24  details  two  types  of
      generic letters that were sent out to applicants by CRD.

|Figure 24: Example of stock letters sent out to legacy asylum          |
|applicants                                                             |
|1  |'On 19 July 2006, the Home Secretary made a statement to Parliament|
|   |about the then UK Border Agency's legacy of electronic and paper   |
|   |records relating to unresolved asylum cases. He stated that the aim|
|   |was to clear these cases within five years or less, namely by July |
|   |2011. I can confirm that your client's case falls into this        |
|   |category but I cannot give any indication at this  stage when it   |
|   |will be actioned. We will contact your client when your client's   |
|   |case comes up for decision.'                                       |
|2  |'Please send your photographs and any other documents62 along with |
|   |the completed form sent  with this letter, to the address at the   |
|   |top of this letter. You should do this within 21 days from      the|
|   |above date. If you do not return the documents requested above, we |
|   |will consider your case   on the documents available to us.'       |
|   |'We ask that you do not make routine telephone or written enquiries|
|   |about the progress of your case, as this diverts our resources from|
|   |resolving cases. We will not confirm receipt of your reply to this |
|   |letter or receipt of your photographs. Should we require any       |
|   |further information about your case, a UKBA colleague will contact |
|   |you.'                                                              |


 7.43    In September 2011, a CAAU manager asked  the  Home  Office  policy
      unit whether it could include cases within the first  exception  where
      CRD had not dealt with cases appropriately and there  was  no  obvious
      reason why it had not made a decision. For example,  where  applicants
      were in contact with the Agency and the delay in making  the  decision
      was not attributable to them. The communication went on  to  add  that
      applicants could argue that 'they would be covered by  the  commitment
      to finish CRD by summer 2011'. The Home Office Policy Unit  responded,
      stating that the policy position was that such cases  would  not  fall
      within this exception, highlighting the importance of maintaining  the
      principle 'that cases are decided according to the law and  policy  in
      place at the time of decision'.

 7.44    However, this position changed in November  2011,  when  the  Home
      Office policy unit stated that it had no objection to older CAAU cases
      receiving ILR, where it was clear that this was appropriate and  where
      it would not undermine the principle of cases being decided  according
      to the law and policy in place at the time of decision. The advice  to
      CAAU then went on to identify a further exception which  could  result
      in a grant of ILR rather than DL, in  addition  to  providing  further
      advice on circumstances where it may be  appropriate  to  depart  from
      policy and exceptionally grant ILR - Figure 25 refers.

|Figure 25: Two further scenarios where the grant of ILR might be       |
|appropriate                                                            |
|1  |Where a decision was made prior to 22nd July that a grant of leave |
|   |on these grounds was not appropriate, but after 22nd July 2011 the |
|   |Agency reviews that decision and - on the basis of       the same  |
|   |evidence - decides the earlier decision was wrong and that leave   |
|   |should have been granted.                                          |
|2  |Other cases where there are other compelling reasons to grant ILR  |
|   |rather than DL. Indicators     that suggest a case may fall into   |
|   |this category include:                                             |
|   |. having spent a very long time in the UK (say 7 years plus);      |
|   |. having had multiple and serious administrative delays in a case  |
|   |being considered, through no fault of the applicant; and           |
|   |. having had one or more periods of lawful leave (e.g. DL as a     |
|   |UASC) that meet / come close to meeting the six years of DL that an|
|   |applicant would need to qualify for ILR.                           |
|   |These factors are not definitive and are cumulative, if several    |
|   |apply to one case it is more likely to fall into this category.    |


 7.45    The above  scenarios  did  not  allow  caseworkers  to  grant  ILR
      themselves. they had to refer all such cases to a senior caseworker at
      Senior Executive Officer level. The Agency was unable  to  provide  us
      with any  evidence  that  local  guidance  had  been  issued  to  CAAU
      caseworkers  setting  out  the  exceptions  (or  the  further   advice
      provided), nor  had  any  records  being  kept  detailing  when  these
      exceptions were applied.  This  was  unacceptable.  Best  practice  is
      always to set out exceptions to the policy in guidance,  which  should
      be published for transparency purposes  if  possible.  By  failing  to
      publish the exceptions and disseminate them widely, it was  much  more
      likely that the implementation of these exceptions would be  adversely
      affected, with caseworkers either applying them inconsistently or  not
      at all, as demonstrated by our file sampling findings.

 7.46    If the exceptions had been implemented effectively, we  would  not
      have commented on this  policy  change.  However,  implementation  was
      flawed. Our examination of cases where some form of leave was  granted
      showed that adult applicants in four  cases  (9%)  were  granted  ILR,
      while the remaining 42 (91%) got DL. We found nothing  in  either  the
      paper file or on CID to indicate that those granted ILR fell under one
      of the exceptions. Furthermore, in  our  interviews  with  caseworkers
      none showed an awareness of any of the exceptions, they only spoke  of
      ILR being replaced by DL.

