
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 01 and 15 June 2015                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between

                 ANSUY DEVI JAMAWANTEE DEELAH (AND 3 OTHERS)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellants:   Mr Z Malik, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Malik  Law  Chambers
             Solicitors

Respondent:   Mr N Sheldon, of Counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal
             Department



   i)     Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002 are not confined to an appeal under  section  84(1)(c).  They
      apply also to appeals brought under section 84(1) (g).

  ii)     Section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, which instruct Judges  to
      attribute "little weight" to the considerations specified therein,  do
      not give rise to a constitutionally impermissible encroachment on  the
      independent adjudicative function of the judiciary.

 iii)     A private life "established", in the wording and in the context of
      section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, is not  to  be  construed  as
      confined to the initiation,  or  creation,  of  the  private  life  in
      question but extends to its continuation or development.

  iv)     The adjective "precarious" in section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act does
      not contemplate only, and is not restricted to, temporary admission to
      the United Kingdom or a grant of leave to remain in a  category  which
      permits no expectation of a further grant.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  four  Appellants  are  nationals  of  Mauritius  and,   together,
    constitute a family unit formed by mother and  father  (the  first  two
    Appellants)  and  their  daughter  and  son,  aged  21  and  14   years
    respectively.  The first Appellant was lawfully present in  the  United
    Kingdom from July 2005, initially as a visitor and  subsequently,  upon
    conversion, as a student.   The  other  three  Appellants  entered  the
    United Kingdom lawfully  and  acquired  dependant  status.   Successive
    grants of leave to remain  ensued.   These  were  followed  by  several
    unsuccessful attempts by the first Appellant to acquire  further  leave
    to remain as a student.  This phase culminated in her  application  for
    further leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules, dated  05  April
    2013.  This elicited, initially,  an  in-country  unappealable  refusal
    decision, followed by a decision to issue  removal  directions  against
    all Appellants, dated 28 January 2014.

 1. The grounds of the Appellants' appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    "FtT")  invoked  Article  8  ECHR  and  section  55  of  the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  In dismissing their appeals, the
    Judge noted in particular that the family unit would be undisturbed  by
    the Secretary of State's decisions.  He  also  highlighted  ability  to
    reintegrate into their country of origin; the  utility  of  educational
    achievements acquired  in  the  United  Kingdom;  enduring  significant
    family ties with Mauritius; and the ability of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants to learn a new language  if  necessary.  The  Judge  further
    found certain aspects of the  first  and  second  Appellants'  evidence
    unworthy of belief. In making his conclusions he referred explicitly to
    section 117B(6) and section 117D(1)(a)  and  (b)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Issues

 2. Following an initial refusal, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  a
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal. Both the grounds of appeal and  the  grant
    of permission focus on the new provisions of section 117A and  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act"),
    inserted by the Immigration Act 2014 and operative from 28  July  2014.
    As the appeal progressed, permission to amend the grounds was  granted.
    As a result, the Appellants' case now telescopes to the following  four
    submissions:

     i) Sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act  apply  only  to  an  appeal
        under section 84(1)(c) of the same statute.  As a result, they have
        no application to  this  appeal  which  is  brought  under  section
        84(1)(a) and (g).


    ii) Insofar as section 117B(4) and (5)  of  the  2002  Act  purport  to
        instruct Judges to attribute "little weight" to the  considerations
        specified therein it cannot be thus construed as to do so would  be
        to give effect to a constitutionally impermissible encroachment  on
        the independent adjudicative function of the judiciary.

   iii) A private life "established", in the wording and in the context  of
        section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, is not to be construed  as
        confined to the initiation, or creation, of  the  private  life  in
        question but extends to its continuation or development.

    iv) The adjective "precarious" in  section  117B(5)  of  the  2002  Act
        contemplates, and is restricted  to,  temporary  admission  to  the
        United Kingdom or a grant of leave to remain in  a  category  which
        permits no expectation of a further grant.

    In setting forth the four issues to  be  decided  I  have,  as  regards
    issues (ii) and  (iii),  preferred  my  own  formulation  which,  I  am
    confident, is a fair reflection of  the  slightly  different  terms  in
    which they were constructed by Mr Malik on behalf  of  the  Appellants.
    While each of the four  issues  shall  be  addressed  seriatim,  it  is
    necessary to begin with the relevant statutory provisions.

Statutory Framework

 3. All statutory references which follow are to the legislation  in  force
    at the material time. For  convenience,  the  provisions  currently  in
    force are reproduced in  the  Appendix  hereto.  The  right  of  appeal
    against immigration decisions is governed by section  82  of  the  2002
    Act, the material provisions whereof were, at the material time, these:



         "(1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
          he may appeal to the  Tribunal.

          (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-
             (a) refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
             (b) refusal of entry clearance,
             (c) refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section 10 of
             this Act,
             (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in  the
             United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the  person
             has no leave to enter or remain,
             (e) variation of a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom if when the variation takes  effect  the  person
             has no leave to enter or remain,
             (f) revocation under section 76 of this Act of indefinite leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
             (g) a decision that a person is to be removed from  the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions under [section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba)
             or (c) of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  (removal  of
             person unlawfully in United Kingdom),
             (h) a decision that an illegal entrant is to  be  removed  from
             the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs  8  to
             10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (control of entry:
             removal),
             (ha) a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47   of   the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (removal:  persons
             with statutorily extended leave),
             (i) a decision that a person is to be removed from  the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions given by virtue of  paragraph  10A
             of that Schedule (family),
             [(ia) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
             Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph 12(2) of  Schedule
             2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (seamen and aircrews),]
             [(ib) a decision to make an order under section 2A of that  Act
             (deprivation of right of abode),]
             (j) a decision to make a deportation order under  section  5(1)
             of that Act, and
             (k) refusal to revoke a deportation order under section 5(2) of
             that Act.


         The permitted grounds of appeal are  regulated  by  section  84(1),
which provides:


          "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision
          must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
             (a) that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  immigration
             rules;
             (b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of Article  20A  of
             the Race Relations (Northern Ireland) Order 1997or by virtue of
             section 29 of the Equality  Act  2010  (discrimination  in  the
             exercise of public functions etc) so far as relating to race as
             defined by section 9(1) of that Act;
             (c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary to  Human
             Rights Convention) as being incompatible with  the  appellant's
             Convention rights;
             (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a  member  of  the
             family of  an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in  respect  of
             entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
             (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance  with  the
             law;
             (f) that the person taking the decision should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
             (g) that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of the immigration decision would breach the United
             Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would  be
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as  being
             incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.

    Part 5A of the 2002  Act, introduced by section 19 of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 and in force since 25 July  2014,  establishes  a  new  regime
    under  the  rubric  "Article   8   of   the   ECHR:   Public   Interest
    Considerations". Section 117A provides:


          "(1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
          determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
              (a) breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
              family life under Article 8, and
              (b) as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
Human Rights Act 1998.


           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
              (a) in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
              117B, and
              (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
              to the considerations listed in section 117C.


           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2). "


    Section 117B, embraced by the cross heading "Article 8: Public Interest
    Considerations Applicable in All Cases", provides:


         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
    public interest.

          (2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
          to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
          financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (4) Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.

          (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
          a person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
          precarious.

          (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom. "


    The  subject  matter  of  section  117C  is  "Article   8:   Additional
    Considerations In Cases Involving  Foreign  Criminals".   Section  117C
    does not arise for consideration in these appeals.

 4. The trigger for the application of the various provisions assembled  in
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act is  a  decision  "made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts".  These latter words are defined  in  section  61(2)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007:

         "A reference (in any enactment, including one passed or made before
          this Act) to "the Immigration Acts" is to-

          (a) the Immigration Act 1971,
          (b) the Immigration Act 1988,
          (c) the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993,
          (d) the Asylum and Immigration Act 1996,
          (e) the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 [cf section 10: removal
          directions],
          (f) the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
          (g) the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act
          2004 (c. 19),
          (h) the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (c. 13) ,
          (i) this Act, and
          (j) the Immigration Act 2014."

    I would also mention two material provisions of the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  First, by virtue of section 1 and Schedule 1 to the Act, one  of
    the Convention rights  protected  under  domestic  law  is  Article  8.
    Second, by section 6(1):


         "It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a  way  which  is
          incompatible with a Convention right."

         This completes the statutory framework relevant to this appeal.

The First Issue

 5. Is the application of sections 117A and 117B of the 2002  Act  confined
    to an appeal under section 84(1)(c)? The argument of Mr Malik on behalf
    of the Appellant drew attention to the cluster of statutory  provisions
    formed by sections 82, 84 and 86. He linked the words "is  required  to
    determine" in section 117A to the words  "must  determine"  in  section
    86(2).  He also sought to forge a nexus between section 117A(1)(b)  and
    section 84(1)(c).  He contended that the exercise of considering all of
    the provisions belonging to the statutory context in play impels to  an
    affirmative answer  to  the  question  posted  above.  It  was  further
    submitted that the criteria enshrined in paragraph 276ADE and  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules are clear and objective, leaving  no  scope
    for applying the section 117B considerations.

 6. It was further argued that in cases of the present kind it is  not  the
    Secretary of State's decision  to  remove  a  person  from  the  United
    Kingdom which is challenged on Article 8 grounds:  rather,  it  is  the
    consequence of the decision, or the further action  taken  via  removal
    directions,  which  is  objectionable.  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the
    construction for which the Appellants  contend  is  not  undermined  by
    either Dube (Sections 117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) or YM  (Uganda)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.   It
    was also argued that the language of the new section 84, deriving  from
    section 15 of the 2014 Act, points to a  consistent  intention  on  the
    part of Parliament. Finally, Mr  Malik  prayed  in  aid  the  following
    passage in Forman (ss 117A-C - considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC),
    at [17](i):

         "These provisions (sections 117A and  117B)  apply  in  every  case
         where a Court or  Tribunal  is  required  to  determine  whether  a
         decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's  right
         to respect for private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as
         a result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
         1998.  Where a court or tribunal  is  not  required  to  make  this
         determination, these provisions do not apply."

    As a result, Mr Malik argued, the FtT erred in law in applying sections
    117A and 117B in determining these appeals.

 7. The submissions of Mr Sheldon on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    primarily,  drew  attention  to  the  differing  ways  in   which   the
    Appellants' appeals were canvassed before the FtT.  This was due to the
    differing  circumstances  of  the  two  children  and  the  distinctive
    circumstances of their parents.  Thus while section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was invoked, this applied  to  the
    younger child only; paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  Rules  applied  to  the
    children, but not the parents; paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv) applied to  the
    older child, but not  the  younger  one  in  whose  case  the  relevant
    provision was paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi); and paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM applied to the parents and the older child, but not the younger one.
     Mr Sheldon observed that it would appear that all  of  the  Appellants
    asserted the existence  of  individual  private  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   Moreover, the older child has a  girlfriend  in  the  United
    Kingdom (who testified) and the mother's father is a  British  citizen.
    Mr  Sheldon  submitted  that,  notwithstanding  these  differences  and
    variations, the main question for the FtT was whether it was reasonable
    to expect the family to return to Mauritius.  This is reflected in  the
    key conclusion in [61] of the determination:

         "For the reasons stated above there  is  no  reliable  evidence  to
         demonstrate that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  third  or
         fourth Appellants to return to Mauritius."

    It is appropriate to observe that the substance of this  conclusion  is
    unchallenged on behalf of the Appellants.

 8. Next, Mr Sheldon drew attention to the consonance of language found  in
    paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules ("and it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the applicant to leave the UK") and section 117B(6)(b) of the
    2002 Act ("it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    United Kingdom") and paragraph EX.1(ii) ("it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK").   Mr Sheldon submitted that  within
    [64] of the FtT's determination there are two  distinct  and  perfectly
    valid conclusions:

     a) it would not be unreasonable to expect the  family  and  the  older
        child in particular to return to Mauritius; and


     b) the Appellants' lack of financial independence was a  factor  which
        operated to their detriment.

    Mr Sheldon argued that the first of these conclusions disposed  of  the
    appeal under the Rules.  In making  this  conclusion  the  FtT  applied
    section 117B(6) and section 117D(1)(b).[1]  It  was  further  submitted
    that in making the second of  these  conclusions,  which  weakened  the
    Article 8 appeal, the FtT applied section 117B(3).  Properly  analysed,
    Mr Sheldon argued, the FtT  applied  sections  117A  and  117B  to  the
    Article 8 grounds of appeal, but  did  not  do  so  in  conducting  the
    separate exercise of deciding whether the Secretary of State's decision
    was in accordance with the Rules.  This notwithstanding  that  in  this
    particular case both the Rules and the Act require the FtT to ask,  and
    determine, the same question.

 9. Pausing  at  this  juncture,  I  find  Mr  Sheldon's  analysis  of  the
    determination of the FtT persuasive.  It flows from  an  evaluation  of
    the determination as a whole and does not rely on forensic  microscopic
    dissection.  Furthermore, it was not really countered in the  arguments
    of Mr Malik.  I further agree with Mr Sheldon's alternative submission.
     This was to the effect that even if the  Appellants'  construction  of
    the relevant statutory provisions is correct and the FtT made the error
    asserted the net effect would have been the adoption of  three  (rather
    than two) separate routes to the same destination, namely paragraph 276
    ADE of the Rules, paragraph  EX.1  thereof  and  sections  117B(6)  and
    117D(1)(b) in tandem.  As a result, the outcome of  the  appeals  would
    have been no different.


10. It follows that this ground  of  appeal  must  fail.   Notwithstanding,
    given the full argument on the issue and the special listing status  of
    this appeal,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  examine  the  issue  of
    statutory construction which formed the  centrepiece  of  this  ground.
    The argument on behalf of the Secretary of State is that sections  117A
    - 117D of the 2002 Act apply to  appeals  brought  under  both  section
    84(1)(c)  and  (g).   In  my  judgment,  this  submission  is  correct.
    Fundamentally, it is compatible with the ordinary and  natural  meaning
    of the statutory words.  Furthermore, it  yields  an  unremarkable  and
    perfectly workable outcome, harmonious with the other elements  of  the
    statutory framework.  In contrast, I consider the construction advanced
    on behalf of the Appellants to be strained and distorted.  In  my  view
    there is no sensible distinction between an Article 8 assessment in  an
    appeal pursued under section 84(1)(c) and an Article 8 assessment in an
    appeal pursued under section 84(1)(g).  The  principles  governing  the
    Article 8 assessment must, in each case, be the same.  Article  8  does
    not possess the chameleon  character  which  these  arguments  require.
    Logic and common sense dictate this construction.

11. Furthermore, while it is correct that in a section 85(1)(c) appeal  the
    focus is on the immigration decision under challenge and in  a  section
    84(1)(g) appeal the focus is on  removal  of  the  Appellant  from  the
    United  Kingdom  in  consequence  of  the  immigration  decision  under
    challenge, I consider this to be  of  no  moment.   If  Parliament  had
    intended to make the distinction advanced by the Appellants, one  would
    expect to find explicit and unambiguous words to  this  effect.   There
    are none.  In addition,   I  offer  the  observation  that  while  this
    discrete issue was not ventilated in argument, it  is  unclear  whether
    this distinction  could  have  been  legitimately  made  in  any  event
    without, simultaneously, amending the Human Rights Act 1998, which, per
    section 6, makes it unlawful for a public authority to act in a  manner
    incompatible with a person's protected Convention rights.

12. My conclusions on the issue of statutory  contribution  raised  by  the
    first ground of appeal are, therefore, twofold.   First,  assuming  the
    underpinning of this ground to be sound, the FtT  did  not  commit  the
    error of which the Appellants complain. Second, this ground is based on
    a construction of the relevant statutory provisions  which  I  consider
    misconceived and, accordingly, lacks the  underpinning  assumed  to  be
    correct for the purpose of the first of these conclusions.

The Second Issue

13. Do  section  117B(4)  and  (5)  oblige  Tribunals,  without  choice  or
    discretion,  to  attribute  "little  weight"  to   the   considerations
    specified therein?  The argument developed by Mr Malik is that  Article
    8 ECHR forms part of domestic statutory law  and  it  is  the  duty  of
    courts and tribunals to interpret it like any other  statute  and  give
    effect to it according to what they consider to be its proper  meaning:
    see the discussion in Re  P  [2008]  UKHL  38,  at  [33].   This  is  a
    principle which reflects the rule of law, one of the axioms whereof  is
    that statute law  be  mediated  by  an  authoritative  judicial  source
    independent of the legislature, the executive and the public  authority
    which administers the statute: see R (Cart)  v  Upper  Tribunal  [2009]
    EWHC 3052 (Admin) at  [36]  -  [38].   Unless  there  is  the  clearest
    provision to the contrary, Parliament must be presumed not to legislate
    contrary to the rule of law: see R (Evans) v  Attorney  General  [2015]
    UKSC 21, at [51] - [59].

14. The next step in the Appellants' argument involves the proposition that
    it is for the court or  tribunal  concerned  to  decide  the  issue  of
    proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR.  In performing  this  function
    the court or tribunal decides how much weight is to  be  attributed  to
    competing considerations in  determining  how  the  balance  should  be
    struck between the public interest and protected individual rights: see
    inter alia, Huang v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2007]
    UKHL 11 and EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 41.  The doctrine  of  judicial  precedent  requires  lower
    courts and tribunals to follow binding authorities of superior  Courts.
    As a result, section 117B(4) and (5) does  not  require  the  court  or
    tribunal concerned to ascribe "little weight" to the matters  specified
    therein. Rather, it is argued that what  appears  to  be  a  clear  and
    strict instruction to the court or tribunal can effectively be ignored,
    with the result that the Judge is unconstrained in  deciding  how  much
    weight to accord to each of the listed considerations.

15. The riposte of Mr Sheldon on behalf of the Secretary of State  is  that
    the meaning of  section  117A(2)  is  unambiguous:  in  conducting  the
    Article 8(2) proportionality assessment the court or tribunal concerned
    must have regard to the specified considerations.   There  will  be  no
    obligation to do so in cases where the  considerations  do  not  arise.
    The "little weight" provisions in  section  117B(4)  and  (5)  are  the
    statutory incarnation  of  principles  well  established  in  both  the
    domestic  and  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.    These   are   conveniently
    summarised in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), at [38] - [41].   Section  117B(5)  in  effect
    operates as a reminder to courts and tribunals of  a  principle  which,
    irrespective of its recent incorporation  in  statute,  they  would  be
    obliged to apply in any event.  Finally, Mr Sheldon submitted that this
    issue of construction arises in a vacuum, given that in dismissing  the
    appeals the FtT did not decide that little weight should  be  given  to
    either of the matters specified in section 117B(4) and (5).


16. It is convenient to address this latter argument first.   In  short,  I
    find it persuasive.  The central issues for the  FtT  were  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the younger child to return to  Mauritius
    and  whether  there  were   any   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
    reintegration in Mauritius of  the  other  three  Appellants.   I  have
    rehearsed in [4] and [5] above the relevant provisions of both Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act and the Rules.  I have concluded that the FtT  did  not
    engage in any impermissible elision.  Furthermore, there is no  adverse
    "precariousness" finding in its determination.  The only provisions  of
    Part 5A considered by the FtT were section 117B(3) and (6).  It follows
    from this analysis that, in my judgment, Mr Sheldon's submission is  to
    be accepted.  The construction of  sections  117A  and  117B  urged  on
    behalf of the Appellants simply does not arise  having  regard  to  the
    provisions of Part 5A which the FtT considered and its ensuing findings
    and conclusions.


17. While the second ground of appeal  must,  therefore,  fail,  given  the
    fullness of argument on the statutory construction issue  I  would  add
    the following.  First, I reiterate what this Tribunal said  in  Forman,
    at [17]:

       "We consider the correct analysis of sections 117A and 117B to be as
       follows:

          i)       These provisions apply in every case  where  a  court  or
             tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
             the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to  respect  for
             private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as a  result,
             would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.
              Where a Court  or  Tribunal  is  not  required  to  make  this
             determination, these provisions do not apply.


         ii) The so-called "public interest question" is  "the  question  of
             whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect  for
             private and family life  is  justified  under  Article  8(2).",
             which appears to embrace the entirety  of  the  proportionality
             exercise.


        iii) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must have  regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
             section 117B in all cases: per section 117A(1) and (2).


         iv) In considering the public interest question in cases concerning
             the deportation of foreign criminals,  the  court  or  tribunal
             must have regard to the section  117B  considerations  and  the
             considerations listed in section 117C.


          v) The list of considerations in sections 117B  and  117C  is  not
             exhaustive: this is clear from the words  in  parenthesis  "(in
             particular)".


         vi) The court or tribunal concerned has no  choice:  it  must  have
             regard to the listed considerations."


    The next passage in Forman foreshadows to some extent the issue  raised
    under the banner of this ground of appeal:


         "While the court or tribunal  is  clearly  entitled  to  take  into
         account considerations other than  those  listed  in  section  117B
         (and, where appropriate,  section  117C),  any  additional  factors
         considered must be relevant, in the sense that they  properly  bear
         on the "public interest question".  In this discrete respect,  some
         assistance is provided by reflecting on the public  law  obligation
         to  take  into  account  all  material  considerations  which,   by
         definition, prohibits the intrusion of immaterial factors.   We are
         not required to decide in the present case  whether  there  is  any
         tension  between  section  117A(2),  which  obliges  the  court  or
         tribunal concerned to have regard to  the  list  of  considerations
         listed in section 117B and, where appropriate, section 117C and the
         contrasting terms of section 117B (5) and (6) which are  framed  as
         an instruction to the court or tribunal to attribute little  weight
         to the two considerations specified."

18. Next, in construing the provisions under scrutiny, certain observations
    about  the  structure  and  syntax  of  sections  117A  and  117B   are
    appropriate.  The draftsman's mechanism of enjoining a decision  maker,
    whether it be a court or tribunal or other agency, to "have regard  to"
    specified matters is of some longevity.  It is  long  established  that
    where this mechanism is employed, the corresponding duty is to obey the
    legislature's instruction, that is to say the decision maker must  have
    regard to the matter in question.  In the typical statutory model,  the
    legislature goes no further.  Where this model is invoked this  denotes
    the first stage in the  exercise  to  be  performed  by  the  judge  or
    decision maker.  The second stage is a product of the  common  law:  it
    imports a duty to give such rational weight to the matters specified as
    the  judge  or  decision  maker  considers  appropriate.  Within   this
    formulation  lies  the  principle  that  in  the  generality  of  cases
    involving decisions of this genre the barometer for judicial review, or
    appeal on a point  of  law,  is  the  Wednesbury  principle.  See,  for
    example, Tesco Stores v Secretary of  State  for  the  Environment  and
    Others [1995] 1 WLR 759. Lord Hoffmann's formulation of the  principles
    at [56] - [57] and [68], while  devised  in  a  planning  law  context,
    applies generally.


19. The statutory model for which the legislature  has  opted  in  sections
    117A and 117B is not the  typical  one.  True  it  is  that  its  first
    striking element is the familiar one of obliging the court or  tribunal
    concerned to have  regard  to  specified  considerations:  per  section
    117A(2).  These obligatory considerations are then listed  in  sections
    117B and 117C.  As section 117C does not arise in this  appeal,  I  say
    nothing more about it.  As regards section 117B, there is  a  total  of
    six  "considerations".   Some  of  these  have  the  dual  identity  of
    statutory considerations and legal principles, being readily  traceable
    to both Strasbourg  and  domestic  jurisprudence.   The  characteristic
    which links the "considerations" listed in section  117B(1),  (2),  (3)
    and (6) is that of the "public interest".  These provisions reflect the
    reality that the public interest  is  multi-layered  and  has  multiple
    dimensions.  Those aspects of the public interest which the legislature
    has identified as considerations to be taken into account as  a  matter
    of obligation are contained in these provisions.


20. In contrast, the two "considerations" contained in section 117B(4)  and
    (5) are somewhat different  from  the  other  four,  in  the  following
    respects.  First, they make no mention of the  public  interest.   They
    are, rather, concerned with facts and factors which, while  bearing  on
    the proportionality assessment under Article 8(2) ECHR, shift the focus
    from the ambit of the public interest to choices  and  decisions  which
    have been made by the person or persons concerned in  their  lives  and
    lifestyles.  Second, there is a degree of tension between  a  court  or
    tribunal having regard to a specified factor, as a matter of obligation
    (on the one hand) and (on the other) giving effect to  a  Parliamentary
    instruction about the weight to be given  thereto.  Indeed,  in  giving
    effect to section 117B(4) and (5), the court or tribunal  concerned  is
    not, in truth, performing  the  exercise  of  having  regard  to  these
    statutory provisions.  Rather, the Judge is complying with a  statutory
    obligation,  unconditional  and  unambiguous,  to  give  effect  to   a
    parliamentary instruction that the considerations in  question  are  to
    receive little weight.

21. All of the six factors contained in section 117B are properly seen as a
    rehearsal of well established principles of law  and/or  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules which have become familiar to all who practise in
    this field.  Furthermore, this discrete statutory  model  develops  the
    increasingly familiar device of codifying and incorporating  Article  8
    principles  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  the  Part  5A  model  the
    legislators have taken a step further  by  giving  expression  to  such
    principles in primary legislation.

22. I would add that I am satisfied that there is nothing in this  analysis
    which  promotes  the  Appellants'  argument.   The  elements  of   this
    analysis, interesting though they may be, are,  ultimately,  of  little
    moment.  True it is that the drafting of the new  statutory  provisions
    is far from felicitous.  A statutory exhortation to "have regard to"  a
    consideration  is  not  the  same  as  a  statutory   instruction   and
    corresponding obligation,  to  "give  little  weight"  to  a  specified
    consideration.  The  infelicities  of  drafting  in  these   particular
    provisions  are  not  unique:   section   117A(2),   structurally   and
    syntactically, suffers from  comparable  infelicities.   The  words  in
    parenthesis "(in particular)" are detached from the position which they
    should ideally occupy and the distant separation  of  "to"  from  "have
    regard" similarly jars. However, while the drafting  could  undoubtedly
    have been better, I consider the underlying intention to be  abundantly
    clear, expressed in unambiguous language.  While the drafting of  these
    critical statutory provisions wins no literary prizes, I consider  that
    the substance of the duty imposed on courts and  tribunals  by  section
    117A(2) admits of no doubt or ambiguity.


23. The  argument  advanced  by  Mr  Malik  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    explicitly acknowledges that if the statutory provisions under scrutiny
    are possessed of the clarity which I  have  found  it  must  fail.   It
    founders accordingly.  To this I would  add  that  there  is  no  legal
    principle of which I  am  aware  confounding  the  conclusion  that  an
    instruction by the legislature to a  court  or  tribunal  to  attribute
    little weight to the matters  specified  in  section  117B(4)  and  (5)
    either contravenes some constitutional norm or, in  order  to  preserve
    the constitutional balance, must be construed as narrowly and  strictly
    as possible and in  a  manner  which  unshackles  the  Judge  from  the
    constraints imposed. The United Kingdom,  being  one  of  those  states
    which operates the so-called "dualist" doctrine, it is by statute  that
    Article 8 forms part of the domestic law of this jurisdiction and it is
    by the same vehicle viz statute that Parliament has chosen to calibrate
    certain aspects of its operation in our legal system. I  consider  that
    this gives rise to no constitutional trespass or imbalance.  I  further
    consider this analysis entirely consistent with  the  passages  in  the
    judgment of Laws LJ in Cart  (supra)  on  which  the  Appellants  rely.
    Ditto those  in  Evans  (supra).   My  final  conclusion  is  that  the
    statutory  provisions  under  scrutiny  do  not  have  the  effect   of
    abrogating or eclipsing any fundamental right or any principle  of  the
    rule of law. Every court or tribunal would be attributing little weight
    to the matters specified irrespective of the parliamentary  instruction
    in primary legislation. Approached in this  way,  these  new  statutory
    provisions may  be  viewed  both  as  a  reinforcement  of  established
    principles, all Judge made and a reminder to Courts  and  Tribunals  of
    the need to give effect to them.

The Third Issue

24. In the context of section 117B(4) and (5)  of  the  2002  Act,  is  the
    establishment  (or  establishing)  of  private  life  confined  to  its
    initiation, or creation?   Mr Malik submitted that the  normal  meaning
    of the verb "establish" impels to an affirmative answer.   In  response
    to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Malik accepted that  private  lives
    and relationships are by their vary  nature  effervescent  and  dynamic
    rather than static.   He  agreed  that  neither  comes  into  existence
    abruptly.  Rather, both are developed progressively,  with  a  distinct
    element of evolution.  While it is a truism that every person's private
    life and relationships develop at different paces,  some  more  quickly
    than others, I consider that  this  does  not  assist  the  Appellants'
    argument.  On the contrary it confounds it.
    .
25.  In choosing the verb "establish" in section 117B(4) and (5), it  seems
    likely that the draftsman has simply drawn from the long  standing  and
    repeated judicial espousal of this term. Developing the analysis  begun
    in  [24]  above,  I  consider  that,   in   this   statutory   context,
    "established" is synonymous  with  "developed".   The  construction  of
    "established" advanced on behalf of the  Appellants  is,  in  my  view,
    artificially narrow.  It is further defeated by  the  long  established
    absurdity  principle  of  statutory  construction,  familiar  to   all:
    Parliament is presumed  not  to  have  intended  an  absurd  effect  or
    consequence.  The  suggestion  that  the  "little  weight"  instruction
    enshrined in section 117B(4) and (5) applies only to the beginning of a
    person's private life or the commencement of a relationship formed with
    a qualifying partner and not the continuance of  either  results  in  a
    construction  of  these  provisions  which,   in  my   estimation,   is
    manifestly unsustainable to the point of absurdity.  Why  penalise  the
    former and not the latter?  No rational  explanation  or  justification
    for this differential treatment was  advanced  in  argument  and  I  am
    unable to conceive of any.

26. Furthermore, the construction advocated on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    would, in my opinion, be  unworkable  in  practice.   The  exercise  of
    attempting to delineate the formation of a  person's  private  life  or
    relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  from  the  continuation  and
    extension thereof would be an impossible  one  in  practice.   In  this
    context one is reminded of the truism that Parliament legislates in the
    real world.  There is no conceivable rational distinction  to  be  made
    between the two concepts, or scenarios. For this combination of reasons
    the third ground of appeal must fail.

The Fourth Issue

27. Is a "precarious" immigration status, in the context of section 117B(5)
    of the 2002 Act, confined  to  cases  where  the  person  concerned  is
    afforded either temporary admission to the United Kingdom or a grant of
    leave to remain under a category which permits no  expectation  of  any
    further such grant?  Mr Malik submitted that the word "precarious",  in
    ordinary  language,  denotes  something  uncertain,  unsafe  or  shaky.
    Pausing, I find no reason to dissent from this contention.   Developing
    his argument, he submitted that a person's residence is not  precarious
    in this sense where there is valid leave to remain as a student.   This
    (he submitted) is to be contrasted with residence pursuant to temporary
    admission or under a category which by its nature admits of  only  very
    limited permission to stay with no provision for  further  extension  -
    for example, entry and sojourn pursuant to a visitor's visa.   Finally,
    it was  argued that  a  "precarious"  immigration  status  is,  in  the
    Strasbourg  and  domestic  jurisprudence,  generally  associated   with
    unlawful residence.

28. The primary submission of Mr Sheldon on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is that the "precarious" provision in section  117B(5)  does  not
    arise on the facts of this case.  Consistent with my  analysis  of  the
    determination of the FtT and associated conclusions -  see  above  -  I
    concur  with  this  submission.   This  ground  of  appeal  must   fail
    accordingly.

29. I consider that Mr Malik's submission is confounded in any event by the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in AM at [19] - [33], AM (S117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), at [19]-[33] and, in particular, the  conclusion
    enshrined in [32]:

         "To put the matter shortly,  it  appears  to  us  that  a  person's
         immigration status is 'precarious' if their continued  presence  in
         the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a  further  grant  of
         leave.  It is precisely because such a  person  has  no  indefinite
         right to be in the country that the relationships they  form  ought
         to be considered in the light of the potential need  to  leave  the
         country should that grant of leave not be forthcoming"

    Judges and practitioners should be constantly alert to this  clear  and
    concise  formulation  of  the  principle  of  "precariousness".    More
    recently, in  BM and Others (Returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC
    CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal stated, in  the  context
    of a person who had been granted limited leave to enter and  remain  in
    the United Kingdom after making an asylum claim, at [107](v):


         "Section 117B(5): We find that this Appellant's immigration  status
         in the United Kingdom was at all material times precarious.  All of
         his attempts to establish a stable, secure  status  in  the  United
         Kingdom were unsuccessful.  It follows that the private life  which
         he  has  developed  in  the  United  Kingdom  qualifies   for   the
         attribution of little weight."

30. The argument that  in  the  Strasbourg  and  domestic  jurisprudence  a
    precarious immigration status generally equates to  unlawful  residence
    was not developed by reference to any decided cases.   Furthermore,  it
    is not easily reconciled with  the  Appellant's  principal  contention,
    formulated  in  [3](iv)  above.   In  addition,  in  Jeunesse   v   the
    Netherlands (Application No. 12738/10), the Grand Chamber  stated  that
    the Applicant's residence in the Netherlands during a 17 year period  -
    which, on the facts of her case, could not  be  described  as  anything
    other than precarious - was unlawful: see  [102].   She  was  an  alien
    whose presence was "tolerated"  by  the  host  state:  see  [103].  The
    precarious nature of her presence emerges  clearly  in  the  succeeding
    passage:

           "Confronting the authorities of the  host  country  with  family
           life as a fait accompli does not entail that  those  authorities
           are, as a result, under an obligation ... to allow the applicant
           to settle in the country.  The court has previously  held  that,
           in general, persons in that situation  have  no  entitlement  to
           expect that a right of residence will  be  conferred  upon  them
           ...".

     [Emphasis added].

     As the case references which follow demonstrate,  there  is  clear  and
    consistent Strasbourg authority to this effect.  See, for example, B  v
    Sweden (Application No. 57442/11).

31.  I  consider  that  the  word  "precarious"  is   an   unsophisticated,
    unpretentious member of the English  language.  It  denotes  generally,
    something which is unstable, uncertain, fragile. It describes  a  state
    of affairs, condition or status  which  is  bereft  of  guarantees  and
    security.  It is the antheisis of something which  is  stable,  secure,
    certain.   This is its  ordinary  and  natural  meaning.   In  deciding
    whether a person's immigration  status is "precarious", the application
    by the court or  tribunal  concerned  of  this   ordinary  and  natural
    meaning will focus on the nature, quality and reality of such status.

32. Giving effect to the principles and approach outlined above, I conclude
    unhesitatingly that in enacting these statutory provisions it  was  the
    intention of the legislature that a person who is granted limited leave
    to enter and remain in the United Kingdom as a student is possessed  of
    an immigration status which is precarious.  Such status  regulates  the
    life, arrangements and affairs of the person concerned for  a  measured
    period of time and with no assurance of continuation or extension.   It
    does not extend beyond the short or medium  term.   Its  effect  is  to
    convey to the beneficiary from the outset  an unequivocal  message,  or
    admonition, that permission to reside in the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    permitted purpose and complying with all of the  stipulated  conditions
    will expire on a specified date, or sooner  in  certain  eventualities.
    The immigration status of every  such  person  is,  in  my  view,  both
    captured and  defined  by  the  adjective  "precarious".   Furthermore,
    Parliament has made a clear and deliberate  distinction  between  those
    unlawfully present in the  United  Kingdom  and  those  whose  presence
    derives from a  precarious  immigration  status.  The  suggestion  that
    Parliament has legislated in a manner which treats unlawful immigration
    status as synonymous with precarious immigration status  is  confounded
    by the clear statutory language and has no jurisprudential underpinning
    which was brought to the attention of the Tribunal. I reject all of  Mr
    Malik's arguments accordingly. For  this  combination  of  reasons  the
    fourth ground of appeal must fail.

Omnibus Conclusion and Decision

33. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated  above  I  dismiss  these
    appeals and affirm the decision of the FtT.








                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                          Date: 10 July 2015







                                  APPENDIX


 Current provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act
 introduced by section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014, brought into force on
      20 October 2014 by The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 3,
               Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014



82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal

(1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-
   (a) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection claim  made
   by P,
   (b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse  a  human  rights  claim
   made by P, or
   (c) the Secretary of State has decided to revoke P's protection status.

(2) For the purposes of this Part-
   (a) a "protection claim" is a claim made by a person ("P")  that  removal
   of P from the United Kingdom-
      (i) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
      Convention, or
      (ii) would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to
      persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
   (b) P's protection claim is refused if the Secretary of State  makes  one
   or more of the following decisions-
      (i) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not  breach  the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention;
      (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom would  not  breach  the
      United Kingdom's obligations in relation to  persons  eligible  for  a
      grant of humanitarian protection;
   (c) a person has "protection status" if the person has been granted leave
   to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a  refugee  or  as  a  person
   eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
   (d) "humanitarian protection" is to be construed in accordance  with  the
   immigration rules;
   (e) "refugee" has the same meaning as in the Refugee Convention.


 84. Grounds of Appeal


 "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) (refusal of protection claim)  must  be
   brought on one or more of the following grounds-
      (a) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach
       the United
      Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention;
      (b)that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would  breach
      the United Kingdom's obligations in relation to persons eligible for a
      grant of humanitarian protection;
      (c) that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  would  be
      unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (public
      authority not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention). "

                           -----------------------
[1]  117D Interpretation of this Part
   1) In this Part-
       "Article 8" means Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights;
       "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-


           (a)        is a British citizen, or
           (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                 of seven years or more;
       "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
           (a)        is a British citizen, or
           (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
                 of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section  33(2A)  of  that
                 Act).


