
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Bhimani (Student: Switching Institution: Requirements) [2014] UKUT 00516
                                    (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MAYANK VINODCHANDRA BHIMANI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors

Where a student chooses to study at another institution holding a different
sponsor licence number from that of the institution where he/she was
granted leave to remain to study, he/she is required to make a fresh
application for leave to remain.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of  convenience  I  shall  refer  to  Mr  Bhimani  as  the
    appellant, as he was before the First-tier Judge, and the Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

2.   The appellant first entered the United  Kingdom  on  25  November  2009
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   His  leave  was
    subsequently extended until 11 August 2014, but on 13  March  2013  his
    leave to remain was curtailed so that it would expire on 12  May  2013.
    On 11 May 2013 he applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He had previously been granted leave to remain in order to  study  with
    Access College, London.  However in  support  of  his  application  for
    further leave to remain he provided an academic  transcript  from  One-
    Tech Training, showing that he had studied at that establishment for  a
    diploma in business management between 6 June 2011 and 8 January 2013.

3.   The relevant statutory and other materials are as follows:




                            "IMMIGRATION ACT 1971


         3.   General provisions for regulation and control.
         E+W+S+N.I.
           (1)    Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act,  where
                a person is not a British citizen-


                (a)    he shall not enter the United  Kingdom  unless  given
                    leave to do so in accordance with the provisions of,  or
                    made under, this Act;


                (b)    he may be given leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
                    (or, when already there, leave to remain in  the  United
                    Kingdom) either for  a  limited  or  for  an  indefinite
                    period;


                 (c)   If he is given limited leave to enter  or  remain  in
                    the United Kingdom, it may be given subject  to  all  or
                    any of the following conditions, namely-


                    (i)     a  condition  restricting  his   employment   or
                        occupation in the United Kingdom;


                     (ia)  a condition restricting his studies in the United
                        Kingdom;


                      (ii)   a  condition  requiring  him  to  maintain  and
                        accommodate himself, and  any  dependants  of  his,
                        without recourse to public funds;


                    (iii)  a condition requiring him to  register  with  the
                        police.


                     (iv)   a  condition  requiring  him  to  report  to  an
                        immigration officer or the Secretary of State; and


                    (v)    a condition about residence.


           (2)    The Secretary of State shall from time to  time  (and  as
                soon as may be) lay  before  Parliament  statements  of  the
                rules, or of any changes in the rules, laid down by  him  as
                to the practice to be followed in the administration of this
                Act for regulating the entry into and  stay  in  the  United
                Kingdom of persons required by this Act  to  have  leave  to
                enter, including any rules as to the period for which  leave
                is to  be  given  and  the  conditions  to  be  attached  in
                different circumstances; and section 1(4) above shall not be
                taken to require uniform provision to be made by  the  rules
                as regards admission of  persons  for  a  purpose  or  in  a
                capacity specified in section 1(4) (and in  particular,  for
                this as well as other purposes of this Act, account  may  be
                taken of citizenship or nationality).


                If a statement laid before either House of Parliament  under
                this subsection is disapproved by a resolution of that House
                passed within the period of forty days  beginning  with  the
                date of laying (and exclusive of  any  period  during  which
                Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or  during  which  both
                Houses are adjourned for more  than  four  days),  then  the
                Secretary of State shall as soon as may be make such changes
                or further changes in the rules  as  appear  to  him  to  be
                required in the circumstances,  so  that  the  statement  of
                those changes be laid before Parliament at latest by the end
                of the period of forty days beginning with the date  of  the
                resolution (but exclusive as aforesaid).


           (3)    In the case of a limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                United Kingdom,-


                (a)     a  person's  leave  may  be   varied,   whether   by
                    restricting, enlarging or  removing  the  limit  on  its
                    duration, or by adding, varying or revoking  conditions,
                    but if  the  limit  on  its  duration  is  removed,  any
                    conditions attached to the leave shall cease  to  apply;
                    and


                (b)    the limitation on and any conditions  attached  to  a
                    person's leave  (whether  imposed  originally  or  on  a
                    variation) shall, if not superseded, apply also  to  any
                    subsequent leave he may obtain after an absence from the
                    United  Kingdom  within  the  period  limited  for   the
                    duration of the earlier leave.
           ...


         4.    Administration of control
           E+W+S+N.I.
           (1)    The power under this Act to give or refuse leave to enter
                the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  exercised  by   immigration
                officers, and the power to  give  leave  to  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom, or to vary any leave under  section  3(3)(a)
                (whether  as  regards  duration  or  conditions),  shall  be
                exercised by the Secretary of State; and,  unless  otherwise
                allowed  by  or  under  this  Act,  those  powers  shall  be
                exercised by notice in writing given to the person affected,
                except  that  the  powers  under  section  3(3)(a)  may   be
                exercised generally in respect of any class  of  persons  by
                order made by statutory instrument.


           (2)    The provisions of Schedule  2  to  this  Act  shall  have
                effect with respect to-


                (a)    the appointment and powers  of  immigration  officers
                    and medical inspectors for purposes of this Act;


                (b)    the examination of persons arriving in or leaving the
                    United Kingdom by ship  or  aircraft,  and  the  special
                    powers exercisable in the case of those who  arrive  as,
                    or with a view to becoming,  members  of  the  crews  of
                    ships and aircraft; and


                (c)    the exercise by immigration officers of their  powers
                    in relation to entry into the United  Kingdom,  and  the
                    removal from the United Kingdom of persons refused leave
                    to enter or entering or remaining unlawfully; and


                (d)    the  detention  of  persons  pending  examination  or
                    pending removal from the United Kingdom;


               and  for  other  purposes  supplementary  to  the  foregoing
               provisions of this Act.


           (3)    The  Secretary  of  State  may  by  regulations  made  by
                statutory instrument, which shall be subject to annulment in
                pursuance of a resolution of  either  House  of  Parliament,
                make provision as to the effect of a  condition  under  this
                Act requiring a person to register with the police; and  the
                regulations may include provision-


                (a)    as to the officers of police by whom registers are to
                    be maintained, and as to the form  and  content  of  the
                    registers;


                (b)    as to the place and manner  in  which  anyone  is  to
                    register and as to the documents and information  to  be
                    furnished by him, whether  on  registration  or  on  any
                    change of circumstances;


                (c)    as to the issue of certificates of  registration  and
                    as  to  the  payment  of  fees   for   certificates   of
                    registration;


                and the regulations may require anyone who is for  the  time
                being subject to such a condition to produce  a  certificate
                of registration to such persons and in such circumstances as
                may be prescribed by the regulations.


           (4)    The Secretary of State may by  order  made  by  statutory
                instrument, which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance
                of a resolution of either House  of  Parliament,  make  such
                provision as appears to him to be  expedient  in  connection
                with this Act for records to be made  and  kept  of  persons
                staying at  hotels  and  other  premises  where  lodging  or
                sleeping accommodation is provided, and for persons (whether
                British citizens or not) who stay at any  such  premises  to
                supply the necessary information.
           ....


           IMMIGRATION (LEAVE TO ENTER AND REMAIN) ORDER 2000


           ....
                                   PART II

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE AS LEAVE TO ENTER

        Entry clearance as Leave to Enter


         2.   Subject to article 6(3), an  entry  clearance  which  complies
             with the requirements of article 3 shall have effect as  leave
             to enter the United Kingdom to the extent specified in article
             4, but subject to the conditions referred to in article 5.


         Requirements


         3.   (1) An entry clearance shall not have effect as leave to enter
                unless it complies with the requirements of this article.


           (2)    The entry clearance must specify the  purpose  for  which
                the holder wishes to enter the United Kingdom.


           (3)    The entry clearance must be endorsed with:


                (a)    the conditions to which it is subject; or


                (b)    a statement that it is to have effect  as  indefinite
                    leave to enter the United Kingdom.


           ...


         HC 395


         245ZW  Period and conditions of grant


             (a)  Subject to paragraph (b), entry clearance will be granted
                  for the duration of the course.


             (b)  In addition to the period of entry clearance  granted  in
                  accordance with paragraph (a), entry clearance  will  also
                  be granted for the periods set out in the following table.


         Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.


         |Type of Course        |Period of leave to     |Period of leave to  |
|                      |remain to be granted   |remain to be granted|
|                      |before the course      |after the course    |
|                      |starts                 |ends                |
|12 months or more     |1 month                |4 months            |
|6 months or more but  |1 month                |2 months            |
|less than 12 months   |                       |                    |
|Pre-sessional course  |1 month                |1 month             |
|of less than 6 months |                       |                    |
|Course of less than 6 |7 days                 |7 days              |
|months that is not a  |                       |                    |
|pre-sessional course  |                       |                    |
|Postgraduate doctor or|1 month                |1 month             |
|dentist               |                       |                    |


        Notes
             (i)  If the grant of entry clearance is made less than 1 month
                  or, in the case of a course of less than 6 months that  is
                  not a pre-sessional course, less than 7  days  before  the
                  start of the course, entry clearance will be granted  with
                  immediate effect.


             (ii) A pre-sessional course     is a course which  prepares  a
                  student for the student's main course of study in the UK.


             (iii)    The additional periods  of  entry  clearance  granted
                  further to the table above will  be  disregarded  for  the
                  purposes of calculating whether a migrant has exceeded the
                  limits specified at 245ZV(g) to 245ZV(gb).


         (c)  Entry clearance will  be  granted  subject  to  the  following
             conditions:


             (i)  no recourse to public funds;


             (ii) registration with the police,  if  this  is  required  by
                  paragraph 326 of these Rules;


             (iii)    no employment except:


                  (1)  employment during term time of no more than 20  hours
                      per week and  employment  (of  any  duration)  during
                      vacations, where the student is following a course of
                      degree level study and is either:


                      (a)  sponsored by a Sponsor that is a Recognised Body
                           or a body in  receipt  of  public  funding  as  a
                           higher education institution from the  Department
                           of Employment and Learning in  Northern  Ireland,
                           the Higher Education Funding Council for England,
                           the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales or
                           the Scottish Funding Council; or


                      (b)   sponsored  by  an  overseas  higher   education
                           institution  to  undertake  a  short-term   Study
                           Abroad Programme in the United Kingdom.
                  (2)  employment during term time of no more than 10  hours
                      per week and  employment  (of  any  duration)  during
                      vacations, where the student is following a course of
                      below degree  level  study  and  is  sponsored  by  a
                      Sponsor that is  a  Recognised  Body  or  a  body  in
                      receipt of  public  funding  as  a  higher  education
                      institution from the  Department  of  Employment  and
                      Learning in Northern Ireland,  the  Higher  Education
                      Funding Council for  England,  the  Higher  Education
                      Funding Council for Wales  or  the  Scottish  Funding
                      Council,
                  (3)  employment during term time of no more than 10  hours
                      per week and  employment  (of  any  duration)  during
                      vacations, where the student is following a course of
                      study at any academic level and  is  sponsored  by  a
                      Sponsor that is a publicly funded  further  education
                      college,
                  (4)  employment as part of a course-related work placement
                      which forms  an  assessed  part  of  the  applicant's
                      course  and  provided  that  any  period   that   the
                      applicant spends on that placement  does  not  exceed
                      one-third  of  the  total  length   of   the   course
                      undertaken in the UK except
                      (i)   where  it  is  a   United   Kingdom   statutory
                           requirement that the placement should exceed  one
                           third of the total length of the course; or
                      (ii) where the placement does not exceed one half  of
                           the total length of the course undertaken in  the
                           UK and the  student  is  following  a  course  of
                           degree level study and is either:
                           (a)  sponsored by a Sponsor that is a  Recognised
                               Body or a body in receipt of public  funding
                               as a higher education institution  from  the
                               Department of  Employment  and  Learning  in
                               Northern  Ireland,  the   Higher   Education
                               Funding  Council  for  England,  the  Higher
                               Education Funding Council for Wales  or  the
                               Scottish Funding Council; or
                           (b)  sponsored by an  overseas  higher  education
                               institution to undertake a short-term  Study
                               Abroad Programme in the United Kingdom.
                  (5)  Employment as a Student Union Sabbatical Officer, for
                      up to 2 years, provided the post is elective  and  is
                      at the institution which is the applicant's sponsor.
                  (6)  Employment as a postgraduate doctor or dentist  on  a
                      recognised Foundation Programme, and
                  (7)  until such time as a decision is received from the UK
                      Border Agency on an application which is supported by
                      a Certificate of Sponsorship assigned by  a  licensed
                      Tier 2 Sponsor and which is made following successful
                      completion of course at degree level or  above  at  a
                      Sponsor that is  a  Recognised  Body  or  a  body  in
                      receipt of  public  funding  as  a  higher  education
                      institution from the  Department  of  Employment  and
                      Learning in Northern Ireland,  the  Higher  Education
                      Funding Council for  England,  the  Higher  Education
                      Funding Council for Wales  or  the  Scottish  Funding
                      Council and while the applicant has extant leave, and
                      any appeal against that decision has been determined,
                      employment with the Tier 2 Sponsor, in the  role  for
                      which they assigned the Certificate of Sponsorship to
                      the Tier 4 migrant.
                       Provided that the migrant is not  self  employed,  or
                      employed as a Doctor or Dentist  in  Training  unless
                      the course that the migrant is being sponsored to  do
                      (as recorded by the Confirmation  of  acceptance  for
                      Studies Checking Service) is a recognised  Foundation
                      Programme or professional sportsperson  (including  a
                      sports coach) or an entertainer,  and  provided  that
                      the migrant's employment would not fill  a  permanent
                      full time vacancy other than under the conditions  of
                      (7) above,  a  vacancy  on  a  recognised  Foundation
                      Programme or as a sabbatical officer; and
                      (iv) no study except:
                           (1)   study   at   the   institution   that   the
                               Confirmation  of  acceptance   for   Studies
                               Checking Service records  as  the  migrant's
                               Sponsor, or where the  migrant  was  awarded
                               points for a visa letter unless the  migrant
                               is studying at an  institution  which  is  a
                               partner   institution   of   the   migrant's
                               Sponsor,  study  at  the  institution  which
                               issued that visa letter;
                           (2)  until such time as a  decision  is  received
                               from the UK Border Agency on an  application
                               which is  supported  by  a  Confirmation  of
                               Acceptance for Studies assigned by a  Highly
                               Trusted Sponsor and which is made while  the
                               applicant has extant leave, and  any  appeal
                               against that decision has  been  determined,
                               study  at   the   Highly   Trusted   sponsor
                               institution  which   the   Confirmation   of
                               acceptance  for  Studies  Checking   Service
                               records as having assigned a Confirmation of
                               Acceptance  for  Studies  to  the   Tier   4
                               migrant; and
                           (3)  supplementary study."

4.   In the decision letter of 19 September 2013 the respondent stated  that
    where a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant makes a successful application
    for leave to remain on or after 5 October 2009, s.50  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 prohibits that student from  study
    other than at the institution that the Confirmation of  Acceptance  for
    Studies Checking Service records as the student's sponsor.  It was said
    that if a student chose to  study  at  another  institution  holding  a
    different sponsor licence number from that  of  the  institution  where
    they were granted leave to remain to study, they were required to  make
    a fresh application for  leave  to  remain.   It  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had last been granted leave to remain based on  a  successful
    application made on 23 March 2011 for leave to  remain  to  study  with
    Access College in London but in view of the fact  that  the  transcript
    showed that he had studied at One-Tech Training, at a time when he  was
    subject to s.50 by virtue of extant leave, the Secretary of  State  was
    not satisfied that he had complied with the conditions attached to  his
    leave to remain.  It was said that therefore he  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of this category and it had been  decided  to  refuse  the
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
    under paragraph 322(3) with reference to paragraph 245ZY(c)(iv)  of  HC
    395.

5.   The judge at paragraph 8 of his determination described the  key  issue
    as  being  whether  s.50  (which  inserted   s.3(1)(c)(ia)   into   the
    Immigration Act 1971) attached to the leave of all students a condition
    that they must not switch from the institutions that issued them with a
    CAS.  A secondary issue was whether the Secretary of State  had  indeed
    exercised a discretion under paragraph 322(3).   The  judge  noted  the
    terms of  s.3(3)(a)  and  s.4(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  and
    concluded that the effect of these provisions was that the Secretary of
    State could not make a general variation  of  the  terms  of  leave  in
    relation to any class of  person  (including  students)  through  other
    means such as the Immigration Rules which of course were not a form  of
    subsidiary legislation.  The judge considered that it  was  clear  from
    the  relevant  provisions  that  a  formal  notice  of  any  change  of
    conditions was required,  whether  that  change  was  notified  to  the
    individual or class of persons by statutory  instrument.   It  followed
    that s.50(2)  of  the  2009  Act  which  permitted  a  condition  under
    s.3(1)(c)(ia) of the 1971 Act to be added to  leave  given  before  the
    passing of  the  2009  Act,  merely  clarified  that  the  power  under
    s.3(3)(a) of the 1971 Act could be  exercised  in  relation  to  extant
    leave, whereas ordinarily, additional conditions would be added at  the
    point at which the duration of the leave was being extended.  The judge
    considered that s.50(2) was not intended and did not purport  to  amend
    s.3(3)(a), which remained the principal  source  of  power  to  impose,
    change  and  revoke  conditions  attaching  to  a  person's  leave  and
    certainly s.50(2) did not replace s.4(1) of the 1971 Act which provided
    for the modality for imposing conditions on a  class  of  persons.   He
    commented that it was also significant that paragraph 245ZT(c)(iv)  did
    not even purport to refer to itself as a  condition  but  although  the
    Rule was not a condition it was drafted in language that indicated that
    it introduced a requirement.  The judge went on to say that he had seen
    no evidence that a condition was in fact attached  to  the  appellant's
    leave, whether individually or as part  of  a  class  of  persons  with
    respect to whose leave to remain the Secretary of State had by an order
    attached a restriction as to study.  He therefore  concluded  that  the
    decision under paragraph 322(3) was not in accordance with the law  and
    required to be set aside.

6.   In the alternative he considered whether or not any discretion  was  in
    fact exercised,  and  concluded  that  the  language  employed  by  the
    decision maker suggested that it was  not  appreciated  that  paragraph
    322(3) came under the section of the Rules where leave "should normally
    be refused".  It had not been shown that the  discretion  was  in  fact
    exercised.  The appellant met and had been granted points  towards  the
    substance of the Rules in relation to the CAS and  Maintenance,  Funds.
    There was nothing the judge could see  from  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    preventing the grant to the appellant of further leave to remain.   The
    appeal was allowed.

7.   The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against this decision on the basis that the  appellant's  leave  within
    the United Kingdom had always been subject to  the  condition  that  he
    could not change his  sponsoring  organisation  without  notifying  the
    Secretary of State.  The  refusal  had  not  sought  to  impose  a  new
    condition as the judge appeared to  suggest  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination, and there had  not  been  a  change  in  the  conditions
    attached to the appellant's leave in the United Kingdom.

8.   Mr Nath said that it was common ground that the appellant  had  changed
    sponsors without the Secretary of State's knowledge.  He  was  required
    to inform the Secretary of State of this and  that  was  the  condition
    that he was required to abide by.  There were no new conditions and the
    judge was wrong at paragraph  18  of  the  determination.   There  were
    existing conditions, and that was a requirement.

9.   In his submissions Mr Malik  agreed  that  the  appellant  had  changed
    sponsors without the Secretary of State's knowledge,  but  argued  that
    the judge was  correct  to  find  there  had  been  no  breach  of  any
    immigration conditions.  He referred first of all to  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in GO-O [2008] EWCA Civ 747, noting what  was  said
    at the end of paragraph 4 that :

         "A rule preventing students from making such a change might well be
         arbitrary or unnecessary in the absence of case-specific reasons."

10.  Subsequently s.3(1) of the 1971 Immigration Act  had  been  amended  by
    s.50 of the 2009 Act and the relevant provision was s.3(1)(c)(ia),  the
    effect of which was that if a person was given limited leave  to  enter
    or remain in the United Kingdom, it might be given subject  to  all  or
    any of the following conditions, namely  a  condition  restricting  his
    studies in the United Kingdom.  This was therefore  a  discretion.   It
    was clear from s.4(1) that the power under the Act to  give  or  refuse
    leave to enter the United Kingdom or to vary leave under s.3(3)(a)  was
    to be exercised by notice in writing  given  to  the  person  affected.
    Therefore, when the Secretary of State imposed a condition on leave she
    was required to give written notice under this  provision.   Therefore,
    unless a written notice imposed conditions on  leave  to  remain  there
    were no valid conditions.

11.  Mr Malik referred next to the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)
    Order 2000 at paragraph 3(3)(a) which said  in  effect  that  an  entry
    clearance shall not have effect as leave to enter  unless  it  complies
    with the requirements of this Article including being  required  to  be
    endorsed with the conditions to which it is subject.  This was a strict
    requirement.  Reference was also made to paragraph 5 of the Order which
    stated that an entry clearance will  have  effect  as  leave  to  enter
    subject to any conditions, being conditions  of  a  kind  that  may  be
    imposed on leave to enter given under s.3 of  the  Act,  to  which  the
    entry clearance  is  subject  and  which  are  endorsed  on  it.   This
    reinforced the point.

12.  Therefore, based on the 2000 Order, any condition was  required  to  be
    endorsed on the entry clearance.  In any event  a  written  notice  was
    required to be given for the imposition of a valid condition.

13.  Mr Malik referred to section C of the Home  Office  bundle,  which  was
    the appellant's passport.  There was no reference  on  the  endorsement
    there to him being required to study at a particular  institution.   It
    simply said there was to be no recourse to public funds and he was able
    to do work/business as in the Tier 4 Rules.  There was also  section  D
    which was the appellant's residence permit that referred to him working
    twenty hours maximum in term time and gave a reference number which was
    the CAS number but was  not  a  condition.   Therefore  there  were  no
    conditions on entry clearance or leave to  remain.   No  condition  had
    been imposed on the residence permit or the entry clearance for him  to
    study at a particular institution.

14.  In any event there was no evidence before the  judge  or  the  Tribunal
    that a written notice had ever been issued  to  the  appellant  stating
    that he  had  been  given  leave  to  remain  subject  to  a  condition
    restricting his studies.  When there was a refusal under Part 1X of the
    Immigration Rules the burden was on the Secretary of State to show that
    the person had been in breach of a requirement.   The  judge  had  been
    entitled to conclude as he did as  the  leave  to  remain  was  granted
    without conditions.

15.  With regard to paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv),  it  seemed  that  although  any
    imposition of conditions under the 1971 Act was discretionary,  it  did
    not mean that under this Rule the Secretary of State had granted  entry
    clearance subject to a condition in this case and there was no evidence
    of a condition being  imposed.   With  regard  to  the  requirement  at
    paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(1), this was not mandatory as could be seen from
    sub-paragraph  (c)(i)  and  (iii),  as  if  conditions   were   imposed
    automatically, why was it necessary to mention public funds and work in
    the endorsements?  The Secretary  of  State  was  required  to  act  in
    accordance with the Rules, but she had a discretion to depart from them
    and it was open to her not to  impose  the  conditions  and  where  she
    imposed the conditions they must be in accordance with  the  Order  and
    the Act.

16.  GO-O was a judicial recognition that a  Rule  of  this  kind  might  be
    arbitrary and unnecessary.  Even if there were ambiguity in the  order,
    it was necessary to construe it as narrowly as possible as there  would
    be very serious consequences to appellants.  It was a criminal  offence
    to breach immigration conditions, as set out at s.24 of the  2002  Act.
    The general conditions were required to be taken into  account  and  it
    was necessary to tell  appellants  of  their  limits  in  the  clearest
    possible terms.  This had been recognised by Parliament in s.4  and  in
    the 2000  Order  there  must  be  notice  in  writing  with  regard  to
    conditions and endorse accordingly.

17.  If the Tribunal were not with Mr Malik, then there was the point  about
    the discretion that was required to be  exercised,  and  reference  was
    made to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ukus  [2012]  UKUT  00307
    (IAC).  Paragraphs 11 and 22 in particular were of relevance.  If there
    was a failure to exercise a discretion in such circumstances this would
    render the decision as being not in accordance with the law.

18.  By way of reply Mr Nath argued that under s.50 there  was  a  need  for
    written notice and conditions but these were the conditions of the 2009
    Act and  had  been  sent  to  his  particular  sponsor.   This  was  in
    accordance with paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv) and also addressed the paragraph
    322(3) discretion point as well as the requirements and the  conditions
    imposed on the appellant.

19.  Mr Malik argued that this was a new point and what was said about  s.50
    in the decision was, with respect, nonsense.  Section 50 simply amended
    s.3(c)(i) to insert the reference to conditions on study and  what  was
    said in the decision  letter  about  s.50  did  not  reflect  what  the
    provision actually stated.  It empowered  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    impose a condition.

20.  Mr Nath had no further points to make.

21.  I reserved my determination.

Discussion

22.  It is clear from s.3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971  that  a  person
    given limited leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  may  be
    given that leave subject to  conditions  which  include  the  provision
    inserted by s.50 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009:
    a condition restricting his studies in the United Kingdom.

23.  It is important also to bear in mind the terms of s.3(2) which, as  set
    out above, establishes that the Secretary of State shall from  time  to
    time lay before Parliament statements of the rules or  changes  in  the
    rules laid down by her as  to  the  practice  to  be  followed  in  the
    administration of the Act for, inter alia, regulating  the  entry  into
    and stay in the United Kingdom of persons required by the Act  to  have
    leave to enter, including any rules as to the period for which leave is
    to  be  given  and  the  conditions  to  be   attached   in   different
    circumstances.

24.  It is in this light that paragraph  245ZW(c)(iv)(1)  has  to  be  seen.
    The effect of this provision is that entry clearance in the case  of  a
    Tier  4  (General)  Student  will  be  granted  subject  to  conditions
    including the requirement that the student  is  not  allowed  to  study
    except at the institution which  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies Checking Service records as their sponsor.   That  is  a  clear
    example of a provision made in accordance with s.3(2) of the 1971 Act.

25.  As regards s.4(1) of the Act, the effect of this  is  to  require  that
    powers under the Act giving or  refusing  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom are to be exercised by notice in writing given to  the  person.
    But the subsection goes on to make it clear  that  the  requirement  of
    notice in writing operates "unless otherwise allowed by or  under  this
    Act", which in my view entails, inter alia, that s.4 must  be  read  in
    conjunction with s.3(2), itself enabling provisions such  as  paragraph
    245ZW(c)(iv)(1).

26.  As regards the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order  2000,  Mr
    Malik drew my attention to the specific provision set out at  paragraph
    3(3)(a) which requires the entry clearance  to  be  endorsed  with  the
    conditions to which it is subject.

27.  However I interpret the biometric and residence permit,  a  copy  which
    is at Annex D to the explanatory statement, as  doing  precisely  that.
    As Mr Malik accepted, the reference number is the CAS number of  Access
    College,  London,  and  I  think  it  is   not   straining   a   proper
    interpretation of the requirements of paragraph 3(3)(a) of the Order to
    read this as an endorsement of  a  condition  to  which  the  leave  is
    subject, i.e. study at the college in respect of which that CAS is  the
    reference.

28.  Accordingly I consider that the judge erred in  his  interpretation  of
    the relevant provisions in this  case.   The  decision  to  refuse  the
    application was a lawful one, subject to what I have to say below.

29.  The remaining issue  is  that  of  the  exercise  of  discretion  under
    paragraph 322(3).  It seems to me sufficiently clear from  reading  the
    decision letter that this was not done,  and  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance in Ukus, in particular paragraph 22(i) of that decision, there
    has been a failure by the Secretary of State, having properly concluded
    that the appellant was in breach of the conditions  of  his  leave,  to
    appreciate that she had a discretion to exercise and having so  failed,
    failed to exercise it.  The judge's decision  allowing  the  appeal  in
    full is therefore set aside and the decision in the appeal  is  re-made
    by a decision allowing it to  the  extent  that  it  remains  with  the
    respondent to make a decision in accordance with a proper  exercise  of
    the discretion under paragraph 322(3) of HC 395.




Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

