

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

             AB (Ahmadi letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00511(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th July 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     AB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, counsel, instructed by Dean Manson LLP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

In deciding a claim to international protection based on a  person's  Ahmadi
faith where credibility is in  issue,  the  more  that  a  letter  from  the
Ahmadiyya Association UK contains specific information as to the  claimant's
activities in the United Kingdom, the more likely the letter is to be  given
weight.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

     1. We make an order under rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
        Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
        any matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the
        appellant.

     2. The appellant appeals a decision  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal (Judge Warren L Grant sitting with a non-legal member,  Dr
        J O De Barros) who dismissed his appeal against a decision dated 11
        January 2011 that the appellant is subject to automatic deportation
        pursuant to s32(5) UK Borders Act 2007.  The panel  concluded  that
        none of the exceptions provided for in the Act apply. On 25th  July
        2012 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein found an error of  law  in  the
        following terms:


          1. At the hearing before me on 27 July and  as  reflected  in  my
             typed and contemporaneous Record of Proceedings and subsequent
             Directions dated  15 August 2012, I found that the  First-tier
             Tribunal had materially erred in law, on  the  basis  that  as
             contended in Grounds 1 and 2 of the Appellant's Permission  to
             Appeal application, there had been a failure to make  material
             findings as to the applicability of the guidance in HJ  (Iran)
             and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 and to make any  findings  as
             to whether the Appellant on return to  Pakistan  would  be  at
             risk as an Ahmadi with a high profile father.
          2. Having made this clear to the parties at  the  hearing  I  set
             aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated
             on 9 November 2011 save that their findings over paragraph  35
             to 38 inclusive should be preserved.


     3.  The  factual  findings  preserved  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        determination are as follows:


             35.  We find that the appellant's  mother  has  exaggerated  a
             number of issues in her evidence. Despite her claim  that  the
             factory is not doing well we accept the  appellant's  evidence
             that it employs 150 workers and that it supplies plastic  bags
             to retail outlets inside Pakistan. There is no  evidence  that
             it has been attacked or that the management  or  workers  face
             discrimination or difficulties on account of the faith of  the
             owners. The  appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon  two  complaints
             allegedly filed at the Race Course police station  in  Lahore.
             The reports purport to have been filed by the manager  of  the
             factory and by the appellant's mother. The reports state  that
             threats have been made by one Kamil  Khan  to  burn  down  the
             factory on account of money  allegedly  owed  to  him  by  the
             appellant's late father. If there is  a  date  on  the  report
             filed by the  manager  it  has  not  been  translated  by  the
             translator but the mother's complaint is  dated  19th  October
             2010. According to the translation  the  complaint  bears  her
             thumb print although we do not believe that she was present in
             Pakistan on 19 October 2010. The translation states,  "I  have
             recently come here from Pakistan" which  makes  little  sense.
             The complaint states that she had been  receiving  threatening
             phone calls on what is clearly a mobile phone in London from a
             mobile phone in Pakistan. We do not know how a total  stranger
             could have found out her mobile phone number but  we  are  not
             assisted by the print out of phone calls  made/received  which
             follows. It appears from a separate document that the  manager
             allegedly lodged his complaint on 31 August 2010 and  we  find
             that if a threat was made as long ago as August 2010 the maker
             of the threat would have made  good  his  threat  long  before
             November 2011. We find that the appellant or  someone  on  his
             behalf has  manufactured  evidence  and  we  make  an  adverse
             credibility finding against both him and his mother.


             36.  We also find that despite claims made  by  the  appellant
             and by his mother that the close relatives  in  Pakistan  have
             either all emigrated [sic] there  is  an  aunt  who  may  well
             believe that she is entitled to succeed to her late  brother's
             ownership of this factory.  Although  the  appellant's  mother
             claimed that this aunt is a member of  the  Pakistan  People's
             Party and that she has (if we heard  correctly)  forsaken  her
             Ahmadi faith for that of Islam, the  appellant's  mother  runs
             the factory by phone and by email, keeping a  careful  eye  on
             the accounts and visiting the factory  as  necessary.  Despite
             her ailments she managed to visit on her own in  January  2011
             and we find that she has exaggerated her  health  problems  in
             order to try to show that she is dependent on  the  appellant.
             There is a thriving business in the  ownership  of  an  Ahmadi
             family and we reject any suggestion that threats of  any  kind
             have been or are being made to the management.


             37.  We find that the appellant's older brother was already in
             Pakistan at the time of the murders and that the appellant and
             his mother arrived on the following  day.  The  appellant  has
             variously stated that he stayed in the family home  in  Lahore
             which we find the family  (most  probably  his  mother)  still
             owns. It seems that this is the address which appears  at  the
             top of the complaint allegedly filed by her  with  the  Lahore
             police in October 2010. The appellant claims  that  he  stayed
             there with his sister-in-law and his two nephews but  that  he
             posted extra guards. He and his mother have also  stated  that
             they were advised that terrorists were watching the  house  so
             they stayed in a hotel. Both versions cannot  be  correct  and
             there is no explanation to show how anyone  could  have  known
             that terrorists or any other people were watching  the  house.
             If they were so interested in the  appellant  and  his  mother
             that they watched the house they will  have  known  that  they
             checked into a hotel especially when we take into account  the
             appellant's claim that he was known to be his father's son and
             that far from keeping a low profile he gave interviews to  Al-
             Jazeera. He further claimed in his interview that the  Taliban
             made threats to him through phone calls to the factory and  to
             his mother but we have rejected the possibility  that  threats
             were made to the factory and we find that his mother  remained
             in Pakistan for 6 weeks after the murder without suffering any
             adverse consequences. The  appellant  has  also  claimed  that
             during his imprisonment in the  UK  the  Taliban  have  phoned
             someone else to make threats against him but his mother  makes
             no mention of these later phone calls.


             38.  We find that  the  conflicting  accounts  show  that  the
             appellant and his mother have exaggerated their stories to try
             to create adverse interest in the appellant  whereas  in  fact
             there is none. We find  that  on  16  December  the  appellant
             signed a disclaimer withdrawing his asylum  claim.  He  claims
             that he thought he could rely on the grant of indefinite leave
             to remain but on 30 October 2010 he had received a  notice  of
             liability  to  deportation  and  we  believe  that   he   well
             understood that ILR would not avail him. He sought to withdraw
             his asylum claim because he knew that there was  no  basis  to
             seek international protection. He now seeks  to  reinstate  it
             based  upon  a  conflicting  account  which  is   lacking   in
             credibility.


     4. Further undisputed facts are as follows:


        a. The appellant's father was a prominent  Ahmadi  businessman  and
           philanthropist who was killed  during  Friday  prayers  when  an
           Ahmadi Mosque in Lahore was attacked on 28th May 2010.
        b. The appellant arrived in the  UK,  with  his  father  and  other
           family members, on 30 November 2002 and was  granted  indefinite
           leave to remain in 2007 along with his other family members. The
           appellant was aged 15 when he arrived and has  resided  lawfully
           since then.
        c. The appellant's mother, father and siblings were all naturalised
           as British citizens in 2008. The  appellant  did  not  apply  to
           naturalise.
        d. The appellant was convicted on 13th  August  2010,  following  a
           trial, of robbery (a street mugging  for  a  mobile  phone)  for
           which he received a sentence of 18 months imprisonment.  He  was
           aged 22 at  the  date  of  conviction.  The  Judge's  sentencing
           remarks noted that it was "... absolutely clear that you planned
           to rob someone if someone came  by.  The  claim  that  your  co-
           defendant was responsible....I regard as equally incredible.  It
           is perhaps unfortunate  that  you  didn't  plead  guilty  at  an
           earlier stage....you have not faced up  to  the  fact  that  you
           committed this offence and you apparently continue to deny  it."
           Having regard  to  the  Sentencing  Guidelines  for  Robbery  it
           appears that the court concluded that this was a level 1 offence
           with aggravating features.

     5. Before us the appellant submitted that his deportation would result
        in persecution for reasons of religion, both as an  individual  who
        would actively observe and preach his  faith  and  because  of  his
        social and business links to a prominent Ahmadi family; would be  a
        breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and would  be  a  breach  of
        Article 8 of the ECHR. We also heard submissions from Mr Halim with
        regards to Article 8.


     6. We heard oral evidence from the appellant, his mother  (through  an
        interpreter) and Mr Imran Zafar who is the  head  of  all  security
        arrangements in the UK for the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  UK.
        The appellant and his mother gave sworn evidence. The appellant was
        reminded that his previous evidence both to the criminal court  and
        to the First-tier Tribunal had been disbelieved and that this panel
        would take this into account when assessing his credibility  today.
        He was advised on the importance of complete candour and  frankness
        when giving his evidence.

      Evidence

     7. In addition to the standard respondent's bundle we were referred to
        a bundle of  documents  marked  "Part  A  subjective  evidence",  a
        skeleton  argument  filed  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  witness
        statements dated 3rd  June  2013  filed  on  behalf  of  all  three
        witnesses (which incorporated all of relevance from  their  earlier
        witness statements), 2 photos, various news extracts and  a  letter
        dated 6th June 2013 from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK to the
        appellant's solicitors.  A large bundle of "Objective Evidence" was
        also filed on behalf of the appellant together  with  an  essential
        reading list although we were not, during submissions, referred  to
        any particular document therein. Since this appeal  was  heard  and
        determined by the First-tier Tribunal and since an error of law was
        found by Judge Goldstein the country guidance case of MN and others
        (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389
        (IAC) has been reported and we  have  of  course  taken  this  into
        account in reaching our decision.

       The appellant's religious observance

     8. The appellant's evidence was that whilst in detention he had become
        more devout in his religious observance. Since release he has  been
        mentored by Mr Zafar whom he sees regularly  and  through  whom  he
        participates  in  activities  organised  by  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
        Association   UK.   Those   activities   include   attending    and
        participating  in  religious  community  activities  such  as  book
        stalls, handing out leaflets and door to door leafleting.  He  also
        claims to preach although he did  not  start  this  activity  until
        about a year after his release on licence because it was not  until
        then that he felt sufficiently knowledgeable about his faith. There
        was some discrepancy in his evidence as to how often he claimed  to
        preach; his oral evidence varied between every month  to  at  least
        once  a  month,  to  every  week.  A  letter  from  the   Ahmadiyya
        Association UK dated 6th June 2013 ("the 6th  June  letter"  quoted
        more fully below) refers to  the  President  of  the  Fazal  Mosque
        branch in London confirming in writing to the Ahmadiyya Association
        UK head office that he preaches to  his  friends  and  contacts  in
        London.


     9. Although his witness statement says [33] that he  had  taken  "full
        participation in all religious activities ever since [he]  came  to
        the UK  and  with  greater  commitment  after  [his]  release  from
        detention", in oral evidence he made no claim to  having  practised
        his religion prior to detention in any manner other than  attending
        Friday prayers. His witness statement sets out the manifestation of
        his  devotion  in  the  UK  including  undertaking  special  duties
        involving regular preaching and door to door leafleting,  attending
        Jalsa Salana, and performing Eid prayers. Although he states  these
        activities are not possible in Pakistan he does not, either in  his
        witness statement or in oral evidence, state that he intends to  or
        would wish to undertake them in Pakistan, save in [54]  which  also
        refers to him having been  discreet  in  his  religious  observance
        whilst in Pakistan prior to coming to the UK aged 15.


    10. The appellant's mother said in her evidence that the appellant  had
        been "quite active" in his faith in Pakistan  but  that  after  his
        father's death he became more active. This was not the  appellant's
        evidence, which was that although he had always had faith, his time
        in prison and since had been  influential  in  the  degree  of  his
        expressed observance; he had not gone to the Mosque  as  frequently
        prior to prison. The 6th June  letter  refers  to  the  appellant's
        activities "Since his arrival in the UK".  Neither  the  writer  of
        the 6th June letter nor the  President  of  the  Fazal  Mosque  who
        appears from the letter to  have  given  that  information  to  the
        writer, filed a witness statement or gave evidence before us and it
        was not therefore possible to ascertain  what  was  meant  by  this
        phrase. The appellant's mother said that the appellant attended the
        Fazal Mosque in England. The 6th June letter says that  he  attends
        Friday prayers at the  Fazal  Mosque  regularly  and  observes  his
        prayers in congregation regularly.

    11. The appellant's evidence as to the name of  the  President  of  the
        Fazal Mosque, (the position held by the  writer  of  the  6th  June
        letter) and as to the full name of the organiser of the  preaching,
        was unclear, contradictory and confused. He said,  variously,  that
        the President of the Fazal Mosque was the writer of  the  6th  June
        letter; that the president was not the writer of  the  letter;  and
        that he did not know the name of the President of that  Mosque.  He
        did not know how the writer of the 6th June letter had obtained the
        information contained in the 6th June letter. The appellant did not
        know how the President of the Fazal Mosque who,  according  to  the
        6th June letter had written a  letter  dated  4th  June  containing
        information about the appellant's Ahmadi religious activities,  had
        obtained that information (the letter of 4th June was not  produced
        to us). The appellant then said he thought that possibly his mentor
        (Mr Zafar) had provided the information. What was apparent was that
        whoever the President of the Fazal Mosque is, the appellant had  no
        direct contact with him and the information  recorded  in  the  6th
        June letter had come from a letter dated 4th June  which  had  been
        written by someone who himself had received that  information  from
        other individuals.

    12. The appellant relied on two photos which show  him  standing  in  a
        street at a stall and handing out a leaflet.  He  said  these  were
        taken on the same occasion (he could not remember with any accuracy
        when) and show him standing with others. He had no other photos  of
        such activities.


    13. A letter from the Ahmadiyya Association  UK  dated  6th  June  2013
        refers to the President  of  the  Fazal  Mosque  branch  in  London
        confirming in writing to  the  Association  head  office  that  the
        appellant delivers leaflets at  stalls  in  "Edgware  Road  and  in
        Surrey villages each week". The appellant  was  unable  to  confirm
        that he had ever delivered leaflets to a "Surrey" village, although
        his witness Mr Zafar did refer to activities that the appellant had
        undertaken in Surrey.

    14.  Mr Zafar is the head of security and  responsible  for  youth.  Mr
        Zafar said in evidence that he personally prays every  day  at  the
        Fazal Mosque save that for Friday prayers he  goes  to  the  Morden
        Mosque. Mr Zafar confirmed that the appellant  went  regularly  and
        frequently to prayers but explained  that,  other  than  at  Friday
        prayers, one might well not see particular  people,  although  they
        had been there, because (other than  Fridays)  prayer  time  was  a
        private event. He was unable  to  confirm  that  he  had  seen  the
        appellant during the week at mosque on a regular or frequent basis.


    15.  He mentors the appellant (although he made clear that there  is  a
        mentoring team responsible for those activities but he was involved
        because he knew the family) since his release  from  detention  and
        sees him usually twice a week although sometimes  more  frequently.
        He usually goes to his home although also sees him occasionally  at
        the Mosque, youth association gatherings at the Mosque and  at  the
        community farm in  Guildford  where  the  Association  holds  youth
        events. The various events are organised from the centre for  youth
        (those aged between 16 and 40) and for the elderly (those over 40).
        Mr Zafar explained that there was a difference  between  leafleting
        and preaching although the distribution of a leaflet was not merely
        that; it could lead to a discussion and this would then  be  called
        preaching. He had not directly seen the appellant  undertake  these
        activities but had seen the photos of him in Edgware Road  and  had
        spoken to other "boys" and sources who had confirmed  to  him  that
        the appellant had undertaken these activities. Mr  Zafar  confirmed
        he had known the appellant's family for some 8 years but  had  more
        active involvement  with  the  appellant  since  his  release  from
        detention. He explained that part of his role  from  the  community
        and security side was to mentor or arrange mentoring for boys going
        through difficult times. He said the appellant does community  work
        both at his direction and at  the  direction  of  his  local  Quaid
        (loosely translated as the local youth area  organisation)  between
        once and three times a week.


    16. Mr Zafar was asked specifically about the appellant's  faith  based
        activities:


             "Q.  Does he ever do anything without instruction, when he has
             not been told to do it?
             A.   Well, because he has been under this mentoring thing, so,
             obviously, if he has got things, then he will come up  -  like
             recently he was interested in setting up someone in  business,
             so he was going to get some advice for himself and then he has
             been going out and checking with  some  agencies  how  can  he
             start work, so, obviously, he is  using  his  own,  obviously,
             brain and, if he has got anything to do, then  he  do  consult
             and go out and look for it.
             THE CHAIRMAN:   When he attends the mosque on the  days  other
             than the Friday prayers, is that something he is  directed  to
             do or something that he does of his own free will?
              A.  No, his own free will.  There is no need to push him.
             JUDGE LANE: Is your mentoring of  him  primarily  directed  to
             getting him to engage in the charitable and other  works  that
             you have described or  to  what  extent  is  it  religious  in
             nature; to what extent are you attempting to bring him  deeper
             into the Ahmadi faith so that he may be able, for example,  to
             go on preaching to others?
             A.   This is to keep our youth connected rather  than  getting
             in ... because we live in a society where very easily you  can
             get into things, you can go out  and  ...   I  mean,  as  most
             things, I would have said that people go out and  their  spare
             time is (inaudible) dating and clubbing and this and that,  so
             we try to have things, have some sports matches or meetings or
             gatherings or seminars, so that youth can  get  together,  sit
             down and learn rather than just wasting their time.
             Q.   Is it fair summary of that answer  that  activity,  youth
             and community activities, are to  keep  the  youth  away  from
             distractions that may put them into problems with society ----
              A.  That is right.
              Q.  - and doing criminal offences.
     A.  Yes, and  also  to  enhance  their  knowledge  as  well  about  the
             religious - what their  beliefs  are  and  when  you  talk  to
             someone  how  can  you  tell  what  the  differences  are  and
             everything, so ...
             THE PRESIDENT:   And how do you rate AB's understanding of the
             religious faith?
             A.   In the beginning he was not that knowledgeable,  but  now
             with time he has learnt a lot and he does question  a  lot  as
             well,  anything  that  is  bothering  him,  if   he   is   not
             understanding, then he will try to get answers.  I think  that
             he searches on the net or there are a number of books that  he
             can read.  I know they have a big library at home."


    17. Mr Zafar, in his witness statement dated 3rd June 2013,  refers  to
        the appellant's involvement in night  security,  assisting  at  the
        annual convention in Alton and  that  since  his  imprisonment  and
        release he has seen a great change  in  him;  he  has  become  more
        mature and responsible [5] and [6].


    18. In his own witness statement [54] the appellant says

             "....It is clear that the open propagation of my  faith,  such
             as engaged in by me  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  not  be
             permitted in Pakistan. It is to be noted that I  was  discreet
             in  this  conduct  whilst  in  Pakistan  because  of   general
             hostility towards and disproval of Ahmadis by  the  mainstream
             Muslim population, legislative restriction and  fear  of  harm
             from extremists."


         Although this paragraph was not put to him directly, the  appellant
         in his oral evidence and indeed earlier in  his  witness  statement
         confirms that he was not devout in  his  religious  observance  and
         that his desire for such expressions of observance arose  following
         the death of his father and, of more consequence, his imprisonment.


          Business involvement


    19. The appellant claimed that he helped his mother, who  is  disabled,
        with her business interests. In his  witness  statement  dated  3rd
        June 2013 he states [29] that he looks after his mother's  business
        under an agreement and profit sharing and is  committed  to  slowly
        taking over the family business responsibilities and that he  plays
        a "vital role assisting [his] mother in  day  to  day  duties"[30].
        When asked specifically what he did he said "Accounts, maybe  audit
        accounts" and, that he would "do what she has  asked  [him]  to  do
        which she cannot understand. It is just generally helping her out."
         In his witness statement [47] the appellant said  he  manages  the
        family properties in the UK with tenants, letting  and  maintenance
        arrangements and that he  intends  "to  continue  to  assist  [his]
        vulnerable mother in managing these given her disability."


    20. The appellant's mother, when  first  sworn,  appeared  to  give  an
        impression of not understanding what was being  asked  of  her.  It
        rapidly became clear however that, in so far as her business acumen
        was concerned at least, she was astute and competently running  the
        family  business  and  philanthropic  interests  in  Pakistan  both
        through her visits to Pakistan and from the UK.  In  his  statement
        the appellant said that "Most  of  [their]  Ahmadi  employees  have
        already left Pakistan..." [40]. In oral evidence the appellant said
        there were about 150 employees; he  did  not  know  how  many  were
        Ahmadi and how many were not Ahmadi; there were quite a few  Ahmadi
        employees; that the manager was not Ahmadi.

    21. When asked what the appellant did to assist her she  said  that  he
        was


             ".....  in learning classes now, so he will be  entering  into
             supervision, but  he  never  goes  to  Pakistan,  he  will  do
             business here in the UK."

         When asked if he did anything at the moment she said

             "He looks after some of my  properties  and  he  is  going  to
             markets and trying to start some business."

        Mr Tufan put  to  her  that  the  appellant  had  said  he  audited
        accounts. She replied

             "We receive weekly reports from Pakistan and  some  reports  I
             check and some are checked by him"




22. In her witness statement dated 3rd June  2013  she  said  that  she  had
  struggled whilst the appellant was in prison to manage the properties  in
  the UK and that there is now a backlog of work to be dealt  with  by  him
  [15]. She refers in [17] to the appellant being her principal  carer  and
  that he has been helping her with her responsibilities, taking over  from
  her husband.

    23. Her other son, Z, was, she said, ill and unable to work hard. There
        was no indication from her that he was  involved  with  the  family
        business or interests.


      The death of the appellant's father


    24.  Although it is clear that the appellant's father was  a  prominent
        businessman and member of the Ahmadiya community who  was  murdered
        in a bomb attack on his Ahmadi mosque in Lahore, there  is  nothing
        in the evidence before us that threw  any  doubt  on  the  previous
        conclusion  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   that   this   was   an
        indiscriminate attack against those attending the mosque and not  a
        personal targeting of the appellant's father.






      Medical evidence


    25. There was  considerable  medical  evidence  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal which was taken  into  account  when  they  reached  their
        decision. In addition to that evidence, we had before us  a  letter
        from Falcon Road Medical  Centre  dated  9th  October  2012  and  a
        psychiatric report from Dr C Rehman dated 18th July 2012.


    26. According to the report from the  Medical  Centre  the  appellant's
        mother suffers from Type  II  diabetes  mellitus,  osteoporosis  of
        hips, spine and knees; vitamin D deficiency,  chronic  anxiety  and
        asthma; she is physically dependent upon the appellant. The  report
        states that the appellant helps her in running the  businesses  and
        concludes that his removal from England would be detrimental to her
        health.

    27. The psychiatric report by Dr Rehman sets out his assessment of  the
        appellant's "mental state, diagnosis,  prognosis,  risk  to  mental
        health if returned to Pakistan, ability to maintain himself in  the
        UK,  need  for  physical/emotional  support  in  the  UK  and   his
        fitness/ability to give witness and cross examination." Dr  Rehman,
        who is a consultant psychiatrist, prepared the report on the  basis
        of  information  from  the  appellant,  his  mother  and  documents
        provided by the solicitors. According to the report  the  appellant
        continues to assert his innocence of the  crime  of  which  he  was
        convicted. The report states he was diagnosed as suffering  from  a
        Severe Depressive  Episode  without  psychotic  symptoms  and  Post
        Traumatic Stress Disorder. He was then prescribed Escitalopram  and
        Mirtazapine. There was no up to date medical evidence produced.


      Consideration and findings


    28. In coming to our decision  we  have  considered  all  the  evidence
        before  us,  including  material  to  which  we  have  specifically
        referred and that we  have  not  specifically  mentioned.  We  have
        looked at all the evidence, including the medical evidence, in  the
        round before making any findings.

    29. The essence of the respondent's submission is  that  the  appellant
        was not at risk of  being  persecuted  merely  because  he  was  an
        Ahmadi;  that  this  appellant  does  not  fall  into  any  of  the
        categories considered to be at risk as referred to in MN  and  that
        there was no error in the assessment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        findings as regards Article 8.

    30. Mr Halim on behalf of the appellant in essence submitted  that  the
        appellant does fall within a  protected  risk  category:  he  is  a
        committed Ahmadi who will actively manifest his religion on  return
        to Pakistan; in addition or alternatively  he  comes  from  a  high
        profile Ahmadi family; that he has established family  and  private
        life in the UK such as engages Article 8 and to deport him would be
        disproportionate.



      International protection

    31. The current country guidance of MN replaces  earlier  guidance  and
        although specifically dealing with Qadiani Ahmadis, Lahori  Ahmadis
        are also  included  in  the  guidance.  The  italicised  head  note
        reflects the conclusions of the Tribunal set out in paragraphs  118
        to 127 inclusive of the determination[1].


    32. The issue to be determined by us  is  the  extent,  importance  and
        nature of the appellant's religious identity and observance in  the
        light of his claimed post imprisonment manifestation  of  religious
        practice and belief and the appellant's intention and/or desire  to
        continue such manifestation (such as it may be) on  his  return  to
        Pakistan. In reaching our decision we have, in accordance with  the
        guidance given in MN considered not only the oral evidence and that
        of the witnesses and the documentary evidence but the evidence from
        the Ahmadiyya Association UK as set out in the 6th June letter  and
        from Mr Zafar. We are satisfied for the reasons set out below  that
        the appellant is not reasonably likely to engage or wish to  engage
        in behaviour set out in paragraph 2(i) of  the  italicised  country
        guidance in MN. We are also satisfied,  for  the  reasons  set  out
        below that the appellant is not reasonably likely to be targeted by
        non-state actors on return for religious persecution by  reason  of
        his prominent social and/or business profile.

      Personal religious belief

    33. The appellant's evidence was that although Ahmadi by birth and from
        a prominent Ahmadi family it is only since his criminal  conviction
        that his religious observance has come to be a significant  element
        of his belief, such observance  involving  discourse  with  others,
        including  preaching  and  waqar-e-amal  (cleaning,  clearing   up,
        looking after guests, helping in the organisation of  the  branch).
        Although he claims in one paragraph of his witness  statement  that
        he was prevented through fear from overt observance and practice of
        his faith whilst in Pakistan, we do not accept this  assertion.  It
        contradicts all of his other evidence which is to the  effect  that
        his faith has become more important to him and become  overt  since
        his imprisonment and release from detention; prior to that  he  had
        faith and personal belief. He  was  asked  if  he  went  to  mosque
        regularly and he replied that he "used to go to mosque a  lot,  but
        not as much as [he] did when [he] came out of prison." He was asked
        when his commitment began and he replied "in prison". There was  no
        evidence before us other than as set out in  [54]  of  his  witness
        statement that he had manifested his belief in any  way  whatsoever
        whilst in  Pakistan.  In  submissions  Mr  Halim  referred  to  the
        appellant as having "come to consciousness in prison" and wished to
        rely upon the appellant's stated intention to  proselytise  as  set
        out in [54] "notwithstanding the drafting of the statement."

    34. We have not found the appellant reliable in his evidence to  us  as
        to the extent of  his  current  religious  observance.  There  were
        significant discrepancies in his professed activity - in particular
        the number of occasions he claimed to preach and where he preached.
        He did not know the name of the person who ran the mosque which  he
        attended (he claimed) every day; he did not know the full  name  of
        the  person  who  organised  the  preaching/leafleting   activities
        despite claiming lengthy involvement in preaching since  about  the
        end of May 2012 ie about a year after his release from detention on
        licence. The appellant was very uncertain about the date of the two
        photos that were  produced  to  show  him  preaching.   After  much
        thought he tentatively suggested that  they  were  taken  in  about
        August 2012 although we note that the individuals  in  the  picture
        are heavily clothed and there are no leaves on the trees.

    35.  There is no photographic or other evidence to support his claim to
        have been preaching for a lengthy period. The two  photos  produced
        do no more than show that on one occasion during the  autumn/winter
        he was standing at a  stall  handing  out  leaflets.  Although  the
        appellant's inability to remember when the photographs  were  taken
        may be no more than a problem of memory as to detail, it  does  not
        suggest that the event was a  particularly  important  one  in  the
        appellant's mind, and there is no support for  a  proposition  that
        his inability to remember the particular event was because  he  was
        doing similar activity so frequently. His witness statement  as  to
        his professed  activity  in  Pakistan  up  to  the  age  of  15  is
        inconsistent with his oral evidence and the balance of his  witness
        statement was clear: he was not active in his religious  observance
        whilst he lived in Pakistan  before  coming  to  the  UK  aged  15.
        Although he claims to wish to continue  the  manifestation  of  his
        religious observance in Pakistan as in the UK this claim is in that
        same paragraph [54]. We do not accept this accurately reflects  his
        intention given the lack of reference in the rest of his  statement
        or in his oral evidence to  active,  devout  manifestation  of  his
        faith and when considered alongside the other evidence  before  us.
        We conclude that a significant part of  his  written  statement  is
        unreliable, and much of his oral evidence as to his  present  state
        of religious  observance  is  vague,  unsupportive  and  by  itself
        unconvincing.


    36. Mr Zafar, who has been mentoring the  appellant  since  his  arrest
        prior to conviction  and  in  particular  since  his  release  from
        detention, has no direct  personal  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
        claimed manifestation of his  religious  belief.  He  said  he  had
        received reports from various individuals  but  none  attended  the
        hearing to give evidence  before  us  and  there  were  no  witness
        statements. The person whom the  appellant  claimed  organised  the
        preaching and leafleting activities (whose full name the  appellant
        did not know) did not give evidence. Despite the  6th  June  letter
        referring to the appellant preaching to  friends  and  contacts  in
        London, none were named and none  gave  evidence  to  that  effect.
        Given that his  claim to be  actively  involved  in  preaching  and
        furthering the observance of his religion in the UK where  there is
        no inhibition to  his  doing  so  is  a  critical  element  in  the
        assessment as to what he would do in Pakistan , the  lack  of  such
        evidence is significant.

    37.  We have paid particular attention to  the  6th  June  letter.  The
        first  numbered  paragraph  of  the  letter  pays  tribute  to  the
        appellant's father, his role in the Ahmadiyya community in  Lahore,
        his business and philanthropic interests and his death.  There  was
        no challenge to these references by Mr Tufan. The  second  numbered
        paragraph which refers specifically to the appellant was,  however,
        strongly challenged by Mr Tufan.

    38. That paragraph reads as follows:

             "Since his arrival in the United Kingdom, the President of our
             Fazal Mosque branch in London has confirmed to the Head Office
             in writing dated 4th June 2013 that [the appellant] has:
                i) Observed prayers in congregation regularly.
               ii) Attended the mosque for Friday prayers with regularity.
              iii) Distributed introductory leaflets about Islam  and  other
                   literature at Tabligh  (preaching)  stalls  held  in  the
                   Edgware Road area and in Surrey villages each week
               iv) Preached to his friends  and  contacts  in  London  about
                   Islam.
                v) He appears to have a passion for propagating and  telling
                   others about his faith and will try anyway to strike up a
                   conversation  with  a  new  person  and  then   gradually
                   introduce to him Islamic values and why such  values  are
                   welcome for this society.
               vi) He has been performing waqar-e-amal (lit. manual  labour,
                   in this context meaning  undertaking  cleaning,  clearing
                   up, looking after the guest, feeding them, helping in the
                   organisation of meetings of the branch).
              vii) Has shown a marked change in his character by cooperating
                   with the community's office bearers  in  undertaking  any
                   responsibility assigned to him. He has been very keen  to
                   help in undertaking security and surveillance duties  and
                   has worked for late hours in the car park at  our  Annual
                   Convention held in Hampshire each year.
             viii) Paid his contributions as a member regularly.
               ix) His mother is disabled and is dependent  upon  the  above
                   named person who looks after her with great care."


         The letter concludes with


             "5.  The [appellant] has been and remains an active member and
             his and his family's  very  strong  links,  participation  and
             devotion to  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  community  show  that  he
             attaches a significant importance to his identity as an Ahmadi
             Muslim...."

    39. In  particular  Mr  Tufan  referred  to  the  appellant's  lack  of
        knowledge of who the President of the Fazal mosque was; the lack of
        production of the letter of 4th June 2013; that the information  in
        the letter has come at least third hand and lacks specific  detail;
        that the appellant had not claimed to distribute leaflets or preach
        in Surrey villages and when this was specifically  put  to  him  he
        displayed ignorance of this claim; there was no evidence for  2(iv)
        and 2(v) other than appears in the letter; it was not clear to whom
        the phrase "Since his arrival in the UK" refers - to the  appellant
        who has been in the UK for the last 11 years or  the  President  of
        the mosque. The 6th June letter is signed  by  Mansoor  Ahmed  Shah
        whom the appellant initially said he did not know and then said was
        the President and then said he was not.


    40. The evidence before  us  was  that  the  appellant  undertook  such
        activities  as  he  did  under  the  direct  instruction  of  those
        mentoring him. The appellant comes from a prominent  Ahmadi  family
        and Mr Zafar, and the Ahmadiyya community generally, have  taken  a
        very laudable active interest in ensuring that this appellant  (and
        it seems other young people with  similar  or  potentially  similar
        difficulties) does not re-offend and that he is enabled to  develop
        into a young man who will not discredit the  community.  What  this
        appellant does not, from the evidence before us, do is  participate
        of  his  own  volition  in  preaching  or  other   activities;   he
        participates in activities he is required to  undertake  and  to  a
        very large extent these involve assistance at  events  rather  than
        initiating leafleting or preaching. That is  not  to  minimise  the
        importance of such activities but in so far as  this  appellant  is
        concerned the evidence before us leads us to conclude that were  it
        not for the strictures placed upon him by the community leaders  he
        would not undertake those activities.


    41. We note of  course  that  the  country  guidance  in  MN  at  [122]
        (italicised words paragraph 9) indicates that evidence from the  UK
        Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  upon   in
        Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK  where
        the appellant is worshipping is likely to be highly relevant. In MN
        Dr Ayaz (a senior member of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK and
        National President of the UK  Chapter)  is  recorded  as  being  of
        particular  assistance  in  describing  how  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
        Association UK is run and  that  the  Association  has  a  rigorous
        system for verifying that a person is  an  Ahmadi  ([217(iv)]).  Of
        course there is no dispute but that this appellant is an Ahmadi.

    42. Dr W, a Doctor of Philosophy from Punjab University  gave  evidence
        in MN that Tabligh and da'wa  (preaching  and  propagation  of  the
        faith) are "for Ahmadis the lifeblood  and  raison  d'etre  of  the
        movement......tabligh can take various  forms  as  well  as  direct
        preaching and that  "individual  efforts,  individual  actions  and
        individual personal examples are classed  as  'the  most  important
        ingredients of tabligh'""[161(i)]. The importance  of  tabligh  was
        underlined by Imam Rashed (Imam of the  London  Ahmadi  Mosque  and
        missionary  in  charge,   planning   and   supervising   missionary
        activities  in  the  UK)  in  his  evidence  [195].  He  said  that
        "Propagation goes beyond just leading a good life. Going from  door
        to door has attracted dislike so instead Ahmadis try (in the UK) to
        invite and meet people for one to one sessions" [200].

    43. There is no challenge to that evidence in  this  appeal,  but  this
        appeal concerns not whether someone is an Ahmadi, but the extent to
        which someone who was not an active member of the faith  either  in
        Pakistan or  first arriving in the United Kingdom  has  now  become
        one, since arrest and detention for  a  serious  criminal  offence.
        Whilst it is possible that a combination of his father's murder and
        his awakening spiritual needs in detention have made the  appellant
        into a fundamentally different person, we must also be alert to the
        possible re shaping of his asylum claim in  the  light  of  the  MN
        decision. We have found the appellant's own testimony  written  and
        oral not to be persuasive; although we  found  Mr  Zahar  to  be  a
        credible witness we have found the limited evidence he  could  give
        about  the   appellant's   personal   commitment   and   activities
        significant.  The 6th June letter does not identify with any rigour
        how  this  appellant's  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom   were
        investigated. Much of what is said is reportage and  assertion  and
        the evidence before us does not sustain  those  assertions  to  the
        extent that it appears that some may be in error: for  example  the
        appellant preaching to contacts, leafleting in Surrey and elsewhere
        each week. There was no evidence before us as to how the  Ahmadiyya
        Association undertakes its  inquiries  as  to  an  individual's  UK
        activities or on  what  basis  they  set  out  and  describe  those
        activities. In so far as this appellant is concerned  the  lack  of
        any corroborating evidence, such evidence being  readily  available
        if it existed together with  the  contradictions  in  the  evidence
        before us and what appears in the letter,  results  in  us  placing
        little weight upon the description of the appellant's activities in
        the UK as set out in the 6th June letter.

    44. In a case such as the present where credibility  is  a  significant
        issue,  the more that  a letter from the Ahmadiyya  Association  UK
        as to  an  individual's  activities  here  can  be  supported  with
        specific information the more likely they are to be  given  greater
        weight. We would expect the Association to  be  in  a  position  to
        explain the source of the information given in the letter, how  the
        source is able to speak to such matters and what records  are  kept
        of the activities referred to in the letter.   Overall we  are  not
        persuaded by the evidence that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
        likelihood that the appellant is a spiritually active Ahmadi who is
        committed to preaching or similar acts of proselytising in Pakistan
        and has a well founded fear of persecution arising therefrom.


    45. The appellant claims that his  membership  of  a  prominent  Ahmadi
        family, particularly where the senior  member  of  the  family  was
        killed, albeit not targeted as an individual Ahmadi, renders him at
        greater risk of being persecuted on return  to  Pakistan.  We  note
        that the family continues to hold business  interests  in  Pakistan
        and to  run  a  clinic  and  other  philanthropic  activities.  The
        appellant's mother continues to travel  to  Pakistan,  despite  her
        disabilities, about three times a  year.  She  says  she  does  not
        travel with her children because she would not wish them to  be  in
        danger. Although she says she goes secretly, she transacts business
        whilst in Pakistan. The purpose of her visits is to ensure that the
        businesses are running efficiently and smoothly. We do  not  accept
        that she travels in secret or,  once  there  that  she  visits  the
        businesses in secret. We note that she says that whilst  there  she
        stays in the family home which is heavily armed and that additional
        guards are employed whilst she is  there.  There  was  no  evidence
        before us as to threats received, other than that which she gave to
        the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was  disbelieved.  We  are   not
        satisfied that she is the target of threats whilst in Pakistan. The
        appellant does not run the business and his role in  the  business,
        such as it is, is peripheral. There was no evidence that  he  would
        take a greater role in Pakistan than he does here. We are satisfied
        that returning as the  son  of  the  deceased  owner  of  a  family
        business will not place him at any greater risk than his mother who
        visits and continues to visit regularly and is not threatened.


    46. We have taken  account,  in  reaching  this  conclusion,  that  the
        appellant is the eldest son and that the family were well respected
        in Lahore as  prominent  Ahmadis.  We  note  that  in  MN,  it  was
        concluded that MN was in need of protection. MN  was  himself  high
        profile; he was not  a  family  member  of  someone  who  was  high
        profile. The appellant ZN in MN was a Doctor in a clinic  owned  by
        her whereas this appellant is a family member of the family who own
        the clinic. There was no credible evidence  before  us  that  those
        employed in the appellant's family business or clinic have received
        threats

    47. There was no evidence brought to our attention that individuals who
        have not established  a  desire  to  proselytise  albeit  they  are
        members of prominent  Ahmadi  families  -  are  at  risk  of  being
        persecuted. An Ahmadi who is a member of a prominent Ahmadi  family
        whether  in  terms  of  religious  observance   or   business   and
        philanthropic activities is not,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
        before us, at risk merely through this family connection.

    48. We conclude that the appellant is not at risk of  being  persecuted
        for his religious belief either in fact or imputed and he is not at
        risk of sustaining serious harm if returned to Pakistan.


      Article 8

    49.  The First-tier Tribunal held that it was not  disproportionate  to
        remove the appellant to Pakistan. The grounds seeking permission to
        appeal the First-tier Tribunal determination challenged the  weight
        placed by the First-tier Tribunal upon the medical evidence  as  to
        the appellant's mother's health.  The  26  page  skeleton  argument
        dated 22nd July 2012 relied upon  by  the  appellant  before  Judge
        Goldstein refers in the last 4 pages to the legal principles to  be
        applied when considering deportation and Article 8 and  essentially
        objects to the weight placed  by  the  Tribunal  upon  the  various
        factors relied upon by the appellant.


    50. The First-tier Tribunal determination set out the law on Article 8,
        considered the evidence before it and reached a conclusion on  that
        evidence that the  deportation  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
        interference in the appellant's  private  and  family  life.  Judge
        Goldstein did not find an error of law in that  decision.  Although
        not argued in terms by Mr Halim that he was seeking  permission  to
        appeal the Article 8 decision, in response to our  question  as  to
        what was missing from the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  that
        requires us to rebalance the conclusion, Mr Halim referred  to  the
        passage of time. We reminded Mr Halim that no error of law had been
        found with regards to Article 8; we asked him to identify  anything
        that would change that conclusion. He said that he was not  relying
        on the medical evidence that had been submitted  after  the  First-
        tier Tribunal decision but relied upon the  cumulative  aspects  of
        private life including the further 20 months that has elapsed; that
        there have been positive developments in the appellant's  behaviour
        and conduct, that the family picture has not changed  and  that  he
        was highly unlikely to commit further offences. He referred to  the
        Maslov criteria.

    51.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  reached  its  decision  after   careful
        assessment of the evidence in accordance with the  requisite  legal
        principles. As accepted by Mr  Halim,  the  additional  factor  now
        before us is that a further 20 months has elapsed since the hearing
        before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  appellant  has  not  been
        involved in any further criminality.

    52. We are satisfied that there was no error of law in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal decision as regards Article 8; there was  nothing  in  the
        submissions before us by Mr Halim that enabled or  required  us  to
        reach a different conclusion. There  was  no  significant  evidence
        before us that differed from the First-tier Tribunal  determination
        such that the decision should be overturned; even if there had been
        an error of law as regards Article 8 we would have reached the same
        conclusion namely that removal was not disproportionate.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  regards
    international protection involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law.

     That part of the First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

     We re-make that part of the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on
    asylum and ECHR Article 3 grounds. The appellant is not entitled to the
    grant of humanitarian protection.


                                    Date 17th September 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
-----------------------
[1] In so far as is relevant to this appeal this reads as follows:

      1. ....

      2. (i)  The background to the risk faced  by  Ahmadis  is  legislation
         that restricts the way in which they are able  openly  to  practise
         their faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other
         forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
         elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding
         open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
         amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions   include   openly
         referring to one's place of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
         religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted
         to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
         Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a  fine
         and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of  the
         death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there
         is a risk of lengthy  incarceration  if  the  penalty  is  imposed.
         There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
         actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes the filing  of
         First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step  in  any  criminal
         proceedings) which can result in detentions whilst prosecutions are
         being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state
         actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

         (ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general  for  Ahmadis
         to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private  or
         in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without  infringing  domestic
         Pakistan law.

      3. (i) If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate that it  is  of  particular
         importance to his religious identity to practise and  manifest  his
         faith openly in Pakistan in defiance of  the  restrictions  in  the
         Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging
         in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she is likely
         to be in need of protection, in the light of the serious nature  of
         the sanctions that  potentially  apply  as  well  as  the  risk  of
         prosecution under section 295C for blasphemy.

         (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits  the  description
         just given to avoid engaging in behaviour  described  in  paragraph
         2(i)  above  ("paragraph  2(i)  behaviour")  to  avoid  a  risk  of
         prosecution.

      4. ...

      5. .....  Evidence likely to be relevant  includes  confirmation  from
         the UK Ahmadi headquarters regarding the activities  relied  on  in
         Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK  where
         the claimant is worshipping.

      6.  The  next  step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
         intentions or wishes as  to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
         Pakistan.  This is  relevant  because  of  the  need  to  establish
         whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of
         the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The
         burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
         to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
         permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
         particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
         religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all  the
         evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also  be  relevant.
         If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
         of protection.

      7. ....

      8. ....

      9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on post-arrival conversion  or
         revival in belief and  practice  will  require  careful  evidential
         analysis. This will probably include consideration of  evidence  of
         the head of the claimant's local United  Kingdom  Ahmadi  Community
         and from the UK headquarters,  the  latter  particularly  in  cases
         where there has been a conversion.  Any  adverse  findings  in  the
         claimant's account as a whole may be relevant to the assessment  of
         likely behaviour on return.

     10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably likely  to
         engage or wish  to  engage  in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour  is,  in
         general, not at real risk on return  to  Pakistan,  judicial  fact-
         finders may in certain cases need to consider whether  that  person
         would nevertheless be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state
         actors on return for religious persecution  by  reason  of  his/her
         prominent social and/or business profile.


