
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

ONM (Remittal to FtT with directions) Jamaica [2015] UKUT 00517 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 July 2015                               |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

                                   Between

                                     ONM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr J Wilson of JMW Wilson Solicitors LLP
Respondent:   Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     i) The  power  conferred  on  the  Upper  Tribunal,  exercisable  upon
        remittal to the First-tier Tribunal, by  section  12(b)(i)  of  the
        Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to  give  directions  is
        distinct from the power  conferred  by  section  12(3)(b)  to  give
        procedural directions.


    ii)  Directions  under  section  12(b)(i)  encompass  matters  such  as
        guidance on the law and the scope of the appeal upon remittal.   In
        formulating such directions, the Upper Tribunal must  be  alert  to
        the jurisdictional limits of the First-tier Tribunal.


   iii) Directions under section 12(3)(b) relate to  matters  of  procedure
        concerning the conduct of the remitted appeal.

    iv) Both powers are to be exercised in  a  manner  which  promotes  the
        interests of justice and gives effect to the overriding objective.

     v) The decision in PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  251  does  not
        rule conclusively that the First-tier Tribunal (and, on appeal, the
        Upper Tribunal) has no jurisdiction to consider a ground of  appeal
        which  canvasses  the  frustration  of  a  substantive   legitimate
        expectation, bearing in mind the "otherwise not in accordance  with
        the law" statutory ground of appeal enshrined in section 84 of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. In order to comprehend this decision it is  necessary  to  outline  the
    somewhat chequered and protracted history of this appeal. In summary:

        i) The Appellant, who is a national of Jamaica, was the subject  of
           a decision by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
           (the "Secretary of State"), dated 02 September 2011, to  make  a
           deportation order against him qua foreign criminal under section
           32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Simultaneously, his asylum claim
           was refused.


       ii) By its determination dated  10  February  2012,  the  First-tier
           Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the Appellant's ensuing appeal.

      iii) Permission to appeal having been  granted,  there  were  several
           listings before the Upper Tribunal and, during this  phase,  the
           West Midlands Police ("WMP") became involved  as  an  interested
           party.  This arose out  of  the  Appellant's  quest  to  acquire
           certain  documents  and  information  from  this  source.   This
           yielded certain evidence, including the oral  testimony  of  two
           police officers.

       iv) This rather sluggish phase culminated in an order of  the  Upper
           Tribunal dated 28 January 2015 setting aside the decision of the
           FtT for error of law and making further directions.

        v) This further interlocutory hearing  was  conducted  on  16  July
           2015.



APPEAL TO THE FtT

2.   The Appellant is a national of Jamaica, aged 42 years. He was  lawfully
    present in the United Kingdom between 2001 and 2003, when his leave  to
    remain expired. This appeal  originates  in  deportation  action  taken
    against him by the Secretary of State, in September 2011,  precipitated
    by the Appellant's convictions in respect of  certain  drugs  offences.
    Previously,  in  response  to  the   customary   "minded   to   deport"
    notification, the Appellant had made a human rights and  asylum  claim.
    This is described in the ensuing decision notice in these terms:


         "Your claim for asylum is based upon your fear that if returned you
         would face mistreatment due to being a drugs informant in  the  UK,
         which you claim is part of a social group in Jamaica.   Your  claim
         for humanitarian protection is based upon your fear that you  would
         face unlawful killing if returned to Jamaica ....


         You claim to have acted as  an  informant  from  2006  until  2008,
         giving information against members of [a  named  group].   You  met
         [A&B]  whom you previously  knew  in  Jamaica  ...............  who
         asked you to be a drugs courier for them.  You went to  the  police
         in the UK for help and gave them information.   This  led  to  [CD]
         being convicted and removed from the UK.  You provided  information
         about other individuals too ......


         On the last case you worked on you were set up by the drug gang  as
         they suspected you of being a mole ........  The gang then knew you
         had been acting as an informant. You were threatened by members  of
         the gang .....  [who] .... got into your house on one occasion ....
          they then beat and raped [your partner] .....   [later]  the  gang
         found you and took you to a location where they  tortured  you  for
         three days ....  They told you that you had to pay  off  your  debt
         for acting as a police informer by carrying drugs ...


         You state that you would be found if returned to Jamaica as it is a
         small island and [X  and Y] run drugs from the airport and  nothing
         would get past them.  You state that you  could  not  approach  the
         police in Jamaica as they would not help you ...   The  people  you
         informed on are either in Jamaica or travel back to Jamaica."

    All of the ensuing litigation developments have unfolded  against  this
background.


3.    The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  has  the  following   principal
ingredients:

      a) Drug informants who return  to  Jamaica  do  not  form  part  of  a
         specific social group, lacking an immutable social characteristic.


      b) In any event,  there  is  adequate  state  protection  through  the
         Jamaican Government's Witness Protection Scheme ("WPS").

      c) The  Appellant's  bare  assertion  that  protection  would  not  be
         available from the Jamaican police was disbelieved.

      d) The Appellant's claim to have acted as a police  informant  in  the
         United Kingdom was not considered credible.

      e) He could safely relocate in Jamaica in any event.

      f) The Appellant had secured atonement, having acted as a drug courier
         in response to and in compliance with the threat  alleged  by  him,
         there was no evidence that he was of any enduring interest to those
         whom he claims to fear.

    His claims for humanitarian protection  and  discretionary  leave  were
    also refused.

 4. There are striking features of the appeal process conducted by the FtT:
    the reception of evidence in the form of a letter from  the  WMP  which
    was undisclosed to any party; the receipt of oral evidence from  a  WMP
    police officer in camera; and the receipt of undisclosed evidence  from
    a second police officer in the parties' absence.  Acting on the  police
    evidence, the Tribunal found that the Appellant  was  registered  as  a
    covert human intelligence source ("CHIS") by the WMP for a period of 15
    months  in  2006/2007,   receiving   certain   financial   rewards   in
    consideration of the  provision  of  information.  It  made  a  further
    finding that the Appellant's claims about the quantity  of  information
    provided by him to the WMP had  been  "greatly  exaggerated".  This  is
    followed by further findings:

          "...  We accept the police version as they are  under  a  duty  to
          keep accurate records.  We note that there  is  no  suggestion  on
          police records that the Appellant would  have  been  known  as  an
          informant.  We find that the Appellant, if he wishes to, can  keep
          that former relationship with the police private ....


          There is no suggestion that his involvement with  the  significant
          crime for which he was convicted was in any way directly connected
          to his former role as a police informant.  We find that  there  is
          no evidence that the people with whom he conspired to supply Class
          A drugs were persons on whom he had informed."

     The Appellant's claim that he was known to be a police informant  by  a
    major Jamaican drugs dealer was disbelieved.  Ditto his claim about the
    attack on his partner.  The incongruity highlighted in the Secretary of
    State's decision regarding the Appellant's willingness to reside in the
    United Kingdom but not Jamaica was adopted. So too was the Secretary of
    State's assessment of the availability of state protection in  Jamaica.
    The Tribunal also accepted the Secretary of State's assessment  of  the
    availability  of  internal  relocation,  considering  the   Appellant's
    asserted fear of prosecution to be "localised to his home  area".   His
    appeal was rejected on all grounds accordingly.

SUBSEQUENT PROCEEDINGS

 5. The subsequent course and progress of the Appellant's  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal are charted in [1] above.  At this juncture we draw  attention
    to the grant of permission to appeal to  the  FtT  which  contains  the
    following material passages:

         "The determination makes no mention  that  another  police  officer
         gave evidence ....


         The officer was  unnamed  and  remained  anonymous  throughout  the
         hearing.  The evidence of this unnamed officer was  given  only  to
         the panel in the absence of the parties ....  [and]  has  therefore
         been  hidden  from  the  Appellant  ....   [who]  was  denied   any
         opportunity of cross examining that unnamed witness.  Additionally,
         when [the identified police witness] gave evidence it  was  in  the
         form of a statement which was read by the panel in private and  was
         not shown to either of the parties."

    In summary,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  account  of  the
    procedurally unfair process whereby the FtT conducted  the  appeal  and
    made its decision.


 6. We have  also  paid  attention  to  the  "Further  Grounds  of  Appeal"
    document. It would appear that this was generated following a change of
    legal representation.  This advances three additional complaints:

     a) The FtT erred in law in  accepting  unsubstantiated  assertions  on
        behalf of the Secretary  of  State  regarding  convictions  of  the
        Appellant in 2005/2006.


     b) The FtT further erred in law in failing to engage with an important
        aspect of the Appellant's case, namely that   "...   at  a  meeting
        with his handler and an immigration official, he had been  promised
        that leave to remain would be granted to him and his  family",  the
        Secretary of State having failed to respond to this assertion.


     c) The FtT committed the further error of law of finding that the  WPP
        would be available to the Appellant in Jamaica, as  this  does  not
        extend to police informants in  the  United  Kingdom  and  provides
        inadequate protection in any event.

 7. At a hearing on 28 January  2015  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT.   It  did  so  by  concession  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The FtT's decision was set aside on the  basis  of
    the grant of permission to appeal  rehearsed  in  [5]  above.   It  was
    determined that the case would be remitted to a differently constituted
    FtT for fresh hearing. However, the terms  of  the  remittal  were  not
    finalised as the Appellant wished to rely upon more extensive  grounds.
    This resulted in the subsequent  provision  of  a  submission  entitled
    "Permission to  Advance  Additional  Grounds".   The  proposed  further
    grounds may be summarised as follows:

        i)    The Secretary of State's assessment that the police would not
           agree to engaging the Appellant as an  informant  without  first
           investigating the background is flawed.


       ii)    "Secondly, the Home Office together with the law  enforcement
           agencies responsible for engaging the Appellant as a  CHIS  owed
           him a pre-existing duty of care, by reason of  his  status,  for
           his  well  being  and  safety  .....  [which]  incorporates   an
           obligation not to send him back to Jamaica ...


     This duty of care is consistent with the duty owed by the Home  Office
           to the Appellant under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR".


      iii)    The enforced  return  of  the  Appellant  would  frustrate  a
           substantive legitimate expectation generated by the promise made
           to him that in consideration of acting as an informant  he   "..
           would be provided leave to remain  in  the  UK  indefinitely  or
           lawfully".


       iv)    The proposed enforced return  of  the  Appellant  to  Jamaica
           without first conducting a proper risk assessment  breaches  his
           rights under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR.

        v)    The application of sections 117A - 117C of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  militates
           against the Appellant's deportation.

       vi)    The deportation order  is  in  breach  of  the  Secretary  of
           State's duties under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
           Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009 Act").

 8. By section 82(3A) (a) and  (b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 a decision that section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 (the "2007 Act") applies is an  appealable  immigration  decision.
    Under section 84(1) the permitted grounds of appeal include:

         "(c) that the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998 ...


          e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the  law
             ...


          [and]


          (g)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of the immigration decision would breach the United
             Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or would  be
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as  being
             incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."


 9. In [1] of the determination  of  the  FtT,  it  is  recorded  that  the
    Appellant's appeal was against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    02 September 2011 to make a deportation order  against  him.   This  is
    incorrect, as appears from the Secretary of State's Notice of  Decision
    dated 06 September 2011, bearing the title "Decision that section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies".  Within the text of the latter the
    Appellant's asylum claim is considered and rejected.  It is clear  from
    the ensuing  Notice  of  Appeal  [Form  IAFT-1]  that  the  Appellant's
    challenge was focused mainly on  the  asylum  refusal  aspect.  In  its
    "Summary of Decisions", the FtT stated, inter alia:

         "We dismiss the Appellant's appeal against deportation....


         We uphold the section 72 certificate in respect of the asylum claim
         ...."

     This must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State adverse  to  the  Appellant  against  which  he  was
    appealing. We consider the correct analysis to be the following:

     a) The Appellant was appealing against a decision that  section  32(5)
        of the 2007 Act applies to him.

     b) As a result, all of the grounds of appeal listed in  section  84(1)
        and (3) of the 2002 Act were, in principle, available to him.  This
        continues to apply, given that the appeal is to be remitted to  the
        FtT.

10. The next stage in the analysis  requires  consideration  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's powers.  These are contained in section 12 of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").  Having already found
    the decision of the FtT to be vitiated by material error  of  law,  the
    following provisions apply:

         "(2) The Upper Tribunal - ...


              (b) ... must either -


                    i) remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
                       directions for its reconsideration, or


                   ii) remake the decision.

           3) In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the Upper Tribunal  may
              also -

             (a)  direct that the members of the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
                  are chosen to reconsider the case are not to be  the  same
                  as those who made the decision that has been set aside;

             (b)   give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with   the
                  reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal."

    Having already decided that remittal is appropriate, at this  stage  we
    are empowered, upon remittal, to give both "directions" and "procedural
    directions" to the FtT.  We consider that these are the powers  engaged
    by the Appellant's application to advance additional grounds of  appeal
    to the FtT.


11. In our judgment, these powers are to be exercised  in  a  manner  which
    promotes the interests of justice and gives effect  to  the  overriding
    objective.  We consider that  the  legislature  has  made  a  conscious
    decision between "directions"  and  "procedural  directions".   In  our
    view, the former encompass matters such as guidance on the law and  the
    scope of the appeal upon remittal. This is supported by  the  statement
    in Sarkar v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 195 that the Upper Tribunal  "...  has
    power to give directions which limit the scope of the  reconsideration"
    by the FtT: see [15].  In contrast, "procedural directions" are clearly
    directed to matters of  procedure,  relating  to  the  conduct  of  the
    remitted appeal.

12. Having regard to the highly unusual features of  this  case  and  given
    that we find nothing frivolous or vexatious in those additional grounds
    which are, in principle, viable we propose to exercise  our  discretion
    to make directions which will enable the FtT to consider those  aspects
    of the Appellant's challenge to the Secretary of State's decision which
    it has jurisdiction to determine.  We give effect to this  approach  in
    the following way, with reference to our summary of the six  additional
    grounds which the Appellant wishes to advance in [7] above:

          i)       We  consider  the  first  proposed   additional   ground
             inappropriate for two reasons.  First, it  does  not  disclose
             any arguable material legal defect in the Secretary of State's
             decisions.  Second, it is overtaken in any event by the  FtT's
             finding  that  the  Appellant  was  an  informant  (albeit  in
             considerably narrower  terms  than  he  would  wish)  and  the
             reality that there is no longer any challenge to this fact  on
             behalf of the Secretary of State.


         ii)      We reject the second of the proposed  additional  grounds
             for the fundamental reason that the FtT is  not  empowered  to
             consider and determine a  claim  by  the  Appellant  that  the
             Secretary of State owed him a duty of care and, in making  the
             impugned decisions, has acted in breach  thereof.  This  is  a
             claim  which,  in  our  estimation,  can  be  pursued  by  the
             Appellant only by a private law action against  the  Secretary
             of State based on torts such as negligence and misfeasance  in
             public office. These lie outwith the jurisdictional  remit  of
             the FtT.

        iii)      We  permit  the  Appellant  to  advance  his  substantive
             legitimate expectation ground since, in our judgment, it is at
             least arguable that an immigration decision which frustrates a
             substantive  legitimate  expectation  is   embraced   by   the
             "otherwise not in accordance with the law" statutory ground of
             appeal enshrined in section 84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act.  In thus
             deciding we acknowledge the decision of the Court of Appeal in
             PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 251.   It  is  unnecessary
             for us to decide  whether  that  decision  imposes  a  blanket
             prohibition on the  canvassing  of  a  substantive  legitimate
             expectation upon appeal to the FtT, restricting such challenge
             exclusively to an application for judicial  review:  [32]-[34]
             of  the   judgment   suggest   otherwise.    The   alternative
             construction of the Court of Appeal's decision may be that  in
             that particular case the decision of the FtT  could  not  have
             erred in law on this ground since this  was  not  one  of  the
             Appellant's original grounds of appeal. We  are  mindful  that
             the "otherwise not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  statutory
             provision does not feature in the decision  of  the  Court  of
             Appeal.   Furthermore,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions
             belong to the realm of public law (Bugdacay v SSHD  [1987]  AC
             514, at 522-533) wherein reposes the doctrine  of  substantive
             legitimate  expectations.   We  confine  ourselves  to   these
             observations, while acknowledging that  further  consideration
             of this issue by the Upper Tribunal and the  Court  of  Appeal
             will probably be required.


    (iv)& (v) We  grant   the  Appellant's   application  to   extend   his
             grounds  of  appeal  to encompass  asserted  infringements  of
             Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR, without further  prescription,  save
             to emphasise what we have said in (ii) above.

    (vi) The Appellant's grounds may also be  extended  to  incorporate  an
             asserted breach of section 55 of the 2009 Act.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

13. We decide and direct as follows:

          i)  This appeal is hereby remitted to  a  differently  constituted
             FtT for the purpose of a fresh hearing and decision.


         ii)   We  preserve  none  of  the   findings   contained   in   the
             determination of the FtT promulgated on 15 February 2012.    In
             thus deciding, we  draw  attention  to  the  evolution  in  the
             Secretary of State's position noted in [12](i) above.


        iii)  The Appellant's solicitors will serve on the Respondent a  new
             grounds of appeal pleading, together with  a  new  indexed  and
             paginated appeal bundle and a draft statement of  agreed  facts
             on and file same with the FtT not later than 01 September 2015.


         iv)  The Appellant's skeleton argument for hearing will  be  served
             and filed not later than 01 October 2015.


          v)  The Respondent's replying skeleton argument  and  response  to
             the Appellant's draft statement of agreed facts will be  served
             and filed not later than 01 November 2015.


         vi)  The listing before the FtT will proceed on the first available
             date thereafter, with expedition highly desirable.

14. We conclude with the observation that, upon remittal,  issues  relating
    to the FtT's newly acquired power  under  Rule  13  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2015 could  conceivably
    arise.  By this Rule the FtT is empowered to prohibit the disclosure or
    publication of documents and information.   There  are  sundry  kindred
    powers.  We are aware  that  by  its  decision  of  31  July  2015  the
    Administrative Court has acceded to the application by the  Immigration
    Law Practitioners Association for permission to challenge this rule  by
    judicial review: see [2015] EWHC 2297 (Admin).

15. Given the unusual features of this case and the potential  for  further
    difficult legal and procedural issues arising, the Secretary  of  State
    should give careful consideration to instructing Counsel.


                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date:  08 August 2015
