









R (on the application of SA) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(human rights challenges: correct approach) IJR [2015] UKUT 00536 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                          Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                     The Queen on the application of SA
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




        Before Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision


Having considered all documents lodged and having  heard  Ms  I  Thomas,  of
Counsel, instructed by Lloyds Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and  Mr
Z Malik, of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department,  at  a  hearing  at  Manchester  Civil  Justice
Centre on 31 July 2015



                 Decision: the application for judicial review is refused



   i) Tribunals should be alert to distinguish between human rights  grounds
      and public law grounds.

  ii) In judicial review challenges which include Article  8  ECHR  grounds,
      the question is not whether the impugned decision is vitiated  by  one
      or more of the established  public  law  misdemeanours.   Rather,  the
      question is whether a breach of Article 8 has been demonstrated.

 iii)  Provided  that  the  above  distinction  is   appreciated,   judicial
      adjudication of issues of proportionality may legitimately be informed
      by public law principles.

  iv) The tribunal's approach to  proportionality  in  immigration  judicial
      reviews and immigration appeals differs.  In judicial review, the role
      of the Tribunal is limited by the principle of the discretionary  area
      of judgment, albeit the intensity of  review  will  invariably  depend
      upon the  context.   This  inhibition  does  not  apply  in  statutory
      appeals: Huang v SSHD.

   v) In human rights cases, the focus of the court or tribunal is always on
      the product of the decision making process under scrutiny, rather than
      the process itself,  except  where  Convention  rights  which  have  a
      procedural content are engaged.



                                  Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269)  an Anonymity Order is made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Applicant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      Introduction

(1)   This substantive application for judicial review features some of  the
      most  frequently  encountered  misconceptions  in  cases  which   have
      combined elements of public law and human rights challenges.

      Factual Framework

(2)   The factual matrix is uncontentious, comprising the following  salient
      elements.  The Applicant, a  national  of  Pakistan,  aged  25  years,
      entered the United Kingdom lawfully in  accordance  with  a  visitor's
      visa in 2006.  His lawful sojourn ended in 2008.  In January  2014  he
      applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  His application was refused  by
      the Respondent (the "Secretary of  State")  in  the  same  year.   His
      challenge to this decision secured the grant of  permission  to  apply
      for judicial review by order dated 10 February 2015.

(3)   The centrepiece of the Applicant's case is the relationship  which  he
      has formed with a British citizen. The lady in question (whom I  shall
      describe as his "partner") is now aged 23 years.  The relationship  is
      of approximately five years duration.  It is described in the evidence
      as "akin  to  marriage".   The  upbringing,  background  and  personal
      circumstances  of  the  Applicant's  partner  combine  to   form   the
      cornerstone of the case advanced.  These  emerge  from  the  following
      passages in her witness statement:

           "I have been in care since a young age because my  parents  were
           seen to be neglecting me and my siblings.  Whilst in care I  was
           sexually abused ....


           Then I was placed back with my mother ....  She drank a lot  and
           her partner was very violent towards her ....  I never  went  to
           school ....  I fell in with the wrong crowd and turned to  drink
           and drugs.  I put myself back into care after my mother beat  me
           up ....


           I was raped when I was 15.   I used to drink every day ...."

      One of the highlighted features of the rape is  that  the  perpetrator
      was a Pakistani national who was prosecuted and convicted and,  later,
      deported to Pakistan.  The Applicant is credited by his  partner  with
      having fundamentally transformed her life.  She asserts  that  she  no
      longer indulges in substance abuse; she has  completed  a  child  care
      course; she was  able  to  secure  employment;  she  has  professional
      ambitions for the future; and she is in  a  deeply  committed,  loving
      relationship with the Applicant.

            Legal Framework

   4) The applicable provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  paragraphs
      276ADE, 276BE and 276CE, in tandem with certain provisions of Appendix
      FM, namely paragraphs E - LTRP and EX1.  In the context of this  case,
      there  are  two  salient   provisions.    The   first   is   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) which is concerned with the private  life  dimension  of
      Article 8 ECHR and makes provision for the grant of leave to remain on
      this ground where the applicant -

           "....   is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
           UK  for  less  than  20  years  (discounting   any   period   of
           imprisonment) but there would be very significant  obstacles  to
           the applicant's integration into the country to which  he  would
           have to go if required to leave the UK."

      By paragraph 276BE, if the Secretary of State is satisfied  that  this
      requirement is fulfilled, leave to remain in the United Kingdom for  a
      period not exceeding 30 months may be granted.  If not thus satisfied,
      per paragraph 276CE, leave to remain "is to be refused".

   5) The second main provision of  the  Rules  of  moment  in  the  present
      context relates to the Applicant's quest to secure leave to remain  as
      a partner of the British citizen concerned.   This  engages  paragraph
      EX1 of Appendix FM, which provides, insofar as material, as follows:

           "......... (b)   the applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with a partner who is in the UK and  is  a  British
           citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with  refugee  leave  or
           humanitarian protection and there are  insurmountable  obstacles
           to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

      The "insurmountable obstacles" criterion enshrined  in  this  discrete
      provision of the Rules lies at the heart of the impugned  decision  of
      the Secretary of State and the Applicant's ensuing challenge.

   6) The governing legal framework has two further elements.  The first  is
      Article 8 ECHR which, pursuant to MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
      1192, continues to operate independently of and  in  addition  to  the
      Article 8 provisions of the Rules, albeit in a specific residual mode.
      In the context of deportation of foreign criminals, this  is  captured
      in the following passage in the judgment of Dyson MR, at [46]:

           "If the claimant succeeds on an application of the new rules  at
           the first hurdle ...  then it can be said that he has  succeeded
           on a one stage test.  But if he does not,  it  is  necessary  to
           consider whether there are circumstances which are  sufficiently
           compelling (and therefore exceptional) to  outweigh  the  public
           interest in deportation.  That is an exercise which is  separate
           from a consideration of whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies."



            [Emphasis added.]

      This concept is explained  with  particular  clarity  by  the  further
      decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) and Others v SSHD [2015]
      EWCA Civ 387.  Having emphasised that the relevant provisions  of  the
      Immigration  Rules  are  not  unlawful  simply  because  they  do  not
      comprehensively fulfil the  requirements  of  Convention  rights  with
      respect to immigration decisions, Richards LJ continues, [13]:


           "That is because any Convention right  of  an  individual  which
           goes beyond the  entitlements  set  out  in  the  Rules  can  be
           satisfied by  the  Secretary  of  State  outside  the  Rules  by
           exercise of her residual  discretion  in  accordance  with  such
           Convention right requirements as may apply in that  individual's
           case ...."


      Thus the  MF  principle  is  not  confined  to  the  context  of  the
      deportation of foreign criminals,  but  extends  to  other  Article  8
      provisions of the Rules.


   7) Finally, sections 117A and 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") must also be given effect in  a  case
      of this genre.   These new statutory provisions are  reproduced  fully
      in the recently reported decision of the Upper Tribunal in Bossade (ss
      117A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC), at  [9].
      Within these provisions there is a series of  factors,  the  so-called
      "public interest considerations", to which the court or tribunal  must
      have regard in every case  involving  a  determination  of  whether  a
      decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right  to
      respect for private and/or family life under Article 8 ECHR,  contrary
      to section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

      The Impugned Decision

   8) The Secretary of State's decision  is  distributed  between  a  formal
      notice dated 18 September 2014 and a  supplementary  letter  dated  31
      March 2015.  The latter was  evidently  stimulated  by  the  grant  of
      permission to apply for judicial review.  The first of  these  focused
      particularly on the "insurmountable obstacles" provision of the Rules,
      in the following passage:

           "In determining whether there are 'insurmountable obstacles', we
           have considered the seriousness of the  difficulties  which  you
           and your partner would  face  in  continuing  your  family  life
           outside the UK and whether they entail something that you  could
           not (or could not reasonably be expected to) overcome, even with
           a degree  of  hardship  for  one  or  more  of  the  individuals
           concerned.  While it is acknowledged that your partner has lived
           in the UK all her life, this does not mean that you  are  unable
           to live together in Pakistan.  It is  noted  that  your  partner
           claimed to have been raped in 2005 by an illegal immigrant  from
           Pakistan who was eventually deported and  you  give  this  as  a
           reason why she cannot live in Pakistan.  Your partner was  aware
           of your nationality when entering into a relationship with  you.
           Furthermore, you have not provided any evidence to support  this
           claim and show that she is unable to relocate to  Pakistan  with
           you and continue your family life together.  Although relocating
           there may cause a degree of hardship for your  British  partner,
           the Secretary of State has not seen any evidence to suggest that
           there are any insurmountable obstacles .... preventing you  from
           continuing your relationship in Bangladesh [sic]."

      The next  section  of  the  decision  addresses  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Within  the  analysis  which  follows,
      there is an assessment that the Applicant has  failed  to  demonstrate
      very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  to  his  country  of
      origin: paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules refers. The final element
      of the Notice of Decision is contained under the rubric  "Decision  on
      Exceptional Circumstances". It is couched in the following terms:

           "It has also been considered whether your application raises any
           exceptional circumstances which, consistent with  the  right  to
           respect for private and  family  life  contained  in  Article  8
           .......  might warrant a grant of leave to remain in the  United
           Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   You
           have not raised any such exceptional circumstances,  so  it  has
           been decided that your application does not fall for a grant  of
           leave to remain outside the Rules."

      Judges and practitioners alike will be familiar  with  this  formulaic
passage.

   9) As noted above, the supplementary text of  the  impugned  decision  is
      contained in a later letter, addressed to the Applicant's  solicitors.
      This gives further consideration to the Applicant's application  under
      the heading "Insurmountable Obstacles and Article 8 of the ECHR".  The
      main ingredients of this further essay are the following:

        i) The initiation and development of the  Applicant's  relationship
           with  his  partner  unfolded  in  full  knowledge  that  he  was
           unlawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom  and  of  precarious
           immigration status.


       ii) There is no evidence that  the  couple  cannot  enter  and  live
           lawfully in Pakistan.

      iii) Cultural and language barriers do not equate  to  insurmountable
           obstacles.

       iv) The partner's difficult upbringing, sexual abuse and history  of
           rape  have  all  been  carefully  considered.   (In  terms)  the
           prospects of her re-encountering  the  rapist  in  Pakistan  are
           infinitesimal.


        v) While the medical evidence, which  indicates  that  the  partner
           suffers from "PTSD", has been considered, there is no suggestion
           that there will be no medical facilities for  her  in  Pakistan,
           even if of a standard inferior to that available in  the  United
           Kingdom.





     The letter contains the following omnibus conclusions:


           "The Secretary of State is not satisfied that refusal  of  leave
           to  remain,  taking  full  account  of  all  considerations  and
           evidence, prejudices your client's private and family life,  and
           that of his partner, in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount
           to a breach of Article 8 .....


           The Secretary of State maintains that your client's  removal  is
           considered  to  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim   of
           maintaining  effective  immigration  control  and  the  economic
           wellbeing of the UK ....


           It  is  not  considered  that  there  are  any  exceptional   or
           compassionate  circumstances  which  would  have  unduly   harsh
           consequences for your client or his partner such as would render
           removal from the UK disproportionate.  Leave to  remain  outside
           the Immigration Rules  is  therefore  not  appropriate  in  this
           case."

      The Essence of Judicial Review in Immigration Cases

  10) The common misconceptions to which I have referred in [1]  above  find
      expression in the grant of permission to apply  for  judicial  review.
      The opening passage in the permission order is couched in these terms:

           "It is arguable that the Claimant [a misnomer for Applicant] has
           a genuine and subsisting  relationship  in  the  UK  with  a  UK
           citizen and thus that removal is a disproportionate interference
           with the Article 8 rights of the Claimant and his partner.    It
           is at least arguable that there are insurmountable  difficulties
           in that relationship continuing outside the UK both  because  it
           amounts to a requirement that a British citizen  leaves  the  UK
           and because of the  particular  personal  circumstances  of  the
           Claimant's partner."

      The first error committed is to focus on the arguability of  something
      which has at no time been contested by the Secretary of State,  namely
      the genuine and subsisting relationship between the Applicant and  his
      UK citizen partner.  Pausing at this juncture, it is  tolerably  clear
      that, in this passage, the Judge had in mind certain of the Article  8
      provisions of the Rules: see  [5]  supra.   The  grant  of  permission
      continues:


           "...  Removal constitutes an interference not  merely  with  the
           Article 8 rights of the Claimant but also of  his  partner  ....
           Although the decision letter purports to decide the  application
           under the exceptional circumstances head in the  alternative  in
           my  judgment  that  element  of  the  decision  is   flawed   on
           irrationality or lack of reasoning grounds ....  To dismiss this
           element simply on the basis that  no  exceptional  circumstances
           have been raised is wrong in law or is irrational in the  public
           law sense and fails to give proper reasons for the decision.".


      Within this passage there is a conflation of a human rights and public
      law considerations, in the same notional breath. I shall revisit  this
      infra.


  11) One of the arguments advanced on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,
      based on the second passage quoted  above,  was  that  the  permission
      Judge had, in substance, treated the  application  as  if  it  were  a
      challenge to the merits of the impugned decision.   It  is  timely  to
      emphasise that a challenge by judicial  review  is  of  an  altogether
      different species from an appeal on the merits.   This is one  of  the
      core dogmata of judicial review. This is expressed  in  the  venerable
      principle  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court,  or  tribunal,  is
      supervisory in nature. In De Smith's Judicial  Review  (7th  Edition),
      paragraph 11 - 056, it is expressed in these terms:


           "In general it is right that courts do leave the  assessment  of
           fact  to  public  authorities  which  are  primarily  suited  to
           gathering and assessing the evidence.  Review  must  not  become
           appeal."

       This  dogma  is  also  captured  in  the  celebrated  words  of  Lord
Brightman:

           "Where the existence or non-existence of a fact is left  to  the
           judgment and discretion of a public body and that fact  involves
           a broad spectrum ranging from the obvious to  the  debatable  to
           the just conceivable, it is the duty of the court to  leave  the
           decision of that fact to the public body to whom Parliament  has
           entrusted the decision making power save in a case where  it  is
           obvious that the public body, consciously or unconsciously,  are
           acting perversely."

      (R  v Hillingdon LBC, ex parte Puhlhofer [1986] AC 484, at 518.)

      This  formulation  of  principle,  I  suggest,  applies  also  to  the
      frequently recurring exercises of evaluative judgment  and  predictive
      assessment in the realm of factual  issues  carried  out  by  decision
      makers.  These are ingrained characteristics of decision making in the
      fields of immigration and asylum law.


  12) It is essential for decision makers and judges  alike  to  distinguish
      between cases which involve a human rights challenge, whether in whole
      or in part, and those which do not.  In cases where an application  is
      made to secure a status or benefit under the Immigration Rules  having
      no human rights elements, the ensuing decision is similarly made under
      the Rules. The central question, one of mixed law and fact, is whether
      the applicant satisfies the relevant requirements of the Rules.   This
      prompts some reflection on the  applicable  juridical  framework.  The
      starting  point,  sometimes  overlooked,  is  section  3(1)   of   the
      Immigration Act 1971, which provides:

           "Except as otherwise provided by or  under  this  Act,  where  a
           person is not a British citizen -


              a) he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave to
                 do so in accordance with the provisions of, or made  under,
                 this Act;


              b) he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom (or, when
                 already there, leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom)
                 either for a limited or for an indefinite period ...."

      By section 3(2) the Secretary  of  State  is  obliged  to  lay  before
      Parliament rules  governing  "the  practice  to  be  followed  in  the
      administration of this Act for regulating the entry and  stay  in  the
      United Kingdom of persons required  by  this  Act  to  have  leave  to
      enter". Section 4(1) regulates entry and leave to remain decisions  in
      general terms.  There  is,  of  course,  a  host  of  other  statutory
      provisions resulting from the intense Parliamentary  activity  of  the
      past two decades.    The  common  thread  throughout  the  legislative
      labyrinth is that  of  decision  making  in  the  exercise  of  powers
      conferred by statute or rules made thereunder.  Thus the territory  is
      quintessentially that of public law.


  13) This analysis is clearly identifiable in the speech of Lord Bridge  in
      Bugdacay  v SSHD [1987] AC 514, at 522-523 :

           "...  The discretionary decision whether to  grant  or  withhold
           leave to enter or remain depends must necessarily be  determined
           by the immigration officer or the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
           exercise of the discretion which is exclusively  conferred  upon
           them by section  4(1)  of  the  Act.  The  question  whether  an
           applicant for leave to enter or remain is or is not a refugee is
           only one, even if  a  particularly  important  one  required  by
           paragraph 73 of HC 169  [i.e.  the  relevant  paragraph  of  the
           Rules] to be referred to the Home Office, of a  multiplicity  of
           questions which immigration officers and officials of  the  Home
           Office acting for the Secretary of State must daily determine in
           dealing with applications  for  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in
           accordance with the rules, as, for example, whether an applicant
           is a bona fide visitor,  student,  businessman,  dependant  etc.
           Determination of such questions is only open to challenge in the
           courts on well known Wednesbury principles ....

      While  the  formula  "Wednesbury  principles"  may   appear   somewhat
      restrictive, it seems uncontroversial to  suggest,  some  two  decades
      later, that it extends to  and  embraces  all  recognised  public  law
      errors.

  14) This subject has been considered in a notable recent decision  of  the
      Court of Appeal.  In R (Giri) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  784  the  Court
      rejected the argument that  the  precedent  (or  jurisdictional)  fact
      principles of Khawaja are applicable to a decision that  an  immigrant
      engaged  in  deception  in  an  entry  clearance  application  by  the
      provision of false documents (see R v SSHD, ex parte Khawaja [1984] AC
      74).  The following is the key passage in the judgment of Richards LJ,
      at [19]:

           "The decision here under challenge is a  decision  made  in  the
           exercise of the power conferred on the  Secretary  of  State  by
           section 3 of the 1971 Act to grant leave to remain in the United
           Kingdom. The Rules contain detailed provisions  as  to  how  the
           power is to be exercised (though there is a  residual  power  to
           grant leave even where it falls to be refused under the  Rules).
           Paragraph 322(1A) is one of those  provisions.  Its  application
           involves findings of fact, but that is true of a multiplicity of
           provisions in the Rules. If the conditions in it are found to be
           satisfied, leave must be refused under the Rules, but that, too,
           is true of many other provisions under the Rules. A finding that
           the   conditions   are   satisfied   has   potentially   serious
           consequences  (see,  in  particular,  the  effect  of  paragraph
           320(7B) as summarised above), but paragraph 322(1A) is again far
           from unique in that respect. The key point is that  the  statute
           confers the power on the Secretary of State, or the  immigration
           officers acting on her behalf, to make the decision  whether  to
           grant or refuse leave to remain. It  is  for  the  Secretary  of
           State or her officials, in the exercise of  that  power  and  in
           reaching their decision, to determine which  provisions  of  the
           Rules apply  and  whether  relevant  conditions  are  satisfied,
           including the determination of relevant questions  of  fact.  On
           the reasoning in Khawaja and Bugdaycay, their findings on such
           matters are open to challenge  in  judicial  review  proceedings
           only on Wednesbury principles; it is not a situation in  which
           their powers depend on some  precedent  fact  the  existence  of
           which falls for determination by the court itself."

      Notably, the Court contrasted decisions made under section  3  of  the
      1971 Act with those made under  section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999, which empowers an immigration officer to  direct  the
      removal of a person who is not  a  British  citizen  from  the  United
      Kingdom if "... he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully  or
      not) leave to remain".  Richards LJ observed, at [20]:


           "In that event, as a matter of statutory construction, the  very
           existence of the power  to  remove  would  depend  on  deception
           having been used; and in judicial review proceedings challenging
           the decision to remove, the question whether deception had  been
           used would be a precedent fact for determination by the court in
           accordance with Khawaja. Miss Giovannetti QC, on behalf of  the
           Secretary of State, accepted as much. In practice, however,  the
           issue will rarely arise in that form,  because  decisions  under
           section 10 are immigration decisions carrying a right of  appeal
           to the tribunal, which can review for itself the facts on  which
           the decision under appeal was based and the  existence  of  that
           alternative remedy means that judicial review is  not  available
           in the absence of special  or  exceptional  factors:  see,  most
           recently, the decision of this court in R (Mehmood and  Ali)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 744."

  15) Where an immigration  decision  having  no  human  rights  element  is
      appealable, the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") will examine the  question
      of whether the relevant provisions of the Rules  have  been  correctly
      applied by the Secretary of State, in considering whether the decision
      under challenge is in accordance with the law.  This  will  frequently
      involve examining, and  determining,  disputed  factual  issues.   The
      fundamental enquiry  will  relate  to  whether  the  applicant's  case
      satisfies the applicable requirements of the Rules.  The  legality  of
      the Secretary of State's decision may be challenged  on  (inter  alia)
      conventional public law grounds:  conveniently  summarised  under  the
      familiar headings of illegality, procedural impropriety and Wednesbury
      unreasonableness, the latter incorporating also both a failure to take
      into  account  all  material  factors  and/or  permitting   immaterial
      considerations to intrude. It is, of course, the tribunal which is the
      ultimate arbiter of whether a person's  Convention  rights  have  been
      infringed: Huang  v  SSHD [2007] 2 AC 167.

  16) Where no statutory appeal  is  provided,  the  appropriate  method  of
      challenge may be an application  for  judicial  review  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. In such cases, again on the premise that there is  no  human
      rights element, the same  public  law  grounds  of  challenge  may  be
      invoked.  In the paradigm judicial review, the Upper Tribunal  has  no
      fact finding function and it exercises a more restricted jurisdiction,
      traditionally labelled supervisory, as, unlike the FtT,  it  does  not
      conduct an appeal on  the  merits:  see  [12]  supra.   See  also  the
      discussion in R (Naziri and others) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 437,  at  [73]-
      [75].

Human Rights Challenges: The Correct Approach

  17) I refer to the second excerpt from the permission order reproduced  in
      [11] above.  The gravamen of the Applicant's case has at all  material
      times been that to require him to return to his country of origin will
      breach the family life rights of him and his partner under  Article  8
      ECHR.  I characterise this as a pure human rights claim.  However, the
      passage in the permission order is replete with references  to  public
      law misdemeanours.  This gives rise to what I have described above  as
      an impermissible  conflation.   The  error  thereby  committed  was  a
      failure to recognise that the Applicant was  advancing  a  pure  human
      rights claim and to adjudicate on the application  for  permission  to
      apply for judicial review accordingly.

  18) The contrast between adjudication in conventional judicial review  and
      adjudication in human rights challenges under  the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998 (the "1998 Act") was highlighted with particular clarity by  Lord
      Hoffmann in R (SB) v  Governors of Denbigh High  School  [2007]  1  AC
      100, where a Muslim pupil asserted a right to depart from her school's
      uniform policy by wearing a jilbab,  invoking  Article  9  ECHR.   Her
      challenge ultimately failed.  Lord Hoffmann stated, at [68]:

           "In domestic judicial review, the  Court  is  usually  concerned
           with whether the decision maker  reached  his  decision  in  the
           right way rather than whether he got what the Court thinks might
           be the right answer.  But Article 9 is concerned with substance,
           not procedure.  It confers no right to have a decision  made  in
           any particular way.  What matters is the result ...."

            [Emphasis added.]

      The Court of Appeal's error was to find that  the  governors  had,  in
      adopting the school uniform policy, failed to observe what  the  Court
      considered to be a necessary decision  making  process.  Lord  Bingham
      formulated three  main  reasons  for  reversing  their  decision.   He
      expressed the first in these terms, at [29]:


           "First, the purpose of the 1998  Act  was  not  to  enlarge  the
           rights  or  remedies  of  those  in  the  United  Kingdom  whose
           Convention rights have been violated but to enable those  rights
           and remedies to be asserted and enforced by the domestic  courts
           of this country and not only by recourse to Strasbourg ....


           But the focus at Strasbourg is not and has never been on whether
           a challenged decision or action is the product  of  a  defective
           decision making process, but  on  whether,  in  the  case  under
           consideration,  the  applicant's  Convention  rights  have  been
           violated."


      I would add that the correct  doctrinal  approach  is  rooted  in  the
      language of section 6(1) of the  1998  Act.   The  unlawfulness  which
      section 6(1) forbids is any action by  a  public  authority  which  is
      incompatible  with  a  person's   Convention   right.    The   process
      culminating in the impugned act or  decision  is  legally  irrelevant,
      unless the Convention right concerned has a  procedural  content,  the
      paradigm example being Article 6.

  19) The distinction between judicial adjudication in a challenge based  on
      public law grounds (on the one hand) and a human rights claim (on  the
      other) is highlighted in another landmark decision  of  the  House  of
      Lords, Belfast City Council  v  Miss Behavin Limited  [2007]  UKHL  19
      (a case which, in the words of Baroness Hale, "... must take the prize
      for the most entertaining name of any that  have  come  before  us  in
      recent years."). The impugned decision was the City Council's  refusal
      to license a so-called sex shop in the exercise of its statutory power
      to decline approval to such enterprises.  The Court of Appeal reasoned
      that the Council's decision was contrary to section  6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998 on the ground that it had not sufficiently taken  into
      account the shop owner's right to freedom of expression under  Article
      10 ECHR and its right to the peaceful  enjoyment  of  its  possessions
      under Article 1 of The First Protocol.  The Council's  appeal  to  the
      House of Lords succeeded on the basis that this approach was erroneous
      in law.  The fallacy in its reasoning was analysed by Lord Hoffmann in
      particular, at [12]:


           "... the Court of Appeal did not say that the Respondent's human
           right to operate a sex shop .. had been infringed.  Instead,  it
           said that its Convention rights had been violated by the way the
           Council had arrived at its decision.  In the  reasons  it  gave,
           the  Council  had  not  shown  that  it  was  conscious  of  the
           Convention rights which were engaged ....


           [13]   ....   Either  the  refusal  infringed  the  Respondent's
                 Convention rights or it did not.  If it did, no display  of
                 human rights learning by the  Belfast  City  Council  would
                 have made the decision lawful. If it did not, it would  not
                 matter if the Councillors had never heard of Article 10  or
                 The First Protocol."

      Lord Rodger's formulation  is  equally  uncompromising.   He  said  at
[23]:

           "....  The Council's refusal was unlawful if it was incompatible
           with the Applicant's right to freedom of expression ....


           In that event it would still have been unlawful however much the
           Council had analysed and agonised over the Applicant's right  to
           freedom of expression before refusing the license.  Equally,  if
           the  refusal  did  not  interfere  disproportionately  with  the
           Applicant's right to freedom of expression, then it  was  lawful
           for purposes of section 6(1) [of the Human Rights Act  1998]   -
           whether or not the Council had deliberated on that right  before
           refusing."

      Elaborating on the correct test, Lord Rodger emphasised, at [24], that
      what matters is impact (viz. the end product, or outcome), rather than
      the preceding quality of the  debate.  Baroness  Hale  expressed  this
      concept in the following terms, at [31]:


           "In human rights  adjudication,  the  Court  is  concerned  with
           whether the human rights of  the  claimant  have  in  fact  been
           infringed, not with whether the  administrative  decision  maker
           properly took them into account."

      See also, to like effect, Lord Neuberger at [88] and [90].

  20) At this juncture, it is appropriate to recall that many  human  rights
      decisions involve balancing exercises.  These are evaluative processes
      which normally entail weighing the individual, personal  interests  of
      the person concerned with some competing public interest or interests.
       For immigration judges the dominant Convention right in this  respect
      is Article 8.  It is a truism that in a large majority  of  Article  8
      challenges in the immigration sphere the question to be determined  by
      the tribunal is that  of  proportionality,  the  last  of  the  stages
      specified in R (Razgar)  v SSHD [2004] 2AC 368.   In  such  cases  the
      question for the Tribunal is not  whether  the  impugned  decision  is
      irrational or  is  vitiated  by  the  application  of  the  Wednesbury
      principles or is procedurally unfair or contravenes some other  public
      law standard.  The correct question is, rather, whether  the  decision
      is a disproportionate means of pursuing the legitimate aim in play. If
      "yes", the conclusion is that the Convention right has been  breached:
      not that the decision is  unlawful  on  account  of  some  public  law
      misdemeanour.  I explain in [27] below the manner in which public  law
      errors can inform and illuminate this assessment.

  21) Having regard to the terms of the permission order in  this  case  and
      the debate  which  this  stimulated  at  the  substantive  hearing,  I
      consider  it  timely  to  draw  attention  to  the  contours  of   the
      proportionality principle and the exercise which this requires of  the
      court or tribunal.  Lord Steyn's seminal exposition of the doctrine of
      proportionality in R  v  Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
      ex parte Daly [2001] UKHL  26,  while  instructive  per  se,  has  the
      additional merit of illuminating the differing functions of the court,
      or  tribunal,  in  conventional  judicial  review  and  human   rights
      adjudication, at [27]:

           "The starting point is that there  is  an  overlap  between  the
           traditional   grounds   of   review   and   the   approach    of
           proportionality.  Most cases would be decided in  the  same  way
           whichever approach is adopted. But the intensity  of  review  is
           somewhat greater under the proportionality approach .....


           I would mention three concrete  differences  without  suggesting
           that  my  statement  is  exhaustive.   First,  the  doctrine  of
           proportionality may require the reviewing Court  to  assess  the
           balance which the decision maker has struck, not merely  whether
           it is within the range  of  rational  or  reasonable  decisions.
           Secondly, the proportionality  test  may  go  further  than  the
           traditional  grounds  of  review  inasmuch  as  it  may  require
           attention to be directed to  the  relative  weight  accorded  to
           interests and  considerations.   Thirdly,  even  the  heightened
           scrutiny test developed in R  v  Ministry of Defence,  ex  parte
           Smith ... is not necessarily appropriate to  the  protection  of
           human rights."

      In the developing jurisprudence of the Supreme Court, the doctrine  of
      proportionality has been more recently  formulated  in  the  following
      way:


        i) Is the objective sufficiently important  to  justify  limitation
           upon a fundamental right?


       ii) Is the measure rationally connected to the objective?

      iii) Could a less intrusive measure have been adopted?

       iv) Has a fair balance been struck between individual rights and the
           interests of the community?

      See Bank Mellat  v  HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC  39,  at  [20].   I
      refer also to the most recent consideration of these principles by the
      Supreme Court in  R  (Tigere)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  Business,
      Innovation and Skills [2015] UKSC 57, at [23]-[33].

  22) The terms in which the public authority concerned  has  expressed  the
      impugned  decision,  or  offending   measure,   are   of   inescapable
      importance.   At one  extreme  of  the  notional  spectrum,  a  public
      authority's decision  challenged  on  Convention  rights  grounds  may
      contain an admirable and elaborate dissertation analysing and debating
      all  relevant  aspects  of  the  right  under  consideration  in   the
      particular factual context.  At  the  other  extreme,  the  documented
      incarnation of the impugned decision may  fail  to  even  mention  the
      Convention right engaged.  For courts and tribunals it is important to
      appreciate what this means in practice.  This is succinctly  explained
      by Lord Bingham in SB at [31]:

           "If it appears that a body has conscientiously paid attention to
           all human rights considerations, no doubt  a  challenger's  task
           will be the harder."

      Why is this so? In Article 8 challenges where the crucial question  is
      whether the impugned decision or measure is  proportionate,  in  cases
      where the decision maker has scrupulously examined and weighed all, or
      most, of the facts and considerations bearing on the Convention  right
      engaged it is more likely that a  proper  balancing  exercise  can  be
      demonstrated  resulting  in  a   proportionate   outcome.    This   is
      recognised, in substance, by Lord Bingham in the passage quoted above,
      by Lord Hoffmann in SB at [68] and, more fully, by  Baroness  Hale  in
      Miss Behavin', at [37}:


           "Had the Belfast City Council expressly set itself the  task  of
           balancing the rights of individuals to sell and buy pornographic
           literature  and  images  against  the  interests  of  the  wider
           community, a court would find it hard to upset the balance which
           the  local  authority  had  struck.   But  where  there  is   no
           indication that this has been done, the court has no alternative
           but to strike the balance for itself, giving due weight  to  the
           judgments made by those who are in much closer  touch  with  the
           people and the places involved than the court could ever be."


      Notably, Baroness Hales revisited this issue in the recent decision of
      Tigere (supra) in the following terms, at [32]:  "... the  court  must
      treat the judgements of the Secretary of State,  as  primary  decision
      maker,  with  appropriate  respect.   That  respect  is,  of   course,
      heightened where  there  is  evidence  that  the  decision  maker  has
      addressed his mind to the particular issue before us ...".


      Notably, this is followed by the  observation  that  this  element  is
      missing in circumstances where the  measure  under  challenge  is  the
      product of the negative resolution procedure in Parliament.


  23) While the doctrinal distinction which I have sought  to  emphasise  in
      the preceding paragraphs has been relatively dormant in recent  years,
      it features in the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Singh and
      Khalid v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
      74, at [68] - [71], per Underhill LJ. Of  further  note  is  that,  as
      these passages indicate, the Secretary of State's decision in the case
      of Ms Khalid belonged to the second of  the  two  extremities  of  the
      notional spectrum considered above.

  24) Article 8 is, by  some  measure,  the  dominant  Convention  right  in
      immigration appeals and judicial reviews.  It being a qualified  right
      which in many cases requires a judicial decision  on  proportionality,
      an alertness to the principle, or doctrine, of the discretionary  area
      of judgment is essential. Article 8 is essential.  This  is,  broadly,
      the  United  Kingdom  domestic   law  equivalent  of  the  margin   of
      appreciation  principle  embedded  in  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
      habitually expressed in the following terms:


           "By reason of their direct and continuous contact with the vital
           forces of their  countries,  the  national  authorities  are  in
           principle better placed than an international court to  evaluate
           local needs and conditions."

      (Buckley v United Kingdom [1996] 23 EHRR 101, at [75])

      In domestic law, the effect of this principle is that while the court,
      or tribunal, is the ultimate arbiter of whether a Convention right has
      been violated it will,  in  certain  cases,  attribute  appropriate  -
      sometimes  substantial  -  weight  to  the  function,  expertise   and
      experience of the public  authority  concerned.   Shortly  before  the
      advent of the 1998 Act, Lord Hope offered the following analysis:


           "The questions which the courts will have to  decide  ...   will
           involve questions of balance  between  competing  interests  and
           issues of proportionality.  In this area difficult  choices  may
           have to be made by the executive or the legislature between  the
           rights of the individual and  the  needs  of  society.  In  some
           circumstances it will be appropriate for the courts to recognise
           that there is an area of judgment  within  which  the  judiciary
           will defer, on democratic grounds, to the considered opinion  of
           the elected body or person whose act or decision is said  to  be
           incompatible with the Convention ........


           It will be easier for such an area of judgment to be  recognised
           where the Convention itself requires a  balance  to  be  struck,
           much less so where the  right  is  stated  in  terms  which  are
           unqualified.  It will be easier for it to  be  recognised  where
           the issues involve questions of social or economic policy,  much
           less so where the rights are of high  constitutional  importance
           or are of a kind where the courts are especially well placed  to
           assess the need for protection."

       Almost  two  decades  later  the  prophesies  in  this   illuminating
      commentary have fully materialised in all kinds of guises.

  25) The Appellate Committee of the House  of  Lords  has  considered  this
      issue on several occasions in its  human  rights  jurisprudence.   For
      example, in A v  Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  2
      AC 68,  Lord Bingham stated, at [29]


           "The more purely political  (in  a  broad  or  narrow  sense)  a
           question is, the more  appropriate  it  will  be  for  political
           resolution and the less likely it is to be an appropriate matter
           for judicial decision.  The  smaller,  therefore,  will  be  the
           potential role of the court. It is the function of political and
           not judicial bodies to resolve political questions.  Conversely,
           the greater the legal content of  any  issue,  the  greater  the
           potential role of the court, because under our constitution  and
           subject to the sovereign power of Parliament, it is the function
           of the courts and not  of  political  bodies  to  resolve  legal
           questions."

      In the field of immigration law one of the more striking  developments
      in recent years has been the increasing prescription and expression of
      the public interest in primary legislation, one of  the  more  notable
      instances being the introduction of the statutory provisions  relating
      to the deportation of foreign criminals.  Where Parliament  intervenes
      in this way, the public interest has special force: per Laws LJ in  SS
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550, at [37]-[42] and [52]-[55].

  26) The operation of this doctrine is illustrated graphically in R (Animal
      Defenders International) v Secretary of State for Culture,  Media  and
      Sport [2008] 1 AC 1312, which involved a challenge  to  the  statutory
      prohibition on political advertising.  Lord Bingham stated at [33]:


           "The weight to be accorded to the judgment of Parliament depends
           on the circumstances and the subject  matter.   In  the  present
           context it should in my opinion be given great weight ...."

      The main reason proffered for  this  analysis  was  that  the  subject
      matter lay particularly within  the  province  of  the  democratically
      elected legislature rather than the  judiciary.    Thus,  while  there
      could of course be no abdication of the judicial duty of adjudication,
      the Parliamentary choice would weigh heavily in the  judicial  conduct
      of the balancing exercise in determining whether the interference with
      the Convention  right  engaged  was  proportionate.   As  the  ensuing
      decision of the ECtHR emphasises  -  see  [2013]  57  EHRR  21  -  the
      balancing exercise pitted the right to impart information and ideas of
      general interest which the public was entitled to receive against  the
      government's desire to protect the democratic debate and process  from
      distortion by powerful financial groups with  advantageous  access  to
      influential media.  The Parliamentary  nature  of  the  measure  under
      challenge, coupled  with  additional  elements  such  as  cross  party
      support and no dissenting vote, proved decisive.   The  Grand  Chamber
      concluded, in terms which  have  become  familiar,  that  the  reasons
      adduced to justify the prohibition were relevant  and  sufficient  and
      the measure could not be considered  a  disproportionate  interference
      with the right to freedom of expression.

  27) Provided that the court or tribunal appreciates, and gives effect  to,
      the distinction between a public law  challenge  and  a  human  rights
      challenge, some of the  considerations  which  traditionally  belonged
      exclusively to the realm of the former can permissibly feature in  the
      sphere of the latter.  Thus in deciding whether a decision constitutes
      a disproportionate interference with a person's Article 8  rights,  it
      is permissible to consider questions  such  as  whether  the  decision
      maker has taken into account all material facts and considerations  or
      has  permitted  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude.   These   are
      probably the clearest examples of the legitimate importation of public
      law principles to judicial human rights adjudication.  The  procedural
      fairness of the decision making process may also,  in  some  contexts,
      illuminate the Tribunal's determination of whether the outcome viz the
      impugned decision is proportionate. While maintaining  the  underlying
      distinction will not always be easy, it is the crucial starting  point
      in the judicial exercise.    It is a truism that judges  fall  on  the
      sword of what they write:  judicial failure will be averted if  judges
      take care to avoid the impermissible conflation which shines  brightly
      in the second passage quoted in [10] above.


  28) The task of the court, or tribunal, is complicated  by  the  recurring
      phenomenon of public law grounds of challenge combining and, sometimes
      imperceptibly, merging with a complaint of human rights  infringements
      in one and  the  same  case.   This  is  one  of  the  driving  forces
      underpinning the  Upper  Tribunal's  emphasis  on  the  importance  of
      discipline and focus in pleadings in judicial  review  cases:  see  in
      particular R (SN) v SSHD (Striking Out  Principles)  [2015]  UKUT  227
      (IAC), at [28] - [32].  In such cases the judge must  be  particularly
      alert to apply the correct prism to the different kinds of  challenge.
      The lens must be altered and adjusted at the appropriate stage of  the
      judicial analysis.  This is so not least because  the  application  of
      the doctrine of proportionality in a given case  can  yield  a  result
      different from that which the application  of  public  law  principles
      might produce, as explained by Lord Steyn in Daly at [28].


  29) In Huang v SSHD [2007] 2AC  167,  the  House  of  Lords  examined  the
      decision  making  role  of  immigration  appellate  authorities   when
      deciding appeals on human rights grounds.  It decided that the task of
      the authority is to decide whether the impugned decision is  unlawful,
      being  incompatible  with  a  Convention  right.   The  House  decided
      emphatically that the authority is not simply  reviewing  the  primary
      decision maker's determination.  Rather, it  conducts  a  full  merits
      appeal: see [13].  Thus the authority - now the FtT - is  the  arbiter
      of all aspects of the human rights claim,  including  proportionality.
      The  effect  of  this  decision  is  that  in   deciding   issues   of
      proportionality the FtT conducts a full merits appeal.   This  is  the
      correct approach in statutory appeals.  However, as  explained  below,
      the lens must be adjusted in judicial review cases.

  30) Implicit in the decisions in Daly and Huang is  the  proposition  that
      where human rights issues  fall  to  be  decided  in  judicial  review
      proceedings the function of the Upper Tribunal (and, for that  matter,
      the Administrative Court) does not equate with  that  of  the  FtT  in
      statutory  appeals.   Rather,  in   adjudicating   on   questions   of
      proportionality, the function remains one of review.  That said, it is
      appropriate to emphasise that the standard of review is  not  that  of
      irrationality and, further, the latitude,  or  discretionary  area  of
      judgment, to be accorded to the Secretary of State will vary according
      to the context.  Thus the scale of intensity of review  is  a  sliding
      one.  A case warranting high intensity review could, in the  abstract,
      differ little in substance from an FtT merits appeal.  The  extent  to
      which these two distinct methods  of  judicial  superintendence  merge
      will depend upon further developments in the law.  One of  the  modest
      aims of this judgment is to highlight the distinction.

      The Impugned Decision: Conclusions

  31) On behalf of the  Applicant  Ms  Thomas  acknowledged  that  the  main
      challenge to the  impugned  decision  is  made  under  the  Article  8
      provisions of the Rules.  The central focus of her submissions was the
      "insurmountable obstacles" provision in paragraph EX1 of Appendix  FM.
      She criticised the weight attributed to certain considerations and the
      lack of weight accorded to others. The burden of her argument was that
      the Secretary of State had failed to give  sufficient  weight  to  the
      Applicant's partner's troubled upbringing, her rape when  a  teenager,
      the nationality of the rapist, her PTSD condition and  treatment,  her
      fertility  treatment  and  her  unfamiliarity  with  the  culture  and
      languages of Pakistan.  In short, the burden of the  Applicant's  case
      is that the impugned decision is a disproportionate interference  with
      the family life rights of the Applicant and his partner under  Article
      8 ECHR.

  32) As the most recent learning on the test of  insurmountable  obstacles,
      contained in the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  (on  the
      application of Agyarko and others) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2015] EWCA Civ 440, makes clear, this phrase  as  used  in
      the Rules is intended to have the same meaning as  in  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence, illustrated in Jeunesse  v  The Netherlands  [2015]  60
      EHRR 17 at  [117].   Giving  the  judgment  of  the  Court,  Sales  LJ
      highlighted two particular features of  the  insurmountable  obstacles
      criterion.  First, while imposing  a  stringent  test,  it  is  to  be
      interpreted "in a sensible and practical rather than a purely  literal
      way": see [23].  Second, this criterion is not simply a factor  to  be
      taken into account.  Rather, it is a condition which must be satisfied
      if a claim under the Rules is to succeed.


  33) I find  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision. It is impressively and carefully  reasoned.  Its  components
      are a series of evaluative assessments directed to the  main  features
      of the Applicant's case. No relevant fact or factor has been  ignored,
      while nothing immaterial has been  considered.  Settling  in  Pakistan
      will undoubtedly involve hardship,  disruption,  anxiety  and  various
      challenges for the Applicant's partner, less  so  for  the  Applicant.
      However, collectively, I consider that these factors are  insufficient
      to  warrant  condemnation  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  evaluative
      assessment  as  disproportionate.   While  the  Applicant   would   in
      principle have found it easier to satisfy the less stringent, somewhat
      gentler predecessor test of whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
      the couple to continue their family life outside the United Kingdom, a
      decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  his  detriment,  on  this
      hypothesis, would also have been difficult to upset.  A  fortiori  the
      current decision which involved the application of a demonstrably  and
      incontestably more exacting criterion to the Applicant's case.

  34) It was further argued, albeit  somewhat  faintly,  on  behalf  of  the
      Applicant that the Secretary of State's application of the  "no  ties"
      criterion  enshrined  in  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the   Rules   was
      unsustainable.  The main features of the equation,  in  this  respect,
      are the Applicant's age, his upbringing in Pakistan to the age of  15,
      his present age (25), the length of his sojourn in the United Kingdom,
      his family  circumstances  here  and  the  evidence  relating  to  his
      enduring connections, or the lack thereof, with Pakistan.  I  consider
      that on these issues the Applicant's case is evidentially  barren  and
      incurably  frail.   The  Secretary  of  State's  application  of  this
      criterion is in my view comfortably compliant with the proportionality
      principle.

  35) Finally, in challenging the Secretary of State's decision outwith  the
      framework of the Rules, Ms Thomas's  central  argument  was  that  the
      impugned decision does not demonstrate  sufficient  care,  detail  and
      reasoning on the part of  the  decision  maker.  I  accept  that  this
      complaint, in principle, sounds on the proportionality issue. However,
      as my assessment in [33] above makes clear, I consider  it  devoid  of
      merit.  Having regard  to  the  jurisprudence  on  this  subject,  the
      ultimate question for the Tribunal is whether there  is  something  so
      compelling or  exceptional  about  the  Applicant's  circumstances  to
      warrant the condemnation of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  as
      disproportionate, thereby displacing  the  public  interests  engaged,
      which are the maintenance of firm immigration control and the economic
      wellbeing of the country.

  36) In my judgement, while acknowledging that proportionality  is  a  more
      penetrating and sophisticated tool  of  analysis  than  irrationality,
      this question must be answered in the negative,  for  essentially  the
      same  reasons  which  underpin  the  Tribunal's   rejection   of   the
      Applicant's first and second grounds  of  challenge.  The  Applicant's
      case undoubtedly possesses some unusual, appealing  and  compassionate
      features.  However, bearing in mind that this is not an appeal on  the
      merits, I consider that these fall markedly short of  outweighing  the
      public interest in the balancing exercise.


  37) The frailty of the Applicant's case in this respect is sharply exposed
      by the application of sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act  to  this
      case.  These provisions dictate that little weight is to be  given  to
      any private life established by the  Applicant  when  his  immigration
      status was precarious.  I consider that his immigration status was  of
      this kind from his arrival in the United Kingdom.  In addition, little
      weight is to be attributed to private life established  by  him  since
      the  expiry  of  his  status  of  lawful  visitor  around  2008.   The
      relationship with his partner  was  formed  during  the  period  which
      followed. It has elements of both private and family life. I refer  to
      the recent analysis of these new statutory provisions  in  Forman  (ss
      117A-C: considerations) [2015] UKUT (IAC) 412, at [17].  As a court of
      judicial review, I  conclude  that  as  regards  all  aspects  of  the
      Applicant's  challenge  the  public  interests  in  play,  namely  the
      maintenance of firm immigration control and the economic well being of
      the country, comfortably outweigh the  competing  personal  Article  8
      interests of the Applicant and his partner.

Decision

  38) Giving effect to the analysis and conclusions above:

      (i)   the application for judicial review is dismissed;

       ii) the Applicant will pay the Respondent's costs, to be assessed in
           default of agreement, subject to any submissions in  writing  to
           be made by 31 August 2015; and


      iii) this being, ultimately, a decision entailing the application  of
           well established  principles  to  a  particular  fact  sensitive
           context,  permission  to  appeal  is  refused,  subject  to  any
           application in writing by the Applicant by 31 August 2015.

                 Signed :
                       [pic]
           The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
            President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber

            Dated:       08 August 2015











Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

