

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 September 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  K. M. O.

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Harris, of counsel

      The Immigration Rules, when applied in the context of the  deportation
      of a foreign criminal, are a complete code.  Where  an  assessment  is
      required to be made as to whether a person meets the  requirements  of
      para 399 of the Immigration Rules, as that comprises an assessment  of
      that person's claim under article 8 of the ECHR, it  is  necessary  to
      have regard, in making that assessment, to the matters  to  which  the
      Tribunal must have regard as a consequence of the provisions of s117C.
      In particular,  those  include  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
      committed, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation  of  a
      foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly" in the  phrase  "unduly
      harsh"  requires  consideration  of  whether,  in  the  light  of  the
      seriousness of the offences committed by the foreign criminal and  the
      public interest considerations that come into play, the impact on  the
      child, children or partner of the foreign criminal being  deported  is
      inordinately or excessively harsh.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The question of law  that  arises  to  be  addressed  in  this  appeal
      concerns the construction of the phrase "unduly harsh" in s117C of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and para 399
      of HC 395, as amended by HC 532. In particular, when carrying  out  an
      assessment as to whether the impact upon a qualifying child or partner
      will be unduly harsh,  should  that  assessment  be  informed  by  the
      seriousness of the offence committed by the  foreign  criminal  facing
      deportation or is that assessment focused  entirely  upon  the  impact
      upon the innocent family member, with no reference whatsoever  to  the
      seriousness of the offence?




   2. The view taken by the Tribunal in MAB (para 399; "unduly  harsh")  USA
      [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) was that:




           "The phrase "unduly  harsh"  in  para  399  of  the  Rules  (and
           s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import a balancing  exercise
           requiring  the  public  interest  to  be  weighed  against   the
           circumstances of the individual (whether child or partner of the
           deportee). The  focus  is  solely  upon  an  evaluation  of  the
           consequences and impact upon the individual concerned."




      For the Secretary of State, Mr Wilding submits that the  approach  set
      out by the Tribunal in MAB is not correct.  Before engaging with these
      issues it is necessary to set out the circumstances of the appeal  now
      before the Tribunal. For present purposes the following  summary  will
      suffice.




   3. The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Stanford who, by a determination
      dated 3 January 2015, allowed the appeal against a  deportation  order
      made as a consequence  of  Mr  KO,  to  whom  I  will  refer  as  "the
      claimant", being a foreign criminal  within  the  meaning  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007 because of his conviction of an offence of conspiracy
      to dishonestly make false representations for which he was  imprisoned
      for 20 months. His  wife  was  a  co-defendant  in  those  proceedings
      although she is not a party to this appeal.




   4. The judge allowed the appeal because he found that  deportation  would
      bring about a disproportionate interference with rights  protected  by
      Article 8 of the ECHR because the result  would  be  that  the  family
      would be broken up. There are five children of the family, now aged 2,
      4, 6, 10 and 17 years old respectively. The eldest is  the  claimant's
      step-daughter. The youngest child was born after  he  had  served  the
      prison term that led to the deportation order. The claimant's wife and
      step-daughter have indefinite leave  to  remain  and  the  other  four
      children are British citizens. In reaching that conclusion  the  judge
      found that it would be unduly harsh for the 17 year old step-daughter,
      who was treated in every respect as a child of the family, to move  to
      Nigeria. Although, considered in isolation, the position  of  each  of
      the other four young children was that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
      for them to move to Nigeria, the judge accepted that, in reality, they
      would all remain in the United Kingdom so that the  family  life  each
      enjoyed with their father would be severed.




   5. The appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal on 24 June 2015. By  a
      decision dated 5 August 2015 the Tribunal found  that  in  failing  to
      make any finding as to whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      children and step daughter to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without
      their father  and  in  carrying  out  the  proportionality  assessment
      without proper reference to the immigration rules, the judge  made  an
      error of law such as to require the decision to be set aside  and  re-
      made. It is helpful to reproduce here the findings of fact made by the
      judge that have been  described  as  "undisputed"  and  so  have  been
      preserved, references to "the respondent" being to  the  claimant.  Mr
      Harris, who appeared also at the error of law hearing on behalf of the
      claimant, confirmed today that  these  finding  of  fact  were  indeed
      accepted before the earlier panel to be undisputed:




              i. The respondent has family life with his wife  and  children
                 and has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
                 all five children;

             ii. It would be unduly harsh to expect  his  step  daughter  to
                 live in Nigeria;

            iii. It is accepted that it would be in the  best  interests  of
                 the children to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
                 respondent's wife and if they chose to leave that would  be
                 a matter for them;

             iv. It would not be in his eldest son's best  interests  to  be
                 separated from his father again but it would not be  unduly
                 harsh to require him to live in Nigeria;

              v. The respondent's daughter would suffer if her  father  were
                 to be deported but it would not be unduly harsh to  require
                 her to live in Nigeria;

             vi. There is no evidence to suggest that  it  would  be  unduly
                 harsh for the younger two children to live in Nigeria  with
                 their parents;

            vii. The respondent is the person who cares for the children  at
                 home and organises the household while his wife  works  and
                 she would have to discontinue her employment  to  care  for
                 the children if the respondent were to be deported;

           viii. The relationship the respondent has with all  the  children
                 is not one that could be  maintained  from  abroad  through
                 modern means of  communication;

             ix. The respondent's presence within the family enables them to
                 be financially independent within the  meaning  of  section
                 117(B)(3) of the  NIAA 2002;

              x. It would be in the public interest not  to  take  away  the
                 stability of  the  family  and  to  allow  them  to  remain
                 financially independent.



The legal framework



   6. Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  provide,  so  far  as
      material:

           "32. Automatic deportation

           (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a) who is not a British citizen,

           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

           (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months.

           (3) Condition 2 is that-

                 (a) the offence is specified by order of the  Secretary  of
                 State  under   section   72(4)(a)   of   the   Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (serious criminal), and

                 (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

           (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
           to the public good.

           (5) The Secretary of State must  make  a  deportation  order  in
           respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ...'

           33. Exceptions

           (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-

           (a) do not apply where an  exception  in  this  section  applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and

           ...

           (2) Exception 1 is where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

           (a) a person's Convention rights, or

           (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
           Convention."

   7. Para 396 of the immigration rules provides the following presumption:
           396. Where a person is liable  to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.

      And paras 397 and A398 make clear that  the  rules  aim  to  encompass
      rights protected by the ECHR:

           397. A deportation order  will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

           A398. These rules apply where:

              a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation  claims  that  his
                 deportation would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;



              b) a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order  made
                 against him to be revoked.

   That ambition is reinforced by the heading that follows  of  "Deportation
   and Article 8" under which the framework of the rules is set out:
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and



                 (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

                 (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4  years
                 but at least 12 months; or

                 (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good  and in the public interest because,  in
                 the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has
                 caused serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who
                 shows a particular disregard for the law,




           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  the
           public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
           factors where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
           above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.




      399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies  if
      -



           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and

                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                 (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                 immigration decision; and in either case

                 (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in  the
                 country to which the person is to be deported

                 (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                 UK without the person who is to be deported   or




           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled  in
           the UK and

                    (i) the relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  the
                    person (deportee)  was in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
                    immigration status was not precarious; and

                ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
                    country to which the person is to be  deported,  because
                    of  compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   those
                    described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

               iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain  in
                    the UK without the person who is to be deported.

   6. These rules must be seen in the context of the statutory framework now
      found at s117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
      S.117A sets out, in mandatory terms, what is expected of  a  court  or
      Tribunal:


           117A Application of this Part

               . (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is
                 required to determine whether a decision made under the
                 Immigration Acts-

                     . (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                       and family life under Article 8, and

                     . (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                       the Human Rights Act 1998.

               . (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court
                 or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                     . (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in
                       section 117B, and

                     . (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations listed in section
                       117C.

               . (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question"
                 means the question of whether an interference with a
                 person's right to respect for private and family life is
                 justified under Article 8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

               . (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                 in the public interest.

               . (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                 speak English-

            [pic] [pic]  [pic]
               . (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

               . (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

               . (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-
                 ?(a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and?(b) are better able
                 to integrate into society.

               . (4)  Little weight should be given to- (a) a private life,
                 or ?(b) a relationship formed with a qualifying
                 partner,?that is established by a person at a time when the
                 person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

               . (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
                 established by a person at a time when the person's
                 immigration status is precarious.

               . (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to
                 deportation, the public interest does not require the
                 person's removal where-

                     . (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                       relationship with a qualifying child, and

                     . (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child
                       to leave the United Kingdom.

           117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals

               . (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                 interest.

               . (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                 criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                 of the criminal.

               . (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not
                 been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                 more, the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                 Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               . (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                     . (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United
                       Kingdom for most of ?C's life,

                     . (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the
                       United Kingdom, and

                     . (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                       integration into the country to which C is proposed
                       to be deported.

               . (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                 subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                 genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                 qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                 partner or child would be unduly harsh.

               . (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
                 years, the public interest requires deportation unless
                 there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
                 those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                 (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                 taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                 a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent
                 that the reason for the decision was the offence or
                 offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

Discussion

   8. As is readily apparent, this framework provides a structured  approach
      to the case advanced by a person facing deportation who claims that if
      he is removed there will be an impermissible  infringement  of  rights
      protected by article 8 of the ECHR.  Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act
      2007 provides that the deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive
      to the public good and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
      deportation order unless one of the exception of s33 applies. In  this
      appeal  we  are  concerned  only  with  the  exception  that  prevents
      deportation where removal would breach rights protected by  the  ECHR.
      In order to assess whether  a  person's  Convention  rights  would  be
      breached,  the  Secretary  of  State  must  first   consider   whether
      paragraphs 399 or 399A applies. For the purposes of  this  appeal,  as
      was confirmed by Mr Harris in his oral submissions, we  are  concerned
      only with paragraph  399  and  not  with  399A.  It  is  important  to
      recognise, therefore, that the  assessment  as  to  whether  para  399
      applies is an assessment of whether deportation  would  result  in  an
      infringement of article 8 rights. Where paragraphs 399 or 399A do  not
      apply, or where they are not available because the potential  deportee
      was sentenced to more than 4 years' imprisonment, the final assessment
      of the article 8 claim takes place within the framework of  para  398.
      Again, in the context of the discussion that follows, it is  important
      to  recognise  that  although  this  process  takes  place  under  the
      provisions of the rules, it is an assessment of a claim  that  removal
      would breach rights under article 8 of the ECHR.




   9. The final initial observation concerns the role played in this process
      by the provisions of s117 of the 2002 Act. As those  provisions  apply
      where the Tribunal is required to consider whether a decision breaches
      article 8 rights, it is unambiguously clear that s117 must apply to an
      assessment carried out under the rules.




  10. The immigration rules, in the  context  of  deportation,  represent  a
      complete code so far as Article 8 of the ECHR  is  concerned:  see  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   Therefore,  every  aspect  of
      Article 8 insofar as it is applicable to deportation, must inhabit the
      area within the rules. Thus, the concept of proportionality, involving
      a striking of a balance between the public interest  matters  in  play
      and rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR, must be engaged at some
      point in the assessment under the rules.




  11. Next, it is important to recognise the architecture of  s117C  of  the
      2002 Act. S117C opens with two statements  of  principle.  First,  the
      deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.  Secondly,
      the more serious the offence committed by the  foreign  criminal,  the
      greater is the public interest in his or deportation. Having  set  out
      those principles, s117 provides the framework in which they fall to be
      considered, this echoing, albeit  in  language  that  is  not  exactly
      similar,  the  provisions  of  the  immigration  rules.  Since   those
      statements of principle are considerations to which the Tribunal  must
      (in particular) have regard, it is hard to see why no  regard  at  all
      should be had to them when giving effect to  provisions  of  the  very
      section in which they appear.




  12. There is no tension in the fact that  there  is  an  area  of  overlap
      between s117C(4)&(5) and para 399 of the rules. When s117 was  brought
      into effect by the Commencement Order, the vocabulary of para 399  was
      different, speaking not of undue harshness but of reasonableness.  The
      rule was amended to reflect the vocabulary of the statute and  so  the
      assessment now carried out under  the  rules  is  compliant  with  the
      requirements of the statutory provision.




  13. The approach taken by the Tribunal in MAB was that  there  was  a  two
      stage approach, at least "potentially" (see  para  45),  so  that  the
      issue of proportionality arose only  at  the  second  stage,  where  a
      person subject to deportation failed to meet the requirements  of  399
      or 399A. Therefore:




           "In other words, Part 5A  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  only  becomes
           relevant at Stage 2 when the court or  tribunal  is  considering
           the issue of proportionality..."




      If that were correct, the result would be somewhat remarkable in  that
      a  clear  presumption  enshrined  in  primary  legislation  would   be
      displaced by an immigration rule. That approach seeks to disregard the
      unambiguous requirement of s.117A(2) that in  considering  the  public
      interest question, the court or tribunal  must  (in  particular)  have
      regard to, inter alia, the statement of principle  found  in  s117C(2)
      that the more serious the offence, the greater is the public  interest
      in deportation.

  14. It cannot be said that para 399 and 399A are not  concerned  with  the
      public interest question because the  overriding  presumption  of  the
      rules, as recited at para 396, is that where a  person  is  liable  to
      deportation the presumption shall be that the public interest requires
      deportation. Therefore, the public interest question inhabits para 399
      and 399A just as surely as it does in para 398.




  15. One response to this difficulty might be thought to be as follows.  As
      the rules themselves distinguish  between  levels  of  criminality  by
      providing a different framework for those who have been  sentenced  to
      more than 4 years' imprisonment, is that sufficient to accommodate the
      requirements of s117C(2)? However, an example illustrates how that  is
      not an adequate response. Imagine  two  persons,  A  and  B,  who  are
      foreign criminals facing deportation.  A  has  been  sentenced  to  12
      months imprisonment for, say,  making  a  fraudulent  motor  insurance
      claim. B has been sentenced  47  months  imprisonment  for  a  serious
      offence of possession class A drugs with intent to supply, a  category
      of offence that the Secretary of State considers  to  be  particularly
      serious in the  context  of  immigration  control.   If  the  approach
      advocated in MAB were correct there would be no basis  upon  which  to
      distinguish between those two foreign criminals, despite the demand of
      s117C(2) that the more serious the offence the greater is  the  public
      interest in deportation. Further, if B met the  requirements  of  para
      399(a) on the basis of the impact upon his child or partner considered
      in the manner advocated by MAB, it would mean that at no point in  the
      assessment of his article 8 claim had there been any consideration  of
      the seriousness of his offending, other than the fact of  his  falling
      within s117C(3) and para 398(b).




  16. In MAB the Tribunal place reliance upon what was said in MF  (Nigeria)
      v SSHD to support the conclusion that the assessment  under  para  399
      was not informed by considerations of the seriousness of  the  offence
      committed. That was because the Court of Appeal spoke of the exercises
      under 399  and  398  as  being  "separate",  although  those  separate
      exercises were not said to be different. The observation at para 44 of
      MF that:




           "We accordingly respectfully do not agree with the UT  that  the
           decision-maker is not "mandated or directed"  to  take  all  the
           relevant article 8 criteria into account."




      is consistent with the assessment within para 399  being  informed  by
      the important matter of the seriousness of the offence.  Returning  to
      the hypothetical example of A and B above,  on  the  MAB  approach,  B
      would be  someone  in  respect  of  whom,  if  he  otherwise  met  the
      requirements of the rules, all of  the  relevant  article  8  criteria
      would not have been taken into account.

  17. There is nothing in the rules, or the statute, to  eliminate  from  an
      assessment of what is "unduly harsh" considerations of the seriousness
      of the offence committed. Put another way, it is not at all  difficult
      to see that what may be an unduly harsh consequence in the context  of
      a person who faces deportation because of imprisonment for  12  months
      for an offence  that  does  not  involve  violence,  drugs  or  sexual
      connotations may not be unduly harsh in the case of a person  who,  by
      reason of committing such an offence,  plainly  represents  a  serious
      risk to the public if allowed to remain.




  18. That is reinforced by  the  fact  that  categorisation  as  a  foreign
      criminal can also arise on the basis of persistent offending  even  if
      that offending represents a limited threat to  the  public  at  large,
      such as  might  be  the  case  for  a  person  persistently  given  to
      committing offences of stealing low value items from shops.




  19. The phrase "unduly harsh"  plainly  anticipates  an  evaluation  being
      required. Mr Harris submitted that the evaluation required was of  the
      nature and quality of the relationship. While it  would  be  harsh  to
      sever a relationship between a child and her biological parent, it may
      not be unduly harsh to do so if the nature  of  the  relationship  had
      grown to be superficial. But, as Mr Wilding pointed out  in  response,
      that cannot be the role of the qualifying adverb because  para  399(a)
      itself requires that the relationship be a genuine and subsisting  one
      before consideration is given to whether it would be unduly  harsh  to
      disturb it.




  20. The Tribunal in MAB drew  upon  two  further  lines  of  reasoning  to
      support its approach. At para 73:




           "... it is worth noting that in the context of refugee  law  the
           phrase "unduly harsh" focusses upon  the  circumstances  of  the
           individual concerned within their own country (see, e.g.  Januzi
           v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5). There is no balancing exercise but rather
           an "evaluative" exercise as to whether an individual  cannot  be
           expected to move and live within their own  country  because  of
           the impact upon him or her."




      But there are two difficulties  with  that  reasoning.  First,  unlike
      article 8 of the ECHR, which provides a qualified right to respect for
      private and family life in respect of which a balance is to be  struck
      with the public interest arguments in  play,  the  protection  of  the
      Refugee Convention and article 3 of the ECHR  is  unqualified  and  so
      calls for no such striking of a balance between competing interests.




      Second, and in any event, at para 21 of Januzi, per Lord Bingham:




           "The decision-maker, taking account of all relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country of
           origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect the
           claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to
           expect him to do so"




      From which it can be seen that the requirement is to take account of
      "all relevant circumstances". Importing that to the deportation
      context, it is clear from the provisions of s117C(2) that those
      include the seriousness of the offence giving rise to the decision to
      make the deportation order.

  21. The second source of support  identified  in  MAB  were  decisions  of
      McCloskey J in MK v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) and BM  &  ors  v  SSHD
      [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC), observing that the President had, in MK:




           "... made no reference to the public interests and  was  clearly
           not  engaged  in  a  balancing  exercise  weighing  the   public
           interests against the consequences to the children of living  in
           the appellant's own country but rather was  simply  focusing  on
           the interests of the children"




      And of the words of the President in BM:




           "Again, we detect no suggestion that the term "unduly" in itself
           incorporates a balancing exercise taking into account the public
           interest..."




      However, in MK the Tribunal was concerned with  a  potential  deportee
      who did not have access to para  399  or  399A  because  he  had  been
      sentenced to more than 4 years imprisonment.  Although it  is  correct
      to say that the Tribunal did not have regard to the public interest in
      assessing whether the impact of deportation on the children  would  be
      unduly harsh, that appears to be because that was to be factored  into
      the assessment that had to be carried out under paragraph 398.




      In BM, at para 47, the President said,  specifically,  when  assessing
      the question of whether it would be unduly harsh for a father of young
      children to be deported that:




           "... we view everything in the round..."



      and a little later:



           "Balancing all the facts and factors, our conclusion is that the
           severity  of  the  impact  on  the  children's  lives   of   the
           Appellant's abrupt exit with all that would flow therefrom would
           be of such proportions as to be unduly harsh."




      It is impossible to see how such a balancing exercise could have  been
      conducted unless the matters speaking in the appellant's  favour  were
      balanced against a competing interest, which can only  have  been  the
      public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  which
      necessarily included the factors that s117C(2) required  the  Tribunal
      to have regard to.




  22. For all of these reasons I respectfully differ from the view taken  by
      the Tribunal in MAB.




  23. Although the Tribunal is concerned in this decision with  the  correct
      interpretation  of  399(a),  the  same   principles   apply   to   the
      interpretation of the same phase that appears in 399(b).




  24. The Immigration Rules, when applied in the context of the  deportation
      of a foreign criminal, are a complete code.  Where  an  assessment  is
      required to be made as to whether a person meets the  requirements  of
      para 399 of the Immigration Rules, as that comprises an assessment  of
      that person's claim under article 8 of the ECHR, it  is  necessary  to
      have regard, in making that assessment, to the matters  to  which  the
      Tribunal must have regard as a consequence of the provisions of s117C.
      In particular,  those  include  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
      committed, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation  of  a
      foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly" in the  phrase  "unduly
      harsh"  requires  consideration  of  whether,  in  the  light  of  the
      seriousness of the offences committed by the foreign criminal and  the
      public interest considerations that come into play, the impact on  the
      child, children or partner of the foreign criminal being  deported  is
      inordinately or excessively harsh.




  25. It might be observed also that the Secretary of State's has  published
      Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  -  Chapter   13:   Criminality
      Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases. Although such guidance  to  decision
      makers cannot be determinative in matters of statutory interpretation,
      since this has been published by the same government  department  that
      brought the Immigration Bill to Parliament that inserted s117 into the
      2002 Act, it might be thought likely that the guidance at least  gives
      a good idea of what the legislation was intended to achieve.  At 2.5.3
      the guidance says this:



           2.5.3 The effect of deportation on a  qualifying  partner  or  a
           qualifying child must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
           foreign criminal's immigration and criminal history. The greater
           the  public  interest   in   deportation,   the   stronger   the
           countervailing factors need to be  to  succeed.  The  impact  of
           deportation on a partner or child can be harsh, even very harsh,
           without being unduly harsh,  depending  on  the  extent  of  the
           public interest in deportation and of the family life affected
           .
           2.5.4 For example, it will  usually  be  more  difficult  for  a
           foreign criminal who has been sentenced  more  than  once  to  a
           period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than  four
           years to demonstrate that the effect  of  deportation  would  be
           unduly harsh than for a foreign criminal who has been  convicted
           of a single offence,  because  repeat  offending  increases  the
           public interest in deportation and so requires a stronger  claim
           to respect for family life in order to outweigh it.


  26. Although, for these reasons, I respectfully depart from  the  approach
      advocated by the Tribunal in MAB I do adopt the other guidance offered
      by that decision:




           "Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly  harsh"
           for   an   individual   involves   more   than   "uncomfortable,
           inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome  or  merely  difficult  and
           challenging"  consequences  and  imposes  a  considerably   more
           elevated or higher threshold.




           The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if  they  are
           "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly"  so  if  they  are
           "inordinately" or "excessively" harsh taking into account all of
           the circumstances of the individual."




      Although I would add, of  course,  that  "all  of  the  circumstances"
      includes the criminal history of the person facing deportation.

Remaking decision on appeal

  27. At the beginning of the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  today,  Mr
      Harris made an application under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to admit fresh evidence  not submitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal. This  evidence  was  a  report  by  Dr  Oboho
      providing his opinion upon the  effect  upon  the  children  of  being
      separated from their father. This report was produced at  the  hearing
      and I provided Mr Wilding with a short period of time to consider  its
      content. When the hearing resumed Mr Wilding objected to the admission
      of the evidence.




  28. Rule 15(2A) provides as follows:




           In an asylum or an immigration case-

           a) If a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence
              that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party must
              send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other
              party-

                 i) indicating the nature of the of the evidence; and

                ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier
                    Tribunal; and




           b) when considering whether to admit evidence that was not
              before the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have
              regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay in
              producing the evidence.




  29. As the report was produced for the first time at the beginning of  the
      hearing, it would be a generous interpretation of the rule  to  accept
      the footnote in Mr Harris's skeleton argument, itself produced at  the
      beginning of the hearing, as complying with the notice requirement  of
      rule 15(2)(a). In any event, permission to appeal was granted 4 months
      ago in May  2015  and  accompanying  that  grant  of  permission  were
      directions reminding the parties of the requirements of  rule  15(2A).
      There was no mention at the error of law hearing on  24  June  of  any
      intention to commission such a report and further  directions  in  the
      error of law decision again reminded the parties of what was  required
      to comply with rule 15(2A). Mr Wilding has had no  proper  opportunity
      to consider and respond to the report, which the Tribunal  itself  has
      not received, and in all those circumstances the application to  admit
      it was refused.




  30. Recently, in CG  (Jamaica)  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  194,  Laws  LJ
      reaffirmed that the correct approach in a case such as this was as set
      out in MF (Nigeria). Thus, in MF, Lord Dyson said this:



           "It is common  ground  that  the  first  step  that  has  to  be
           undertaken under the new rules is to decide whether  deportation
           would be contrary to an individual's article  8  rights  on  the
           grounds that (i) the case falls within para 398(b)  or  (c)  and
           (ii) one or more of the conditions set out in para 399(a) or (b)
           or para 399A(a) or (b) applies. If the case  falls  within  para
           398(b) or (c) and one or more of those conditions applies,  then
           the new rules  implicitly  provide  that  deportation  would  be
           contrary to article 8."


      Continuing:

           "36. What is the position where paras 399 and 399A do not  apply
           either because the case falls within  para  398(a)  or  because,
           although it falls  within  para  398(b)  or  (c),  none  of  the
           conditions set out in para 399(a) or (b) or para 399A(a) or  (b)
           applies? The new rules provide that in that event, 'it will only
           be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
           deportation will be outweighed by other factors'.
           43. The word 'exceptional' is often used to denote  a  departure
           from a general rule. The general rule in the present context  is
           that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paras  399  and
           399A do not apply, very compelling reasons will be  required  to
           outweigh the public interest in  deportation.  These  compelling
           reasons are the 'exceptional circumstances'. .
           44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are a  complete
           code and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered  in
           the  balancing   exercise   involve   the   application   of   a
           proportionality   test   as   required   by    the    Strasbourg
           jurisprudence."



  31. In his submissions today, Mr Harris made  clear  that  in  seeking  to
      establish the claimant's claim under article 8 of the ECHR  he  relies
      upon the relationship he now enjoys with his 5 children. He  does  not
      suggest that the  claimant's  relationship  with  his  wife,  who  was
      convicted together with  him  of  the  conspiracy  for  which  he  was
      sentenced to imprisonment, nor any obstacle to  his  integration  into
      Nigeria, is a basis upon which his article 8 claim could succeed.




  32. I have set out above the key findings of fact preserved by  the  panel
      of the Upper Tribunal who found that Judge Stanford had made an  error
      of law and set aside his decision. In brief, there is a strong  family
      life established  between  the  claimant  and  his  wife  and  family.
      Although the judge  recognised  that  the  claimant's  wife  and  four
      children may prefer to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  he  were
      deported, it would not be unduly harsh to expect each of them to  move
      to Nigeria to continue to enjoy family life together  there,  although
      the judge accepted that, in reality, they would remain in  the  United
      Kingdom with their mother. Today, nothing has been offered to  justify
      any departure from those findings of fact.  However,  the  finding  of
      Judge Stanford that it would be unduly harsh to expect the  claimant's
      step daughter to move to Nigeria has also been preserved. His  reasons
      for so concluding were as follows:




           "The oldest child has lived with her mother  and  the  appellant
           since 2003. She is close to adulthood but is still dependant  on
           and has her home with the family. She has  not  visited  Nigeria
           since her arrival in the United Kingdom as a baby and  expresses
           her view in a letter to the tribunal that she does not  want  to
           go to Nigeria because of the story  she  heard  about  her  late
           father who was killed there...




           This oldest child has leave to remain  and  is  settled  in  the
           United Kingdom. She has attended all her schooling in the United
           Kingdom and her personal life and social life is based  here  as
           well as her family life. It is understandable that she expresses
           a wish not to go to Nigeria and her wish must be respected as an
           important factor in coming to my conclusion. Given her  personal
           circumstances I find that it would be unduly  harsh  to  require
           this child to live in Nigeria."




  33. The first question, therefore, is whether it would be unduly harsh for
      the children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  their  father.
      That question must be addressed in the light of the circumstances as a
      whole, paying regard in particular to the factors  the  Tribunal  must
      take into account as a consequence of s117 of the 2002 Act.




  34. The claimant's immigration history is not a good one.  He  arrived  in
      the United Kingdom in March 1986, then aged 17, without leave to enter
      or remain and has remained unlawfully ever since.  He  first  came  to
      notice in May 2003 when served with notice  of  his  liability  to  be
      removed as a person unlawfully present in the United Kingdom. He  then
      claimed asylum. His  appeal  against  the  immigration  decision  that
      accompanied  refusal  was  dismissed  in   February   2004.   He   has
      subsequently accepted that his claim was a false one, founded upon  an
      untruthful account fabricated in order to  manufacture  a  basis  upon
      which he might secure leave to remain.




  35. The claimant and his wife have lived together  since  2003.  The  step
      daughter has always lived with them and  the  marriage  produced  four
      children born in 2005, 2009, 2011 and  2013.  The  four  children  are
      British citizens. The claimant's  wife  and  his  step  daughter  have
      indefinite leave to remain.




  36. The offence for which the claimant was imprisoned was a  serious  one.
      He entered a very late plea of guilty, the case having been listed for
      trial in December 2011. In his sentencing  remarks,  HHJ  Barker,  the
      Common Serjeant of London, said that the family  home  had  been  "the
      centre of a considerable fraudulent activity" and that  a  search  had
      disclosed  "everything  necessary  for  this  web  of  deceit  to   be
      manufactured, including bank cards, chequebooks  and  printing  sets".
      Police officers found details of "hundreds  of  different  cards"  and
      "evidence of a chatline log where the defendant had  been  in  contact
      with others in relation to furthering fraudulent activities  off  this
      sort". 188 accounts had been  manipulated  or  used  to  produce  some
      �98,000 worth of transactions,  either  completed  or  attempted.  The
      judge described the conspiracy, which involved the claimant's wife and
      brother  also,  as  "a  professionally  planned   operation   over   a
      significant period with  multiple  frauds;  therefore  it  is  in  the
      highest category" presumably for the purpose of sentencing guidelines.
      The judge added this:




           "The fact is these are and were serious antisocial offences.  It
           causes considerable disruption to both the  financial  community
           and to the individuals involved..."




  37. As we have already seen, there is both a statutory presumption  and  a
      presumption set out in the immigration rules that the  deportation  of
      foreign criminals is in the public interest.




  38. Mr Harris submits that  when  embarking  upon  the  assessment  as  to
      whether para 399 applies, on the basis that it would be  unduly  harsh
      for the children to remain in the United Kingdom without their father,
      the best interest of those children are a primary consideration. It is
      plain, and I accept it to  be  the  case,  that  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of the children, all of them, if they are able to maintain a
      full parental relationship with both parents and so it is not in their
      best interests for the claimant to be removed while they remain  here.
      That, however, is  not  a  complete  answer  to  the  question  to  be
      addressed because a balance has to be struck  between  that  important
      consideration and the powerful public interest considerations in play,
      including  the  statutory  presumption  that  deportation  of  foreign
      criminals is in the public interest and the more serious  the  offence
      the greater is the public interest in the deportation. The  sentencing
      judge plainly regarded the claimant's offending as serious.




  39. I accept also that there is no evidence to indicate that the  claimant
      now represents a risk of committing further offences. But that is just
      one aspect of the public interest in seeing that foreign criminals are
      deported. That has been made clear, consistently, in guidance given by
      the superior courts. In N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ Judge LJ said
      at para 83:

           "83. The "public  good"  and  the  "public  interest"  are  wide
           ranging  but  undefined  concepts.  In  my   judgment   (whether
           expressly referred to in any  decision  letter  or  not),  broad
           issues  of  social  cohesion  and  public  confidence   in   the
           administration of the system by which control is exercised  over
           non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United  Kingdom
           are engaged. They include an  element  of  deterrence,  to  non-
           British citizens who are already here, even if they are  genuine
           refugees and to those minded to come, so as to ensure that  they
           clearly understand that whatever the circumstances, one  of  the
           consequences of serious crime may well be deportation ..."


  40. More recently, in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, Pitchford LJ said at
      paragraph 24:

           "Deportation in pursuit of  the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
           crime and disorder  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  seen  as  one-
           dimensional in its  effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
           removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee  himself,  but
           also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar position.
           Furthermore, deportation of foreign criminals  preserves  public
           confidence in a system of control whose loss would  itself  tend
           towards crime and disorder."


  41. The same approach was taken by  a  Presidential  panel  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal  in  the  reported  decision  of  Masih   (deportation-public
      interest-basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC). The guidance
      is summarised in the head note as follows:



          "The following basic principles can be derived from the present
          case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation
          to the deportation of foreign criminals:


          (a)      In a case of automatic deportation, full account must be
              taken of the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
              citizens  convicted of serious offences, which lies not  only
              in the prevention of further offences  on  the  part  of  the
              individual concerned, but in deterring others from committing
              them in the first place.

          (b)     Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  expresses   society's
              condemnation of serious criminal activity and promotes public
              confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
              committed them.

          (c)      The starting-point for assessing the facts of the offence
              of which an individual has been committed, and  their  effect
              on others, and on the public as a whole,  must  be  the  view
              taken by the sentencing judge. .




  42. Finally, in this regard, further emphasis was provided by Laws  LJ  in
      SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 at para 54:




           "... The pressing nature of the public interest here is  vividly
           informed by the fact that by  Parliament's  express  declaration
           the public interest is injured if the criminal's deportation  is
           not effected. Such a  result  could  in  my  judgement  only  be
           justified by a very strong claim indeed."




  43. I have examined carefully Mr Harris' skeleton argument and my note  of
      his oral submissions to ensure that I have identified all he points to
      in support of his submission that the  effect  upon  the  children  of
      remaining here while the claimant is deported will  be  unduly  harsh.
      There is undoubtedly a close relationship between this father and  his
      children, as one would expect in any family living  together  as  does
      this one. The preserved finding of fact is that, although it would not
      be unduly harsh for the four younger children to move to Nigeria,  the
      reality of the situation is that they will remain  here  and,  as  the
      family  relationships  cannot  be  maintained  by  modern   means   of
      communication, there will be  a  complete  fracture  of  these  family
      relationships. The claimant is not authorised to work and so has  been
      unable to provide financial support for his family but his role within
      the household has meant that his wife has been able to work, which she
      would find hard or impossible if she had to care on a daily basis  for
      the children without her husband's assistance. Thus it is said that if
      the claimant is removed, the main household income will  be  lost  and
      the children would be subject to economic  disadvantage.  But,  again,
      that is not an experience that can, in my judgment, be categorised  as
      severe or bleak  or  excessively  harsh  as,  like  any  other  person
      lawfully settled in the United Kingdom, the claimant's wife and family
      will have access to welfare benefits should they be needed.




  44. Nor do I have any difficulty in  accepting  the  submission  that  the
      children, who have enjoyed a close and loving relationship with  their
      father, will find his absence distressing and difficult to accept. But
      it is hard to see how that would be any different from any  disruption
      of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  arising  from
      deportation. As was observed by Sedley LJ in AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA
      Civ 248:



           "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it
           has been, would be broken up for ever, because of the
           appellant's bad behaviour. That is what deportation does."



      This family relationship was not, of course, short lived but the point
      is the same. Nothing out  of  the  ordinary  has  been  identified  to
      demonstrate that in the case of this particular family, when  balanced
      against the powerful public interest considerations in play,  although
      the children will find separation from their father to  be  harsh,  it
      will not be, in all of the circumstances, unduly harsh for  them  each
      to remain in the United Kingdom  after  their  father  is  removed  to
      Nigeria.




  45. I should make clear, in case I am wrong to adopt the approach I do  to
      the applicable legal framework, what the outcome would  have  been  if
      the appeal had been determined in accordance with  the  MAB  approach.
      The difference is a stark one.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  MAB
      approach has been summarised as follows:




           "The phrase "unduly  harsh"  in  para  399  of  the  Rules  (and
           s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import a balancing  exercise
           requiring  the  public  interest  to  be  weighed  against   the
           circumstances of the individual (whether child or partner of the
           deportee). The  focus  is  solely  upon  an  evaluation  of  the
           consequences and impact upon the individual concerned."




      In this appeal if there is to be no balancing exercise  requiring  the
      public interest to be weighed and if  the  focus  is  solely  upon  an
      evaluation  of  the  consequences  and  impact  upon  the   claimant's
      children, it is clear that the application of para 399(a) can  deliver
      only one answer, that being that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      claimant's children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  their
      father, given that there is a close parental relationship which cannot
      be continued should their father be deported.







  46. That aside, the position, ultimately, is this. As I do not  adopt  the
      MAB approach, the claimant has not  established  that  the  impact  of
      deportation upon his children would be unduly harsh and  so  paragraph
      399 does not apply. It has not been suggested that para 399A  applies.
      Therefore, the  public  interest  in  his  deportation  will  only  be
      outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there   are   very   compelling
      circumstances over and above those described on  para  399.  The  only
      such matter identified that has not already been had regard to is that
      the claimant has now lived in the United Kingdom for a very long time,
      some 28 years. But that period of stay has been unlawful from start to
      finish and  so  little  weight  can  be  given  to  any  private  life
      established and there is nothing that comes even close  to  displacing
      the public interest arguments.




      Summary of decision




  47. For the reasons given in the error of law  decision  annexed  to  this
      decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  error  of  law  and  its
      decision has been set aside.




  48. I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.



                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    16 September 2015

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

