
                                                   [pic]


   JA (child - risk of persecution) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 00560 (IAC)


   Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                  Decision & Reasons |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 18 October 2016                 |                  On 24 November 2016|


                                   Before


                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER SAINI


                                   Between


                                     ja
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




   Representation:


   For  the  Appellant:   Miss  M  Knorr,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilson
                      Solicitors LLP
   For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer





   A child can be at risk of persecutory harm contrary to the UN  Convention
   on the Rights of the Child in circumstances  where  a  comparably  placed
   adult would not be at such a risk.




                                     DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This appeal is made against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
        to refuse an asylum claim  made  by  the  appellant  effectively  on
        behalf of her son who suffers from albinism, he being  now  7  years
        old. She came to this country some years ago from Nigeria and  there
        is no question but that she overstayed. Nonetheless  her  claim  was
        made on the basis of persecution that she said would  be  occasioned
        to her son were she to be returned to Nigeria, and that  persecution
        would result from his albinism.

     2. The refusal of the claim, which was in addition put on the basis  of
        Article 8, first came before Judge  Canavan  in  August  2013.  That
        decision found in her favour  under  Article  8  and  accepted  that
        because there would be sufficient interference with the  appellant's
        Article 8 rights the requirement that she  should  not  be  returned
        because it would be disproportionate  was  accepted.  The  appellant
        appealed against that on the basis that her  claim  for  asylum  had
        been rejected and should have been granted. The Secretary  of  State
        sought to cross-appeal on the basis that the Article 8 claim  should
        not have been allowed but permission was not granted to cross-appeal
        and it was not pursued.

     3. The fresh appeal was considered by Judge Bruce on 5  December  2013.
        That was of course an appeal to this Tribunal because there had been
        already the adverse decision of Judge  Canavan  on  this  point  and
        Judge Bruce sitting as a Deputy Judge in this Tribunal decided  that
        that appeal should not be allowed. There was then an appeal  to  the
        Court of Appeal. Leave to appeal was refused initially by  a  single
        Lord Justice but on a renewed hearing was granted and in the  result
        the matter was remitted for reconsideration  by  this  Tribunal  and
        that is the situation that we are dealing with.

     4. It is important to note some of  the  findings  of  both  First-tier
        Judge Canavan and Judge Bruce because, as  has  very  properly  been
        accepted by Mr Melvin, it is not for us to go  behind  any  positive
        findings made in favour of the appellant.

    5. There was before Judge Bruce a report from  a  Miss  Ariyo  who  had
       considerable experience in Nigeria. She dealt with the view that was
       formed generally of albinism. There are it seems a very  significant
       number of albinos in Nigeria. It was put as high as 6,000,000 in one
       of the reports but that may be an exaggeration. But certainly one is
       talking almost certainly  in  terms  of  over  1,000,000  out  of  a
       population we are told of something in the order of 200,000,000. But
       there is a general discrimination against  albinos.  This  is  based
       upon a view formed by many that albinism is a curse bestowed upon  a
       family as a result of some form of witchcraft which persists in  the
       nature of albinos. There is a further difficulty, albeit perhaps not
       one which is particularly general, namely that in some cases albinos
       have been murdered because it is believed that their body parts will
       bring benefit to  others  and  this,  as  we  say,  has  undoubtedly
       resulted in some attacks.

     6. It is not entirely clear what the extent of that is. We are told  in
        the whole of Africa there is no evidence of more than some 100 or so
        deaths resulting from that but there is some expert  evidence  which
        has recently been provided which indicates that there  is  a  danger
        that this is on the increase because the body parts of  albinos  can
        produce very significant financial advantage  to  those  who  supply
        them.

     7. However, it cannot we think be said that this is something which  is
        of general application and the question arises as  to  whether  that
        which undoubtedly would amount to persecution or fall within Article
        2 of the Convention on Human rights is sufficiently of a  real  risk
        as  to  justify  on  that  basis  a  finding  that  there  will   be
        persecution,

     8. We say a finding that there  will  be  persecution  because  it  was
        accepted in the earlier decisions that albinos could be regarded  as
        a social group. That must be right. Therefore if there is a  failure
        to provide necessary protection against  persecution,  if  there  is
        persecution, then there is a proper basis for finding that they  are
        refugees and it is again common ground that the test to  be  applied
        in deciding on persecution is very much the same test as would apply
        to decisions whether there is a breach of Article  3  of  the  Human
        Rights Convention and persecution and conduct under  Article  3  are
        put on the same basis.

     9. As we say, there is no question but  that  there  is  discrimination
        against albinos and that were he  to  be  returned  to  Nigeria  the
        appellant's  son,  now  aged   7,   would   be   exposed   to   such
        discrimination. It follows that at school, because he would need  of
        course to have education, he would suffer from  those  who  regarded
        albinos as persons who suffered from some taint,  which  meant  that
        they were to be regarded as lesser beings as a result.

  10. Equally there is a finding in the previous judge's  decisions  because
      Judge Bruce agreed with Judge  Canavan  essentially  in  her  findings
      that, and I quote from paragraph 37 of Judge Canavan's decision:

          "The background evidence and expert evidence  are  consistent  in
          showing;  that  albino  people  are  the  subject  of  widespread
          societal discrimination in areas such as education and employment
          and may often be ostracised by their families and the  community.
          The evidence also shows  that  according  to  some  cultural  and
          belief systems in  Nigeria  albino  people  are  believed  to  be
          endowed with certain powers. There are reports that some  albinos
          have been kidnapped and killed for ritualistic purposes."

    11. Reference was made to Miss Ariyo's report and it was  accepted  that
        the appellant was likely to have a subjective fear that both she and
        her son would suffer from discrimination in a wide number  of  areas
        as a result of his  albinism.  It  was  further  accepted  that  the
        Nigerian authorities were not likely to be able to provide effective
        protection  to  the  appellant   and   her   son   against   ongoing
        discrimination or  the  risk  of  more  serious  harm  arising  from
        potential ritualistic abuse.

    12. Judge Canavan went on to approach the matter on the basis that  what
        was important was the question of access to education and employment
        and, if the result of discrimination was that  access  to  education
        and employment was  compromised,  then  that  would  fall  within  a
        definition  of  persecution  and  that   followed   in   fact   from
        consideration of an approach which has been accepted generally.  But
        the question as again Judge Canavan  posed  was  how  seriously  the
        prejudice might affect a person  and  that  would  depend  on  their
        personal circumstances.

    13. One has to look at this from the point of view of "N", the child. He
        it must be borne in mind has so far, and he is now 7 years old, been
        living in this country where there is not the general  antipathy  to
        and discrimination against albinos. Thus, if he goes to  Nigeria  he
        will find himself in a society which on the findings of  the  judges
        and on the evidence is one where there is a  general  discriminatory
        approach to those suffering from albinism. That is  something  which
        is bound to have a particular effect upon him.  Equally  it  is  not
        suggested that his mother would not send him to  school.  There  was
        evidence apparently that a number of  parents  did  not  send  their
        albino children to school thinking that  there  was  not  any  point
        because albino children would not get anywhere anyway, as  a  result
        of the approach that there was in Nigeria. That we have no doubt  is
        not an attitude that his mother would follow.

    14. Nonetheless, it seems to us to be certainly within the realms  of  a
        real risk that  he  will  suffer  bullying  and  unpleasant  actions
        whether or not they amount to physical violence from fellow  pupils,
        and certainly a general adverse attitude from the public  at  large,
        something which we do not doubt, he will find  difficult  to  follow
        and which will affect him far  more  deeply  perhaps  than  a  child
        brought up in Nigeria exposed to that sort of attitude and no  doubt
        so far as  possible  protected  by  his  family  and  not  expecting
        anything else from where he grows up than that sort of attitude.  It
        will for "N" be something entirely new.

    15. The Convention on the Rights of the  Child  is  clearly  a  relevant
        consideration that this Tribunal and indeed all who deal with asylum
        issues should take into account, and it is clear that a child  could
        be at risk  of  persecutory  harm  contrary  to  the  Convention  in
        circumstances where a comparably placed adult would not be  at  such
        risk. The contrary is not I think argued by Mr Melvin who makes  the
        point that the findings of both judges below cannot be criticised on
        the basis that they adopted a proper approach and that what would be
        suffered was not sufficient to amount to persecution.  He  submitted
        that the risk of ritual slaughter which is really what it amounts to
        was not such as could properly be said to amount to a real  risk  as
        opposed to a remote possibility, and to that extent we are  inclined
        to agree.

    16. But as the UNHCR has observed in its Guidelines, ill-treatment which
        may not arise to the level of persecution in the case of  an  adult,
        may do so in the case of a child, and the child's youth  immaturity,
        vulnerability  etc  will  rightly  be  related  to  how  that  child
        experiences or fears harm.

    17. In E v Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary [2009] I  AC
        536 Lady Hale made some observations which are relied on.  What  she
        said so far as material was this, in paragraphs 8-9:

          "8. These and later cases show that the special  vulnerability  of
          children is relevant in  two  ways.  First,  it  is  a  factor  in
          assessing whether the treatment to which they have been  subjected
          reaches the 'minimum level of severity' - that is, the high  level
          of severity - needed to attract the protection of  article  3.  As
          the  Court  recently  reiterated  in  the  instructive   case   of
          Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v  Belgium  (2006)  46  EHRR
          449, para 48:

              'In order to fall within the scope of  article  3,  the  ill-
              treatment must  attain  a  minimum  level  of  severity,  the
              assessment of which depends on all the circumstances  of  the
              case, such as the duration of the treatment, its physical  or
              mental effects and, in some cases, the sex, age and state  of
              health of the victim.'

          Detaining a Congolese child of five, who had been separated  from
          her family, for two months in an  immigration  detention  facility
          designed for adults met that high threshold even though the  staff
          had done their best to be kind to her.

          9. The special vulnerability of children is also relevant  to  the
          scope of the obligations of the state to protect  them  from  such
          treatment. Again, in  Mubilanzila  Mayeka  and  Kaniki  Mitunga  v
          Belgium, at para 53, the court reiterated, citing Z, A, and Osman,
          that:

              ". .the obligation on the parties  under  Article  1  of  the
              Convention taken  in  conjunction  with  Article  3  requires
              states to take measures designed to ensure  that  individuals
              within their jurisdiction are not  subjected  to  torture  or
              inhuman or degrading treatment including  such  ill-treatment
              administered by private individuals. Steps should be taken to
              enable effective protection to be provided,  particularly  to
              children and other vulnerable members of society  and  should
              include reasonable measures to prevent ill-treatment of which
              the authorities have or ought to have  knowledge."  (emphasis
              supplied)...

    18. Clearly that indicates that  it  is  necessary  to  have  particular
        regard to the vulnerability of children. What  Lady  Hale  said  was
        agreed to by Lord Brown but was not dealt with by the other three of
        their lordships who sat on that case  and  so  we  accept  that  the
        observations are obiter. Nonetheless they carry considerable  weight
        and they coincide with the approach that has been  indicated  to  be
        correct from the Convention on the Rights of the Child and  we  have
        no doubt that that is the approach that should be adopted.

    19. That discrimination which has particular adverse  effects  can  mean
        that there is persecution is undoubtedly so. An  example  given  has
        been discrimination that prevents the access  to  employment  or  to
        education. But that that is not essential in order  for  persecution
        to be established is clear, Miss Knorr has referred in her  skeleton
        argument to a decision of the Federal  Court  of  Canada  in  Kim  v
        Canada (MCI) 120111 2 FCR 448 at 467, 469 and 475, in which the  CRC
        was referred to and the point was made that if the children's rights
        under the CRC were violated in  a  sustained  or  systematic  manner
        demonstrative of a failure of  state  protection  that  child  might
        qualify for refugee status.

    20. Equally in that case the court made the point  that  to  acknowledge
        that children have distinctive rights was not  to  graft  additional
        rights on to the definition in the Refugee Convention of persecution
        but was instead  to  interpret  the  definition  of  persecution  in
        accordance with the distinctive rights that  children  possessed  as
        recognised in the CRC and it was a denial of the CRC rights that the
        court believed to be important in  deciding  whether  there  was  an
        entitlement to refugee status.

    21. It has been submitted essentially by Mr Melvin that we cannot go  so
        far,  and  we  should  not  go  so  far,  as   to   recognise   that
        discrimination in Nigeria could amount to persecution because  there
        are a very large number, running into certainly at least,  1,000,000
        of albinos in that country who would be entitled if that were  right
        to protection.

    22. But that we do not think is the whole answer. We  have  to  consider
        the facts relating to the individual who appears before us. We  have
        here as we have said, a child born in this country, and  brought  up
        in this country, who has not faced any of the discrimination and the
        basis of that discrimination which he  could  be  at  real  risk  of
        suffering were he to be returned to Nigeria.

    23. Thus he would if returned have to recognise that he  is  treated  as
        someone who has a real difficulty, inasmuch as to it  is  considered
        by many that he has been tainted by some form of witchcraft and that
        he simply is to be regarded as  a  second  class  citizen.  That  of
        course in itself might not be enough but it is the  effect  of  that
        upon him that matters and we have no doubt that there is a real risk
        of certainly bullying, possibly worse, when he goes  to  school  and
        that he will feel a pariah in society as a whole.  As  the  previous
        judges have decided there is not likely to be  any  protection  from
        the authorities that he can expect from such conduct against him and
        thus the effect on him is that much more  serious  than  would  have
        been the effect had he lived all 'his life and been  brought  up  in
        the society in Nigeria.

    24. That in our judgment puts him  in  a  different  position  from  the
        general position of albinos in  Nigeria  and  in  our  judgment  the
        likely  effect  on  him  even  short  of  any  real  risk  of  being
        slaughtered or otherwise his body parts being taken,  is  sufficient
        to indicate that there is a real risk of persecution.

    25. We must make it clear that we are approaching this on the basis that
        the position and the particular vulnerability of  children  must  be
        the starting point. But this is a case which depends upon its  facts
        and the circumstances of the child having been brought  up  in  this
        country and not having faced the general approach  to  albinos  that
        exists in Nigeria. Thus we  do  not  regard  this  as  really  being
        appropriate to be a test case for albinos who are due to be returned
        to Nigeria or who face the turning down of any application  made  to
        stay in this country. Those will depend upon  the  circumstances  of
        their  individual  positions,  their  age,  no   doubt   and   their
        background. That is why we say that this is not a case that  can  be
        regarded as one  which  is  of  general  application  save  for  the
        approach. But the approach is one which is as we understand  is  not
        in itself contentious. It is merely that  Mr  Melvin  understandably
        submits that what he is likely to suffer by way of discrimination is
        not sufficient to amount to persecution.

    26. We must make it clear that in our judgment  this  was  a  relatively
        close  run  case  because  it  obviously  is  more  usual  to   find
        persecution where there is something rather  more  than  that  which
        exists in this case. But bearing in mind all the  circumstances  and
        the matters to which we have referred we will allow this appeal  and
        direct that  the  appellant  and  her  son  should  be  entitled  to
        protection under the Refugee Convention.

    27. This will persist only so long as there is a need for it  and  there
        can in future if the need arises be a  reconsideration  because  the
        old approach which this country adopted that once refugee status was
        accepted there was permanent right of residence  has  in  accordance
        with the precise terms of the Convention being changed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds/ humanitarian protection grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Mr Justice Collins
                     Date: 22 November 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.

Signed

[pic]
Mr                              Justice                              Collins
                   Date: 22 November 2016




