

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Macnikowski (applicable policies) [2014] UKUT 00567 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Sent on:                     |
|On 21 July 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             GREGORZ MACNIKOWSKI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: Ms Q Yong instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors (Leeds)
For the respondent: Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1) The principle in Abdi [1995] EWCA Civ 27 involves  an  entitlement  to
      the benefit of a policy that is applicable to the person concerned.


   2) As from 1 April 2009 the applicable policy relating to deportation  of
      EEA nationals who have committed serious offences was that set out  in
      the Criminal  Casework  Directorate  (European  Economic  Area)  Cases
      ("CCD:EEA").  The  preceding  policy  set  out  in  the  Home   Office
      Enforcement Instructions and Guidance (EIGs) Chapter 12.3 ceased to be
      applicable from that date, notwithstanding that it remained by mistake
      on the Home Office website for several years thereafter.
   3) From 15 January 2013  the  CCD-EEA  policy  was  in  turn  revised  by
      modernised guidance  entitled: Criminal  casework:  European  Economic
      Area (EEA) foreign national offender (FNO) cases (CC:EEA)(FNO).

                             DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 12 June 2013 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal  brought  by
the appellant, a 29 year  old  citizen  of  Poland  (and  therefore  an  EEA
national), against a decision made by the respondent on 17 October  2012  to
make a deportation order by virtue of section 5(1) of  the  Immigration  Act
1971. On 15 August 2012 the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  affray  and
sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. He had five previous  convictions,  one
of which had resulted in a custodial sentence of 21 days, for assault, on  9
June 2008. The Tribunal said it considered that  the  respondent  had  shown
that pursuant to regulation 21 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations  2006  (hereafter  the  2006  Regulations)  there  were  serious
grounds of  public  policy/public  security  for  making  such  a  decision.
Regulation 21(3) identifies the first of two  higher  levels  of  protection
against deportation for EEA nationals based on five and 10 years'  residence
respectively; this "baseline" protection for EEA nationals  is  set  out  at
regulation 19(3)(b).


2. In the course of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  an
argument advanced by the appellant's representatives that  the  respondent's
decision was not in accordance with the law because it was not based on  the
Home Office's Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance  (EIG)  Chapter  12.3
which appears to limit deportation action against EEA nationals  to  persons
who "must have been convicted of a serious  offence  normally  attracting  a
custodial sentence of two  years  or  more  ...".  The  First-tier  Tribunal
reasoned that the EIG Chapter 12.3 was:


     "not exhaustive or conclusive of which convictions  will  lead  to  an
    assessment of serious grounds of pubic policy or public  security...The
    use of the word "normally" is not the same as "must" and this fortifies
    the Tribunal's  view  that  the  Instructions  are  not  exhaustive  or
    conclusive of matters that could lead to such an assessment and thus  a
    finding that the decision was not in accordance with the law".


3. Following a hearing on 12 August 2013  before  an  Upper  Tribunal  panel
(UTJs Storey and Jordan) the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set
aside for error of law. In essence this decision considered that the  First-
tier Tribunal had  erred  by  failing  to  recognise  that  the  EIG  policy
afforded a discretion which had yet to be exercised. Noting  that  according
to the respondent there were in fact two different sets  of  policy  on  the
Home Office website at the same time (the EIG policy and  another  which  on
its face gave different guidance (which we will identify in a moment)),  the
Tribunal said that the further question arose as to why the  respondent  had
seemingly failed to follow the EIG policy when it was still on the  website.



4. At the close of the above hearing the UT panel put the parties on  notice
that it wished to receive submissions on the issue of whether  as  a  matter
of law the appellant had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence  in  the
five year period between 1 May 2007 (when he arrived in the UK)  and  1  May
2012. It made reference to  two  pending  references  before  the  Court  of
Justice of the  European  Union,  one  of  these  being  the  Case  C-387/12
Onuekwere v SSHD, 16 January 2014. The Court's ruling in that case  has  now
come to hand and, in light of its clear ruling that periods of  imprisonment
cannot be taken into  account  for  the  purposes  of  deciding  whether  an
applicant had acquired  permanent  residence,  Ms  Yong  conceded  that  the
appellant's  period  of  imprisonment  in  June  2008  prevented  him   from
acquiring permanent residence and that, accordingly, he could only  rely  on
the "baseline" level  of  protection  against  deportation  as  set  out  in
regulation 19(3).


5. At close of the above hearing the  UT  also  directed  the  appellant  to
produce an updated witness statement and any other report  relating  to  his
current risk  of  offending.  Separately  the  respondent  was  directed  to
furnish particulars of (i) the dates on which EIG Chapter 12.3 went  on  the
Home Office website and when it was removed; (ii) the  dates  on  which  the
different policy dealing  with  deportation  action  against  EEA  nationals
(European Casework Instructions (ECIs) ch 8  Section  3  para  2.2.6)  first
went on the Home Office website; and (iii) any amendments  (and  when  made)
to either (i) or (ii) over the period or periods.


6. In response the appellant  produced  a  supplementary  witness  statement
drawn up on 6 May 2014 and dated 14 July 2014, a psychiatric  report  by  Dr
Kajal Patel, Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist  dated  20  May  2014,  and  a
skeleton argument. In the witness statement the  appellant  stated  that  he
continued to be in immigration detention; he had been doing prison  work  as
a cleaner which was a position of trust; he  had  taken  part  in  art  room
activities in the education department; he read a lot;  he  played  football
and his team had recently  won  a  tournament;  he  saw  the  Samaritans  in
detention regularly; he had given up drinking and smoking which  had  caused
him problems in the past; now he wanted to live like  a  normal  person;  he
had plans to start  a  business  when  released;  he  was  also  a  chef  by
profession and also an electrician so whatever happens he would be  able  to
earn a living in the UK and find his own  place.  For  him  to  go  back  to
Poland would be a readjustment as he lived in the UK so long, he  wishes  to
remain.


7. The psychiatrist's report sets out the appellant's history and notes  the
progress he has made in custody where he has completed  a  number  of  short
vocational courses. Reference is made to the appellant having to  leave  his
job at Colnbrook detention centre in the kitchen because of  an  issue  with
his manager and an incident in November 2013 with one of the officers  which
eventually led to his transfer out of Colnbrook. It was also mentioned  that
the appellant reported some difficulties in his relationship  with  officers
at Dover IRC.


8. The report (which emphasises that it is  based  on  the  appellant's  own
self-report) notes that the appellant was adopted as a  child  and  suffered
the loss of his adoptive father some years  later;  he  had  no  history  of
mental health problems; he does not have a clear history of drug or  alcohol
dependence although he had admitted to drinking alcohol at the time  of  one
or more of his offences;  the  appellant  had  not  been  convicted  of  any
offences in Poland.


9. Although there was no OASys report on the appellant  Dr  Patel  addressed
the OASys "domains" or "crimogenic factors" in which the appellant  reported
some difficulties: Relationships;  lifestyle  and  associates;  Alcohol  and
Thinking and Behaviour. Dr Patel said he felt it was very difficult for  the
appellant to address these factors in prison. If he were released  he  would
be faced with very little support and social contact but  would  not  be  in
contact with his anti-social peers. He found the appellant insightful  about
what he needed to do in future to avoid problems with alcohol.


10. Whilst emphasising that risk assessment is  not  an  exact  science,  Dr
Patel concluded that:


    "taking all the information and ambiguities together, it is my  overall
    view  that  [the  appellant]  currently  presents  a  medium  risk   of
    reoffending if he were released. The risk may in  fact  be  lower  than
    this, but this is  my  assessment  based  on  the  information  I  have
    available".


11. Dr Patel went on  to  observe  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  any
convictions for "serious violence", nor had he behaved in a manner that  had
caused serious harm to anybody in the past.  He  concluded  that:  "I  would
therefore assess his risk of serious harm to others to  be  low...I  do  not
think  [the  appellant]  presents  a  particularly  increased  risk  to  any
subpopulatons such as intimate partners, children, or professionals. "


12. The appellant's skeleton argument made three main points.  First,  there
was nothing to show  that  at  the  date  of  decision  the  respondent  had
considered any policy, whether the EIG policy or any other. That  in  itself
rendered the respondent's decision not in accordance with the  law.  Second,
whilst the respondent maintained that the EIG policy  had  been  superseded,
her representative had served it on the panel  for  their  consideration  at
the appeal hearing, appended to other documents. Third, the EIG policy  thus
fell within the Abdi description of a policy that "was widely published  and
intended to be acted upon": see Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
v Abdi [1995]  EWCA  Civ  27  at  [23].  Thus  it  was  submitted  that  the
appellant's case fell directly within the circumstances of the Abdi case.


13. As regards whether the respondent had shown that there were  grounds  of
public policy or public  security  as  required  by  regulation  21(5),  the
appellant submitted that the appellant had  never  been  sentenced  to  more
than 12 months imprisonment; his early guilty plea went to show that he  had
genuine remorse for the crime he had committed; he had served his  sentence;
Dr Patel had assessed his risk  of  serious  harm  to  others  as  low;  the
appellant has been properly rehabilitated within the British system;  if  he
were to be removed there would be an interference with his right to  respect
for private life with disproportionate consequences.


14. The respondent produced a skeleton argument  which  explained  that  the
exercise of answering the Tribunal's three questions had proved elusive  but
she accepted that the "snapshots" furnished on a previous  occasion  by  the
appellant taken from the National Archive indicated the continuing  presence
of the version of EIG  12.3  (which  made  reference  to  2  years)  on  the
external website at the  date  of  decision  (in  October  2012).  Enquiries
showed that this had not in fact been removed until  April  2013  (and  then
only as a  result  of  Mr  Deller  bringing  it  to  the  attention  of  his
department). The respondent was able to confirm that this document had  been
left on the website by mistake.


15. The respondent said she was able to  confirm  that  from  1  April  2009
until early 2013 the external website  had  exhibited  a  document  entitled
Criminal  Casework  Directorate:  European   Economic   Area   (EEA)   Cases
(hereafter  CCD:EEA  Cases)  and  that  this  contained  the   policy   that
caseworkers had been applying to all cases since that  date.  This  document
began with the following Introduction:


    "1.1 This Instruction sets out the action that CCD staff need  to  take
    when processing cases for subjects from the EEA.
    1.2 In a change of policy  commencing  on  1  April  2009,  deportation
    consideration will be extended to cover EEA  Nationals  who  have  been
    sentenced to 12 months for certain offences  covering  sex,  drugs  and
    violence as listed in Annex B.  This  policy  will  apply  to  all  EEA
    Nationals convicted of an offence on or after 1 April 2009."


16. The respondent stated that this was the  policy  document  that  was  in
force on the date she made a decision on the appellant's  case  (in  October
2012). (We observe in parentheses that we take this clarification  to  stand
as a correction to the description of the policy  given  in  the  Tribunal's
error of law decision, which referred to Chapter 8 Section 3 para  2.2.6  of
the ECIs).


17. The respondent explained that this document was replaced on  15  January
2013  by  revised  and  modernised  guidance  entitled:  Criminal  casework:
European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  foreign  national  offender   (FNO)   cases
(CC:EEA)(FNO) and, indeed, the version of this modernised guidance  produced
by Mr Deller was a further updated one; we see this from its page  4  where,
under a heading "Changes to this guidance",  it is stated that  on  23  July
2013 there was a six month review by the modernised guidance team  resulting
in minor housekeeping changes. On page 5 it is stated that:


    "In cases of EEA FNOs, one of the workflow teams  must  check  the  CCD
    referral form to make sure the FNO meets the internal  EEA  deportation
    threshold criteria. The following thresholds apply:
    Custodial sentences of two years (24 months) or over for any  offences,
    or
    Custodial sentences of one year (12) months or over if the  offence  is
    related to drugs, sex, violence or other serious criminal activity (for
    detail of these specific offences, see related link: EEA  National  12m
    offences list).
    While in the majority of cases the two-year threshold  will  apply  for
    acceptance into CC there may be rare occasions when CC is instructed to
    accept a case that falls below that threshold, for example on direction
    from a Minister or the chief executive."


18. The respondent's skeleton argument advanced two  main  points  regarding
the co-existence on the external UKBA website at the  date  of  decision  of
two policies, one applying a  two-year  custodial  sentence  threshold  (EIG
Chapter 12.3), the other applying a one-year threshold (CCD-EEA). The  first
point was that this co-existence did not bring  into  play  Abdi  principles
because unlike the situation in Abdi, there was not here a clear  indication
of what the relevant policy actually  said;  rather  there  were  "different
statements saying different things appear[ing] simultaneously as  statements
of practice to be followed". Thus the EIG document  provided  no  legitimate
basis to suggest that the version more favourable to the  appellant  had  to
be followed or indeed fell to be considered at all.  The  second  point  was
that it was readily apparent from materials elsewhere (including those  used
by the decision maker) that the policy had changed:


    "Any inappropriate action here was the action of allowing an  incorrect
    policy statement to remain online, not the following of the current and
    correct policy in reaching the decision now under appeal."


19. Even if these points were not accepted, the  respondent  submitted  that
any failure to have regard to the EIG 12.3 document was  immaterial  to  the
outcome as the officer concerned was also directed by  alternative  guidance
to the decision actually reached  and  it  was  not  suggested  in  Abdi  or
elsewhere that failure to have regard to  an  alternative  policy  statement
automatically rendered the ensuing decision  "not  in  accordance  with  the
law"; the outcome of Abdi was clearly affected by the Court's view  that  it
was not certain that the outcome  would  be  the  same.   Here  any  further
decision would be taken against the same correct policy but  with  the  "old
rogue version" now removed from the website.  There  would  be  no  material
difference between the matters now being considered in the appeal and  those
which would be considered by the respondent.


20. Given the appellant's clearly correct concession that he cannot show  he
has ever acquired permanent  residence  and  so  only  qualifies  under  the
"baseline" protection set out in regulation  21(5),  it  is  unnecessary  to
summarise what the respondent goes on to  state  in  her  skeleton  argument
about the permanent  residence  issue.  As  regards  regulation  21(5),  the
respondent points out that the appellant's index offence  involved  violence
and the First-tier  Tribunal  expressed  concerns  as  to  his  attempts  to
address his problems so as  to  prevent  any  recurrence  of  his  offending
behaviour. This had not been addressed  by  any  material  provided  on  his
behalf. The materials available as to propensity  to  reoffend  indicated  a
risk such that there is a relevant level of danger to the  public  interest.
As the appellant had not in any meaningful way achieved integration into  UK
society,  this  was  not  a  situation   where   any   question   arose   of
responsibility for his rehabilitation  falling  upon  the  UK.  He  was  not
"rehabilitating" to any position in UK society, as on his history  he  never
actually held any such standing.


21. At the hearing the appellant gave brief  oral  evidence.  He  emphasised
that his job working in the kitchen meant that prison  staff  entrusted  him
with responsibility to handle potentially dangerous items  such  as  knives.
He had learnt a lot of useful skills whilst in prison which would stand  him
in good stead in turning his life around. He was now 30 and wanted  to  live
a normal life.


22. Ms Yong amplified her  skeleton  argument,  pointing  out  that  it  was
incumbent on the respondent to explain why she was departing from  a  policy
of hers that was in the public domain at the date of decision.  The  refusal
letter did not explain this. Indeed the refusal letter shows that no  policy
was referred to at all. If there had been some behind  the  scenes  reliance
on the new policy then surely that should have been put  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal, whereas what  was  put  before  that  tribunal  was  the  EIG
policy.  That was the policy that the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  put
before the First-tier Tribunal as the applicable  policy  and  it  was  that
policy which the First-tier  Tribunal  had  considered.  If  the  First-tier
Tribunal could be misled as to the applicable policy, what  chance  did  lay
individuals have?  What is a member of the public to do in  this  situation?
The appellant's evidence, supported by the psychiatric report,  showed  that
he had faced up to his offences and learnt useful skills  in  prison.  Since
arrival in the UK he had worked, he had had a relationship and had a  social
network of friends. He was more mature now.


23. Mr Deller reiterated the point made in  his  skeleton  that  unlike  the
situation in Abdi, where there was absolutely  no  doubt  about  the  policy
that applied, the present case was characterised by the co-existence of  two
policy documents. This unfortunate situation arose because of  cross-cutting
responsibilities   between   different   departments,   those    with    EEA
responsibilities and those with Criminal Casework  responsibilities.   There
was now better archiving so this situation would not arise  again.   In  the
appellant's case it was sufficiently  clear  that  the  respondent  had  had
regard to her CCD-EEA policy; there was nothing to suggest  she  had  looked
at the other policy and if she had she would not have  followed  it  as  the
CCD-EEA policy instructed her to follow the latter.


24. Mr Deller said the co-existence of two  different  policy  documents  on
the external website was not a happy position,  the  EIG  policy  mistakenly
staying on for some 4 years,  but  this  could  not  be  a  case  where  the
appellant had any kind of legitimate expectation. In any event, even if  the
decision was flawed through failure to apply the EIG policy,  the  appellant
could not succeed under the  correct  policy.  In  addition,  if  the  Upper
Tribunal found the decision not in accordance with the law,  the  respondent
would not be debarred from considering that the situation  had  changed  and
so considering the appellant under the now, further revised, policy.


 25. As regards the EIG policy, Mr Deller  said  that  the  word  "normally"
appears in the wrong place and must have  been  intended  to  refer  to  the
normal outcome of conviction for the offence.


26. As regards  the  issue  of  whether  the  respondent  was  justified  in
deporting the appellant under  regulation  21(5),  Mr  Deller  said  he  was
content to leave that matter to the Tribunal. He accepted that in  the  past
the appellant had engaged with the resident labour market but  his  criminal
behaviour showed he had not  integrated  into  British  society  or  British
norms. Article 8 added nothing to his case, as he had little to show by  way
of private life ties.


27. Asked by the panel whether at the date of decision  the  respondent  was
able to make a lawful decision when she  had  two  published  policies  that
were mutually inconsistent, Mr Deller said  that  if  a  user  went  by  the
external website it would be clear to him or her  that  the  later  document
superseded the EIG document, although he accepted that  the  later  document
did not identify the EIG policy as having been superseded.






   OUR ASSESSMENT


28. There are two grounds of appeal before us.


Regulation 21(5) of the 2006 EEA Regulations pursuant to s.84(1)(d)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)


29. The first ground is that the decision of the respondent  to  deport  the
appellant breached the appellant's EEA rights because  his  deportation  was
not justified on public policy or public security  grounds  as  required  by
regulation 21(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


 30. We do not find this ground made  out.  At  the  date  of  decision  the
respondent was entitled to take the view that the appellant  had  a  history
of criminal offending which showed  escalating  levels  of  seriousness,  as
reflected in the sentence he received  in  August  2012  of  12  months  for
affray. In the  light  of  (i)  the  NOMS  I  assessment,  which  found  the
appellant a medium risk of harm to the  public,  (ii)  the  remarks  of  the
sentencing judge; and (iii)  the lack of evidence  that  the  appellant  had
attended  any  victim  awareness  courses  to  rehabilitate  his   offending
behaviour, it was open to the respondent to find that there was  a  risk  of
re-offending and that all the available evidence indicated  that  he  had  a
propensity to re-offend and that  he  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat to the public. The  respondent  also  took  into
account the appellant's private life ties, which included that he  had  been
living with a sister in the UK and his history  of  employment.  Whilst  the
appellant had some engagement with the resident labour market in  the  past,
his pattern of criminal behaviour between 2008 and 2012 showed  he  had  not
integrated into British society. We agree with Mr Deller that invocation  of
Article 8 added nothing to the appellant's case, as he had  little  to  show
by way of private life ties.


31. By virtue of Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations it is necessary  for  us
to consider whether the decision  remains  a  proportionate  one  consistent
with  regulation  21(5)-(6)  in  the  light  of  evidence  relating  to  the
appellant's  up-to-date  circumstances.  We  accept  that  the   appellant's
previous convictions do not in themselves justify his  deportation.  We  are
mindful that we must take  into  account  a  wide  range  of  considerations
relating to the appellant's circumstances, including that he has  previously
worked in the UK, that he lived in the  UK  for  over  a  year  without  any
convictions, that - discounting the period of time he has spent in prison  -
he has integrated socially and  culturally  into  British  society  to  some
extent and that there is no  evidence  that  he  retains  strong  ties  with
Poland. We also accept  that  whilst  in  prison  (where  he  remains  under
Immigration Act powers) he has been able to acquire  useful  skills  through
short vocational courses and that he describes himself as wishing to  change
his ways. However, whilst it may be that he was entrusted with kitchen  work
at Colnbrook which showed he was trusted with  potentially  dangerous  items
such as knives, and whilst it may be that he presently works  at  a  cleaner
in IRC Dover, where he is entrusted with  potentially  dangerous  chemicals,
it is also clear from the psychiatric report that he had to leave  his  work
in the kitchens at Colnbrook after 6 months because he  had  an  issue  with
the manager. He had then obtained work in the DVD library but after 6  weeks
he was involved in an incident in November 2013 with  one  of  the  officers
which eventually led to his transfer to Dover. The immigration  papers  were
said by Dr Patel to indicate  that  he  had  been  racially  abusive  to  an
officer in November 2013 although  the  appellant  has  no  recollection  of
this. Subsequently when moved to Dover the appellant's application  to  work
in the kitchen was rejected twice. The appellant told Dr Patel that  he  was
not clear why he was rejected, but he  reported  some  difficulties  in  his
relationships with the officers at Dover IRC, as he  found  their  attitudes
to be difficult. Whilst we lack fuller particulars, it  is  clear  that  the
appellant's  conduct  whilst  in  prison  has  caused   problems   for   the
authorities.  Further, although Dr Patel assessed his risk of  serious  harm
to others to be low, he did not appear to  factor  in  these  problems  when
evaluating the appellant's  progress  since  conviction.  Further  Dr  Patel
accepted that:


    "13.11...it is not clear to me what circumstances [the appellant] would
    face if he were to be released, which makes it harder to  estimate  the
    likelihood of him reoffending if he were back  in  the  community.  For
    example [the appellant] would no longer  be  subject  to  any  form  of
    community  supervision  (as  his  sentence  has  expired);  this  would
    potentially have reduced his risk of reoffending".


32. There was therefore no clear basis to assume that if released  into  the
community the appellant would behave  in  an  integrative  way.  Given  that
between the time of his latest offence, which represented an  escalation  in
his  level  of  offending,  and  the  present  the  appellant  has  been  in
difficulties with the authorities  at  both  Colnbrook  and  Dover  IRC,  we
consider that even when due weight is given to certain efforts he  has  made
to address his offending, he  still   represents  a  "genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of
society" within the terms of regulation 21(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


The "not in accordance with the law" ground, pursuant to s.84(1)(e)  of  the
2002 Act


33. The second ground of appeal was that the  deportation  decision  of  the
respondent was not "in accordance with the law" by virtue of  a  failure  to
apply to the appellant's case a relevant policy, namely  para  12.3  of  the
EIG policy. The premise of this ground is that  this  EIG  policy  was  more
favourable to the appellant than the legal criteria set  out  in  regulation
21(5) and that it contained a discretion which caseworkers  were  instructed
to exercise. Applying the principles set out in  AG  and  others  (Policies;
executive discretions; Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo  [2007]  UKAIT  00082  it
would not be open to any Tribunal to exercise that discretion.


34. In addressing this only surviving ground of appeal, it is convenient  to
deal first of all with Ms Yong' argument that the appellant is  entitled  to
a "not in accordance with law" decision because  the  respondent  failed  to
apply any policy, either the old or the new.


35. We would accept that there is nothing that  shows  that  the  respondent
expressly considered the appellant under any policy, but at  the  same  time
we are satisfied that her decision-making was not at odds with  the  CCD-EEA
policy. This states that  deportation  consideration  is  now  "extended  to
cover EEA nationals who  have  been  sentenced  to  12  months  for  certain
offences covering sex, drugs and violence..." It  describes  this  threshold
as only an "initial" criterion. It  proceeds  to  outline  a  "Stage  2"  as
follows:


    "3.12 ...In considering whether to pursue deportation,  the  caseworker
    will consider the length of sentence versus claimed length of residence
    within the context of the EEA Regulations ...This will  help  determine
    whether a case is to  be  pursued.  The  caseworker   will  assess  the
    available evidence to support the FNP's claim re  how  long  they  have
    lived in the UK, and whether they have arguably been exercising  treaty
    rights for this period. They will consider whether  to  pursue  further
    evidence re NI records etc. To  assist  them  to  do  this  caseworkers
    should consider whether we are pursuing deportation in  line  with  the
    following grid."


36. The grid that is given lists four headings at  the  top,  three  dealing
with propensity to re-offend (high risk; medium risk;  low/negligible  risk)
and one dealing with court recommendation.)  The caseworker is  required  to
look at these heads  by  reference  to  a  left  hand  column  dealing  with
"sentence/residence".


37. Moving from the terms of the CCD-EEA policy to the respondent's  reasons
for deciding to deport the appellant, it is sufficiently clear that  his  12
months imprisonment was treated as only an initial criterion  and  that  the
subsequent criteria relating to length of  residence,  working  history  and
propensity to re-offend were those which the respondent took  into  account.
In her letter she noted that the appellant had not only  been  sentenced  to
12 months for affray but he had committed a series of offences tracing  back
to June 2008 and there seemed to be an escalation in the seriousness of  his
offending; that there was no evidence of residence in  accordance  with  the
EEA Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years or 10 years; that he  had
been assessed as  a  Multi-Agency  Public  Protection  Arrangements  (MAPPA)
level 1 nominal as a result of the  nature  of  his  offence;  and  that  in
completing his NOMS 1 assessment the offender manager had found he  posed  a
"medium risk of  harm  ".  "All  the  available  evidence",  the  respondent
concluded, "indicates that you have a propensity to re-offend and  that  you
represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  public
to justify your deportation".


38. It remains to consider whether the decision was not in  accordance  with
the law  for  failing  to  apply  the  EIG  policy  whose  terms  were  more
favourable.


39. If at the relevant time the EIG policy had been an applicable policy  in
the public domain relating to EEA  nationals  liable  to  deportation,  then
there is no doubt in our mind that the  decision  would  have  been  not  in
accordance with the law. If it was an applicable policy  then  it  is  plain
that not only did the respondent not refer  to  it  but  that  she  did  not
afford the appellant the benefit of its provisions. Although the EIG  policy
was not in mandatory terms and although it may be, as Mr Deller has  argued,
that it was poorly drafted, it is clear that it set a two year threshold  as
a starting point for consideration for deportation. On its face  it  limited
deportation action against EEA nationals to  persons  who  "must  have  been
convicted of a serious offence normally attracting a custodial  sentence  of
two years or more...". At the very least, under the terms of this  policy  a
person liable to deportation could expect that if the custodial sentence  in
question was less than two years or  more,  there  would  have  to  be  some
explanation  for  any  departure  from  the  normal  approach.  Potentially,
therefore, this was a policy under which the appellant stood to benefit.


40. It is the respondent's argument, however, that the  fact  that  the  EIG
had only remained on the website in error and that the caseworkers  actually
making decisions had no regard to it, meant that  it  was  not  in  fact  an
applicable policy.


41. This argument runs the gauntlet of several difficulties.


42. First, Mr Deller concedes that not only  did  the  EIG  policy  document
remain on the website for some 4 years without any warning that it had  been
superseded in April 2009, but   the  new  policy  -  the  CCD-EEA  policy  -
contained nothing to indicate to the reader that it had superseded the  EIG.
It is within our judicial  knowledge  that  in  recent  years  new  policies
appearing  on  the  external  website  have  sometimes  contained  a  clause
recording that they cancel  or  replace  a  previous  one;  and  indeed  the
(CC:EEA)(FNO) policy placed before us (which  replaced  the  CCD:EEA  policy
from 15 January  2013;  see  above  paragraph  17)  contains  a  box  headed
"Changes to this Guidance" which stated that on 23 July 2013 there had  been
a six months review resulting in minor housekeeping changes; so  this  could
have been done. Because it was not done there was no way for any  member  of
the public searching the external website to know that the  EIG  policy  had
only been left there by mistake. Nor was there any statement  anywhere  else
on the website explaining that it had been superseded. No  doubt  the  error
arose because of divided  responsibilities  between  CCD  and  EEA  national
caseworkers, but that furnishes only an explanation, not a justification.


43. Second, the EIG  policy  was  a  published  policy  and  the  respondent
accepts that at least for some period before April 2009 it had  been  widely
acted upon.


44. Third, although Mr Deller sought to suggest  (at  least  at  one  point)
that the EIG policy was essentially a "relic"  and  that  caseworkers  could
only have made decisions by reference to the  new  policy,  it  is  apparent
that this was not universal knowledge  to  the  generality  of  Home  Office
officials. We know that because the Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal actually sought to rely on it and encouraged the  Tribunal  to
rely on it (albeit submitting that it did not assist the  appellant  because
of its wording).


45. Fourth, it is arguable that the co-existence  of  two  policy  documents
dealing with deportation of EEA nationals who  have  committed  offences  on
the website at the same time  created  a  lack  of  transparency  and  legal
certainty, it not being possible for members of the  public  to  know  which
was the applicable policy.


46. Mr Deller has submitted that any lack  of  transparency  was  immaterial
because this was not a policy intended  to  assist  a  potentially  affected
person in guiding his  conduct.  Obviously  that  is  true  in  relation  to
whether he could expect to escape the  deportation  consequence  if  he  had
committed offences, but it is less obviously true in  relation  to  whether,
having been sentenced to 12 months, such a person should therefore  be  able
to escape deportation by reference to  Home  Office  policy  concerning  EEA
nationals who had worked in the UK previously.


47. In similar vein, Mr Deller has submitted that the  EIG  policy  document
was not one on which the appellant could in any  sense  place  reliance.  We
think he must be right about that, as it  seems  to  us  Ms  Yong  conceded.
Indubitably there was no unequivocal  assurance,  whether  by  means  of  an
express promise or an established practice,  that  the  Secretary  of  State
would give notice or embark upon consultation before she created or  changed
this policy: see R (Bhatt Murphy) v Independent  Assessor  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
755 (also known as R (Niazi) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department)
at [22]. Policies relating to deportation contained no such  assurances.  At
the same time, quite separately from legitimate expectation,  the  appellant
was arguably  entitled  to  say  that  there  had  been  a  failure  by  the
respondent to abide  by  the  principles  of  good  administration,  on  the
authority of Abdi - by pointing to the fact that  the  EIG  document  stated
that among the factors that "[c]ase workers  would  need  to  consider"  was
that "A person must have  been  convicted  of  a  serious  offence  normally
attracting a custodial sentence  of  two  years  or  more....".  In  such  a
context the appellant might be said to be able to pray in aid what was  said
in R v Department for Education and Employment,  ex.p.Begbie  [2000]  1  WLR
1115, 113E, where the Court saw "no difficulty with the proposition that  in
cases where government has  made  known  how  it  intends  to  exercise  his
powers, which affects the public at  large  it  may  be  held  to  its  word
irrespective of whether the [claimant] has been  relying  specifically  upon
it. The legitimate expectation in  such  a  case  is  that  government  will
behave towards its citizens as it says it will".


48. In Lumba (WL) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  UKSC
12 at [20] Lord Dyson noted that there was little dispute  concerning  three
issues:


    "20.... Mr Beloff QC rightly accepts as correct three  propositions  in
    relation to a policy. First, it must not be a blanket policy  admitting
    of no possibility of exceptions. Secondly, if unpublished, it must  not
    be inconsistent with  any  published  policy.  Thirdly,  it  should  be
    published if it will inform discretionary decisions in respect of which
    the  potential  object  of  those  decisions  has  a  right   to   make
    representations."


49. In relation to this second proposition, Lord Dyson went  on  to  observe
at [26] that:
    "26.As regards the second proposition accepted by Mr Beloff, a decision-
    maker  must  follow  his  published  policy  (and  not  some  different
    unpublished policy) unless there are good reasons for not doing so. The
    principle that policy must be consistently applied is not in doubt: see
    Wade and Forsyth Administrative Law, 10th ed (2009) p 316. As it is put
    in De Smith's Judicial Review, 6th ed (2007) at para 12-039:
          "there is  an  independent  duty  of  consistent  application  of
          policies, which is based on the principle of equal implementation
          of laws, non-discrimination and the lack of arbitrariness."
    The decision of the Court of Appeal in R  (Nadarajah)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1768, [2004] INLR 139  is
    a good illustration of the principle. At para  68,  Lord  Phillips  MR,
    giving the judgment of the court, said  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    could not rely on an aspect of his unpublished policy to render  lawful
    that which was at odds with his published policy. "
50. Having referred at [30] to "the basic public law duty  of  adherence  to
published policy" Lord Dyson concluded at [35]:
    "35. The individual has a basic public law right to  have  his  or  her
    case considered under whatever policy the executive sees fit  to  adopt
    provided that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion
    conferred by the statute: see In re Findlay [1985] AC 318, 338E.  There
    is a correlative right to know what that currently existing policy  is,
    so that the individual can make relevant representations in relation to
    it. In R (Anufrijeva) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2003] UKHL 36, [2004] 1 AC 604, para 26 Lord Steyn said:
      "Notice of a decision is required before it can have the character  of
      a determination with legal effect  because  the  individual  concerned
      must be in a position to challenge the decision in the courts if he or
      she wishes to do so. This is not a technical rule.  It  is  simply  an
      application of the right of access to justice. "
    36. Precisely the same  is  true  of  a  detention  policy.  Notice  is
    required so that the individual  knows  the  criteria  that  are  being
    applied and is able to challenge an adverse decision. I  would  endorse
    the statement made by Stanley Burnton J in R  (Salih)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC 2273 (Admin) at para 52  that
    "it is in general inconsistent with the constitutional imperative  that
    statute law be made known for the government  to  withhold  information
    about its policy relating to the  exercise  of  a  power  conferred  by
    statute." At para 72 of the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the
    present case, this statement was distinguished on the basis that it was
    made "in the quite  different  context  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to withhold from the individuals concerned an internal  policy
    relating to a statutory scheme designed for their benefit". This is not
    a satisfactory ground of distinction.  The  terms  of  a  scheme  which
    imposes penalties or other detriments are at least as important as  one
    which confers benefits. As  Mr  Fordham  puts  it:  why  should  it  be
    impermissible to keep secret a policy of compensating  those  who  have
    been unlawfully detained, but permissible to keep secret a policy which
    prescribes the criteria for their detention in the first place?
51. Despite the policy  scenario  in  Lumba  being  very  different,  it  is
arguable that the principle that there is a "correlative right to know  what
the currently existing policy is so that the individual  can  make  relevant
representations in relation  to  it"  has  purchase  in  the  instant  case.
Although, unlike the situation in Lumba, the inconsistency was  not  between
a published and an unpublished policy,  but  between  two  published  policy
documents, it could be said that that only  compounds  the  failure  of  the
respondent to comply with  her  public  law  duty  of  adherence  to  public
policy: if she can be obliged to give effect to her  unpublished  policy,  a
fortiori she can be obliged to give effect to any policy document  which  is
(or remains) published.

52. Additionally it is arguable that it matters not that the  appellant  did
not know of the existence of this policy (prior to the  decision):  to  echo
the words of Pill LJ in R (on the application  of  Rashid)  v  Secretary  of
State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  744  (although  made  in
relation to an unpublished policy) at [25]:  "Whether the claimant knows  of
the policy is not in the present  context  relevant.  It  would  be  grossly
unfair if the court's ability to intervene depended at all upon whether  the
particular claimant had or  had  not  heard  of  a  policy,  especially  one
unknown to relevant Home Office officials."

53. The reference to certain Home Office  officials  being  unaware  of  the
existence of the policy at issue in  Rashid  might  also  be  said  to  have
arguable resonance in this case, since, as  Ms  Yong  has  highlighted,  the
Home Office Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeared
unaware that the policy which he produced  to  it  had  been  superseded  by
another, less favourable to the appellant.

54. In light of the above considerations it is superficially  attractive  to
conclude that the appellant was entitled to  assume  that  the  EIG  policy,
being on the external website without any warning anywhere that it had  been
superseded, would be adhered to, and that, absent its removal or some  clear
and unambiguous statement that it  was  no  longer  the  applicable  policy,
there was a failure of good administration contrary to Abdi principles.

55. Nevertheless, we do not consider that such considerations can or  should
prevail for two main reasons: first, even though the EIG document was  still
on the website, it is clear that it had  only  remained  there  by  mistake;
second, it is equally clear that since April 2009  (until  15  January  2013
when the modernised guidance  (CC:EEA)(FNO)  policy  came  into  force;  see
above paragraph 17) the  only  policy  that  was  applied  was  the  CCD-EEA
policy. As a result, it cannot be said that the EIG policy  was  any  longer
an applicable policy or one that was intended to be applied.  The  ratio  of
Abdi concerns policies that are "intended  to  be  acted  upon":  see  above
paragraph 12; as applied to policies, the principle of  good  administration
is about policies that are applicable. It is  clear  from  Lumba  [35]  (see
above paragraph 50) that the public law right to have one's case  considered
under a policy concerns "whichever policy the executive sees fit to  adopt".
In the appellant's case there is absolutely  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
respondent intended or saw fit to maintain or apply the EIG policy beyond  1
April 2009 when the CCD-EEA policy came into operation instead.

56. For the above reasons the decision we re-make is:


     to dismiss the appeal brought on  s.84(1)(d) EEA grounds; and


    to dismiss the appeal brought on  the  s.84(1)  (e)  ground  that  "the
    decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law".






                               Signed


                               Date:




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
