
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (NIA 2002: Part 5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC)



                                               Field House


                                              London


                                                          Date of hearing:

                                              13 October 2014





                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane

                                   Between

                              LUMA SH KHAIRDIN

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms K. McCarthy, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, appeared on behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr Z. Malik, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf of
the Respondent.

(1) Section 117A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
requires the Upper Tribunal, in a judicial  review  involving  Article  8(2)
ECHR, to have regard to the considerations mentioned in section  117B  and,
where relevant, section 117C,  when  considering  the  question  whether  an
interference with a person's right to respect for private  and  family  life
is justified. The nature of the  proceedings  is  such  as  to  require  the
Tribunal to determine the questions set out in section 117(1)(a) and (b).

(2) Where the Upper Tribunal is considering, pursuant to section 11  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is  an  error  of
law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involving  Article  8
proportionality, the task of the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that  point)
to deciding if the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of where to  strike  the
balance was unlawful, according to the error of law principles set out in  R
(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982. An Article 8(2) decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State which is susceptible only to judicial review has, by  definition,  not
received such judicial scrutiny; and it is the task of the reviewing  court
or tribunal to provide it, albeit via a process that remains different  from
that of an appeal.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


A. Introduction

1.    This  judicial  review,  conspicuously  well-argued  on  both   sides,
    concerns challenges brought by Mrs Khairdin, an Iraqi citizen born on 1
    July 1942, against decisions of the respondent Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department on 27 November 2012, 8 February 2013  and  13  June
    2014, refusing the applicant leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The last of these decisions post-dates the grant of permission; but  it
    was common ground between the  parties  that  it  formed  part  of  the
    respondent's decision-making  process  and  was  relevant  in  deciding
    whether relief should be granted to the applicant.

2.   Permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings  was  granted  on  10
    January 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen.  Dealing with the decisions
    of 2012 and 2013, he considered it arguable  that  there  was  evidence
    "which needed addressing as to the degree of family life which  it  was
    said was being enjoyed by the applicant in the  United  Kingdom".   The
    decision letters had arguably focused on what the position was when the
    applicant entered the United Kingdom, rather than considering  to  what
    extent matters had changed.

B. The facts

3.   The applicant has two daughters and a  son.   The  elder  daughter,  Dr
    Asmaa Ali, and her husband are general  medical  practitioners,  living
    and working in the United Kingdom.  They have three daughters, all born
    in the United Kingdom.  The applicant was widowed in Iraq in 1981.  Her
    younger daughter, Aseel Mohamad, was said previously to  have  provided
    support for the applicant.  She and  her  husband  and  children  were,
    however, due to emigrate to Canada.

4.   Between 2005 and 2007, the applicant lived in  Malaysia  with  her  son
    and his family.  In 2007 the son and family moved to Australia.  On  18
    March 2007 the applicant entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor.   In
    her visa application, she said that she was receiving financial support
    from Aseel Mohamad, who then was in Abu Dhabi.

5.   The applicant's house in Iraq was said  to  have  been  taken  over  by
    militia in 2007.  On 22 August 2007 the applicant's visit visa expired.
     Seventeen days later, the applicant applied for leave to remain, using
    application form FLR(O).  On the applicant's behalf, it was  said  that
    she was living with Dr Asmaa Ali in a seven-bedroomed house and that Dr
    Ali had "built an annex of two bedrooms and a bathroom  to  accommodate
    her mother".  The applicant was said to  be  suffering  from  diabetes,
    which required close monitoring.  She had  no  strong  ties  left  with
    Iraq.  By contrast she had formed a close bond with her United  Kingdom
    granddaughters.  There was nothing to suggest that, if  granted  leave,
    the applicant would have recourse to public funds.

C. The decision-making

6.   In the respondent's decision  of  27  November  2012,  it  was  stated,
    first, that  the  applicant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which  had  come  into  force  in  July  2012.   The
    application was also considered outside the Rules.  In this regard  the
    decision stated as follows:-

         "Your claim that you are dependent on your daughter Asmaa  Ali  who
         resides  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  evidence  in  your   Visa
         Application Form signed 21/02/2007 shows that you  are  financially
         dependent on your daughter in the United Arab  Emirates.   It  also
         stated your intention was to return home in 3 to 6 months after you
         have visited your daughter and grandchildren and that  you  have  a
         house in Baghdad.  Therefore we do not consider your  circumstances
         sufficiently warrant a grant outside the Rules.


         An application  was  made  on  your  behalf  on  27  January  2012.
         However, your leave to remain  expired  on  22  August  2007.   You
         therefore did not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  your
         application.


         Your application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom has been
         refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay here.  There
         is no right of appeal against this refusal."

7.   In 2011 and 2012 the applicant made further submissions and  a  further
    application using form FLR(O) (on 27 January 2012).   In  January  2013
    the judicial review proceedings were commenced.  On 8 February 2013 the
    respondent issued a decision to refuse leave to remain.

8.   Having noted that the applicant's daughter in the  United  Kingdom  was
    "a mature adult living independently with a family  of  her  own",  the
    decision of 8 February continued as follows:-

         "We have also considered  the  additional  circumstances  you  have
         raised in your application  regarding  your  dependence  upon  your
         daughter in the United Kingdom.  Our records  show  that  when  you
         entered the United Kingdom you were dependent upon another daughter
         in the United Arab Emirates, you  were  living  with  your  son  in
         Malaysia and that the time of your entry clearance application  you
         own property in Iraq.  Your daughter  in  the  United  Kingdom  can
         continue to support you financially from abroad.  Therefore  we  do
         not consider that the grounds you have raised amount to exceptional
         circumstances as to support a grant  of  limited  leave  to  remain
         Outside the Immigration Rules.


         ...


         Your application has been considered exceptionally outside  of  the
         immigration  rules,  with   reference   to   your   representations
         concerning your  health.   It  is  claimed  that  you  suffer  from
         diabetes and have been received insulin injections for the past ten
         years.  You were receiving this treatment in Iraq  for  five  years
         prior to entering the  United  Kingdom.   You  were  said  to  have
         hypertension and high cholesterol.  Due to your family's history of
         heart disease you require regular monitoring.  It is not considered
         that your medical condition reaches the high threshold necessary to
         engage Article 3 on medical  grounds.   The  possibility  that  the
         standard of treatment available to you in Iraq may be  inferior  to
         that available in the United Kingdom is not a  basis  on  which  to
         grant leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   Your  daughter  has
         paid for private consultations for you in the  United  Kingdom  and
         could finance private treatment in Iraq, if necessary.


         You will not be  placed  in  a  worse  position  than  other  Iraqi
         nationals.   Your  circumstances   are   not   considered   to   be
         compassionate or compelling.  Accordingly, the Secretary  of  State
         is not prepared to exercise her discretion in her favour.


         With regard to your representations concerning your fear of  return
         to Iraq, as a  request  for  international  protection  your  claim
         constitutes an asylum application  under  the  terms  of  paragraph
         327(b) of the Immigration Rules.  This claim  should  therefore  be
         made in person at an Asylum Screening Unit.


         ...


         Your application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom has been
         refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay here.  There
         is no right of appeal against this refusal."


9.   Following the grant of  permission,  the  respondent  issued  a  second
    supplementary decision on 13 June 2014, to be read with the decision of
    8 February 2013:-

         "Exceptional Circumstances


         Consideration has been given  whether  there  are  any  exceptional
         circumstances to grant leave to remain outside the rules.  However,
         there are no exceptional circumstances in your client's case  which
         would warrant a grant of leave outside the rules.   We  have  taken
         into  consideration  the  statements  submitted  by  your  client's
         daughters, son, son in law and another family member.  We have seen
         no evidence as proof that your client's home has been taken over by
         the Militia as claimed by her son after she came to the UK in 2007.
          In any event, it would be open to your client to contact  national
         authorities in Iraq in relation to her  house.   It  is  particular
         noted that your client had lived in Iraq for 62 years.


         Your client's son claimed  he  could  not  financially  assist  his
         mother if she returned to Iraq and that she was living with him  in
         Malaysia prior to coming to the UK.  It is noted that  your  client
         informed the entry clearance officer when she applied for her visit
         visa on 21 February 2007 that her address in Iraq was her permanent
         home address.  The  fact  that  your  client's  son  is  unable  to
         financially assist your client is not a compelling reason to  grant
         her leave to remain in the UK.


         Your client's daughter, Aseel Mohammed has stated  she  is  in  the
         process of immigrating to Canada from UAE/Abu Dhabi  and  that  she
         cannot financially support her mother.  However, we  have  seen  no
         evidence  to  substantiate  this  claim.   Your  client's  daughter
         submitted no  proof  of  where  she  is  living  or  proof  of  her
         intentions of relocating to Canada.


         Your client's daughter and her son in law whom she resides with  in
         the UK have both confirmed they are willing to support your  client
         financially whilst she is residing in the UK.  This arrangement can
         continue in Iraq.  It is also noted that your client's daughter and
         son in law  have  assisted  your  client  financially  for  medical
         treatment and medical tests in the UK.  This arrangement  can  also
         continue in Iraq.  Your client's daughter and son in  law  assisted
         your client financially before coming to the UK, therefore this can
         continue in Iraq on your client's return.


         We have taken into consideration  the  statement  submitted  by  Mr
         Basma Larry who states your client will suffer psychologically  and
         emotionally being alone in Iraq.  Your client had spent at least 62
         years in Iraq before coming to the UK.   Your  client  cannot  have
         severed all ties with Iraq in the short time she has  been  in  the
         UK.  Your client will have other family members in Iraq and friends
         whom she will have established relationships while residing in  her
         home country for at least 62 years.


         Your client has not provided any evidence that she will not be able
         to support herself whilst in Iraq.  Your client informed the  entry
         clearance  officer  that  she  was  receiving  her  pension.   Your
         client's pension will still be available and this will  assist  her
         financially whilst adapting back to her life in Iraq.


         Therefore your client's application for leave to remain is refused.


         The  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  your  client   may   have
         established a family life with her daughter and her family  in  the
         UK.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  accepts  that  your  client's
         relationship with her grandchildren in the UK may have strengthened
         in the last few years.  It may  be  the  case  that  your  client's
         grandchildren want her to stay with them in the UK.  The  Secretary
         of State  has  considered  the  best  interests  of  your  client's
         grandchildren as an integral part of her overall assessment of this
         case.  Having regard to all the evidence, the Secretary of State is
         not satisfied that there is something more  than  normal  emotional
         ties between your client and her family members in the UK.   Family
         life aspect of Article 8 is therefore not engaged.  In  any  event,
         even if family life aspect of Article 8 is engaged, your client has
         no entitlement to reside in the UK.  Your client came to the UK  on
         a visit visa and then overstayed.  She had no permission to  reside
         in the UK and she does not qualify for leave under the  Immigration
         Rules.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  considered  your  client's
         circumstances along with some general considerations:  the  general
         administrative desirability of applying known rules if a system  of
         immigration control is to be workable, predictable, consistent  and
         fair as between one applicant  and  another;  the  damage  to  good
         administration and effective control if a system  is  perceived  by
         applicants internationally to be unduly  porous,  unpredictable  or
         perfunctory; the need to discourage non-nationals admitted  to  the
         country temporarily from believing that they live here  unlawfully;
         and the need to discourage breaches of the law.  The  Secretary  of
         State is not satisfied that refusal of leave to remain, taking full
         account of all considerations and evidence, prejudices the  private
         and family life of your client and that of her  family  members  in
         the UK in a manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach
         Article 8.


         Summary


         In summary, the Secretary of State has  reviewed  the  decision  to
         refuse your client's  application  and  is  satisfied  that  it  is
         correct and maintains the original refusal decision.  The Secretary
         of State has carefully considered your client's  Article  8  rights
         and is satisfied that her removal from  the  UK  would  not  be  in
         breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
         (ECHR).  The Secretary of State does  not  consider  your  client's
         return to Iraq to be disproportionate to  the  permissible  aim  of
         maintaining an effective immigration control."


    D. Amending the grounds: paragraph 317 of the immigration rules


10.  Ms McCarthy applied for permission to amend the grounds of claim.   She
    did so on the basis that the applicant contended there was  a  complete
    answer to the judicial review proceedings, in that (irrespective of the
    strength of the other grounds) the applicant had applied for  leave  to
    remain before 9 July 2012.  Accordingly, having regard to the  relevant
    transitional provisions in the Immigration Rules, her application  fell
    to be decided by reference to the Rules as in force before 9 July 2012.
     The relevant Rule was paragraph 317.  This provided as follows:

         "317. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
         grandparent or other dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:


         (i)  is related to a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom in one of the following ways:


             (a)  parent or grandparent who is divorced, widowed, single or
                  separated aged 65 years or over; or


             (b)  parent or grandparents travelling  together  of  whom  at
                  least one is aged 65 or over; or


             (c)  a parent or grandparent aged 65 or over who  has  entered
                  into  a  second  relationship   of   marriage   or   civil
                  partnership but cannot look to the spouse,  civil  partner
                  or children of  that  second  relationship  for  financial
                  support; and  where  the  person  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom is able and willing  to  maintain  the  parent  or
                  grandparent and any spouse or civil partner  or  child  of
                  the second relationship  who  would  be  admissible  as  a
                  dependant;


             (d)  a parent or grandparent under the age  of  65  if  living
                  alone outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional
                  compassionate circumstances...; or


             (e)  parents or grandparents travelling together who are  both
                  under the age of 65 if  living  in  the  most  exceptional
                  compassionate circumstances; or


             (f)  the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle  or  aunt  over
                  the age of 18 if living alone outside the  United  Kingdom
                  in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances; and


         (ii) is joining or accompanying a person who is present and settled
               in the United Kingdom or who is on the same  occasion  being
               admitted for settlement; and


         (iii)    is financially wholly or mainly dependent on the  relative
               present and settled in the United Kingdom; and


         (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together  with  any
               dependants,   without   recourse   to   public   funds,   in
               accommodation   which   the   sponsor   owns   or   occupies
               exclusively; and


         (iva)    can, and will, be maintained adequately, together with any
               dependants, without recourse to public funds; and


         (v)  has no other close relatives in his own  country  to  whom  he
               could turn for financial support; and


         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
               clearance for entry in this capacity; and


         (vii)    does not have one or more unspent convictions  within  the
               meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974."


11.  The submission relying on paragraph 317 was contained in Ms  McCarthy's
    skeleton argument.  Mr Malik indicated that he  was  prepared  to  deal
    with it; but he suggested that the issue of whether to grant permission
    to amend the grounds could be deferred until the Tribunal had heard the
    parties' respective submissions.  In the  circumstances,  I  considered
    that to be an appropriate course.

12.  Ms McCarthy submitted that the evidence placed  before  the  respondent
    demonstrated that  the  applicant  met  the  relevant  requirements  of
    paragraph 317.  She was  widowed;  related  to  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom, namely her daughter Dr Asmaa Ali;  as  a
    GP (married to another  GP)  Dr  Ali  had  ample  financial  means  (as
    evidenced in the documentary material) to provide  for  the  applicant,
    without the latter having to  seek  public  funds;  the  applicant  was
    wholly or mainly dependent on Dr Ali, owing to the  changes  in  family
    circumstances, whereby the applicant's other children were no longer in
    a position to assist; and there were no other close relatives  in  Iraq
    to whom the applicant could turn for financial support.

13.  Mr Malik's response was that the application made on  25  January  2012
    was made on form FLR(O), and this was not an application made under the
    Rules but, rather, outside them.  The application  was,  in  substance,
    for limited leave to remain by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

14.  Although Mr Malik did not specify it, the potential importance  of  not
    making an application for leave under the Rules (here, Part 8) lies  in
    the fact that paragraph A280(c) of the rules  provides  that  paragraph
    317 continues to apply:-

           "to person who had made an application before 9 July  2012  under
          Part 8 which has not been decided as at 9 July 2012".

15.  In the case of Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 40, the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    concerned with the rather different transitional provision contained in
    HC 194 (the Statement of Changes which brought into force  with  effect
    from 9 July 2012  the  significantly  different  Rules  regime).   That
    provision stated that:

           "if an application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
          indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9  July  2012  and
          the application has not  been  decided,  it  will  be  decided  in
          accordance with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012".

16.  In Edgehill, the Court of Appeal held that it was an error of  law  for
    the Upper Tribunal to decide  an  appeal  to  which  that  transitional
    provision applied by having material regard to the  provisions  of  the
    Rules which came into force on 9 July 2012 (in that case, specifying  a
    twenty year United Kingdom  residence  requirement,  in  place  of  the
    previous  fourteen  year  requirement).   Mr  Malik  relied  upon  this
    provision from the judgment:-

         "[33]...A mere passing reference to the 20  years'  requirement  in
               the new Rules will not have the effect of  invalidating  the
               Secretary of State's decision.  The  decision  only  becomes
               unlawful if the decision maker relies upon rule  276ADE(iii)
               as a consideration materially affecting the decision."


17.  Mr Malik submitted that, in the present case, the  respondent  had  not
    fallen into this error.  He also relied upon the judgment of Nicol J in
    Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  2330
    (Admin).  In  that  case,  the  judge  noted  apparent  differences  in
    approach by the Court of Appeal in Edgehill and Haleemudeen v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558 respectively.   At
    [12] he said:-

         "In my judgment, it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  resolve  the
        difference.  I shall adopt the  approach  most  favourable  to  the
        claimant, that is the one in Edgehill.  Nonetheless, Mr Roe accepts
        that he cannot succeed if the decision inevitably would  have  been
        the same even if the Secretary of State had paid  no  attention  at
        all to the criteria in the new Rules."

18.  At [13] the judge stated that he had "no doubt  that  would  have  been
    the case", citing the fact that the claimant was a fit  young  man  who
    had grown up in India and who had only been in the United  Kingdom  for
    seven years, four of them unlawfully.  His relationship with  a  person
    apparently settled in the United Kingdom had begun  when  the  claimant
    was in the country unlawfully.  This led him to conclude that:-

         "I am certain the Secretary of State would have decided the refusal
         of leave would  not  be  disproportionate  even  if  the  test  and
         structure of the decision making in the  new  Rules  had  not  been
         referred to. ...I conclude that the reliance on the new  Rules  was
         not a consideration  materially  affecting  the  decision,  as  the
         result would have been the same in any case.  Similarly in Edgehill
         the Court of Appeal considered that the Article 8 claim of HB was a
         weak one and the court concluded that both the Secretary  of  State
         and the Tribunal would  have  made  precisely  the  same  decision,
         whether or not they had regard to the new Rules, see paragraph 38."


19.  Mr Malik had a further submission to make regarding what  he  said  was
    the inapplicability of paragraph 317  of  the  Rules.   This  was  that
    paragraph 317(vii) contains the requirement that the application of the
    person concerned does not "fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
    for refusal".  Mr Malik pointed in this  regard  to  paragraph  322(1),
    which provides that refusal of leave to remain etc.  must  occur  where
    "the fact that variation of leave to enter or remain  is  being  sought
    for a purpose not covered by these Rules".  He also pointed to the fact
    that,  in  October  2007,  the  respondent  had  refused   an   earlier
    application brought by the applicant on the basis that the  application
    fell to be refused by reason of paragraph 322(7), in that the applicant
    had failed "to honour any declaration or undertaking given orally or in
    writing as to the intended duration and/or purpose of her stay".   This
    was because the applicant had not complied with  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules by leaving the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her
    alleged visit.

E. The original grounds of challenge

20.  Ms McCarthy's submissions also dealt with the two original  grounds  of
    challenge.  Ground 1 contends that the  respondent  applied  the  wrong
    approach in law when considering the applicant's Article  8  rights  by
    conflating consideration of Article 8 with consideration of the amended
    Immigration Rules introduced by HC  194.   The  original  decision  and
    first supplemental decision, according to Ms McCarthy,  plainly  failed
    properly to engage with Article 8.  The original decision  stated  that
    "the family life that you claim to have with relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom does not constitute family life as set out in  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Therefore your claim has been considered on the
    basis of your private life in accordance with paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules".

21.  The second decision, whilst acknowledging that a parental  relationship
    existed with Dr Asmaa Ali, said that the latter  was  "a  mature  adult
    living independently with  a  family  of  her  own.   Your  application
    therefore falls for refusal under the eligibility requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules as set out above".  The  latest  supplemental  letter
    was not as bad as the first two letters, according to Ms McCarthy,  but
    still contained legal error.  The respondent had not  properly  engaged
    with the issue of whether the applicant enjoyed a protected family life
    with her adult daughter and her grandchildren, on the  basis  that  the
    respondent was "not satisfied that there is something more than  normal
    emotional ties" involved.  That was  contrary  to  the  fact-sensitive,
    holistic approach set out by the Upper Tribunal in Ghising (family life
    -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160  (IAC),  which   had
    subsequently found favour in the Court of Appeal (Gurung and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at  [46]).
    There was, in particular, substantial evidence before  the  respondent,
    to the  effect  that  the  grandchildren  were  very  attached  to  the
    applicant, who played a central role in their  lives,  particularly  as
    regards the youngest grandchild.  In deciding  whether  a  family  life
    existed, there was no indication that the respondent had had regard  to
    the evidence regarding dependency on the  United  Kingdom  family,  the
    absence of any alternative means of support, health  issues  (which  Dr
    Asmaa Ali was in a particularly  good  position  to  provide)  and  the
    situation in Iraq.  Indeed, these failures, according to  Ms  McCarthy,
    rendered the respondent's refusal to find a family life irrational.

22.  This led to ground 2, which was that, had  the  correct  approach  been
    applied, the respondent would have granted discretionary leave  to  the
    applicant under Article 8.  Ms McCarthy relied on the judgments of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel & Others v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 741 as  authority  for  the  "supreme  test"
    being one  of  "reasonableness".   The  respondent's  decision  making,
    according to Ms McCarthy, was unreasonable because the  respondent  had
    miscategorised  the  applicant's  Article  8  position  as  precarious,
    ignoring the fact that the applicant had come as a  visitor,  but  that
    her circumstances had changed during her time in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Furthermore there was less  than  a  three  week  delay  in  making  an
    application after leave expired; whereas the delay on the part  of  the
    respondent had been more than three years.

23.  In Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), Sales J held at [33] and [34] that the "new Rules"  could  not
    cover every conceivable case and that where they did not fully  dispose
    of an Article 8 claim, the respondent  would  be  obliged  to  consider
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules.  Furthermore, in Patel  the
    Supreme Court had stated that "the most authoritative guidance  on  the
    correct approach of the Tribunal to Article  8  remains  that  of  Lord
    Bingham in Huang" [54].

24.  Most recently, in MM (Lebanon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985, the Court of Appeal had doubted whether
    the statement in  Nagre  that  a  person  outwith  the  Rules  "has  to
    demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the Rule, that
    he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for  granting
    leave to remain outside the Rules" was of much utility and that "if the
    applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is not
    a further Article 8 claim.  That will have  to  be  determined  by  the
    relevant decision maker".

25.  So far as the best interests of the grandchildren  were  concerned,  Ms
    McCarthy submitted that, even in the second supplemental letter,  there
    was no indication that the family's letters  and  other  materials  had
    actually been taken into account.

26.  Mr Malik's submission on ground 1 was that the respondent's  conclusion
    on whether or not there was family life could be challenged only on the
    grounds of irrationality.  It could not be said that her conclusion  on
    the issue was irrational.  In any event, the challenge was  immaterial,
    given that the decision of 13 June 2014 went on to explain why, even if
    Article 8 was engaged, the respondent took the view that the  applicant
    should not be granted leave.

27.  Mr Malik contended that, as regards what he submitted was  a  "reasons"
    challenge, all that was needed was for the decision to be intelligible.
    The authority for this was to be found in the opinions of the House  of
    Lords in South Bucks District Council v Porter [2004] UKHL 33:-

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of  particularly  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision. The reasoning  must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example by misunderstanding some relevant  policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need refer only to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.    ...Decision
         letters must be read in a straightforward manner, recognising  that
         they are addressed to parties well aware of the issues involved and
         the arguments advanced.  A reasons challenge will only  succeed  if
         the party aggrieved can satisfy the court  that  he  has  genuinely
         been  substantially  prejudiced  by  the  failure  to  provide   an
         adequately reasoned decision." (Lord Brown at [36])


28.  Mr Malik pointed out that, in the  immigration  context,  that  passage
    had recently been deployed by the Upper Tribunal in  Castro  (removals:
    s47 (as amended)) [2014] UKUT 234 (IAC).

29.   Finally,  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  Part  5A  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which came into force on 28 July 2014,
    required the Upper Tribunal to have regard to the considerations listed
    in section 117B (Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable
    in all cases).  In considering "the public interest question"  (namely,
    the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2)), a
    court or Tribunal must have regard to the fact that the "maintenance of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest" (117B(1))  and
    that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life  "that  is
    established by a person at the time when a  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully" (section 117B(4)).

30.  In reply, Ms McCarthy conceded that the  application  made  in  January
    2012 had not been made under Part 8 of the Immigration  Rules  but  she
    submitted that what  mattered  were  the  "substance  and  content"  of
    paragraph 317.  So far as general grounds of refusal were concerned, Ms
    McCarthy said it would not have been rational to have applied paragraph
    322(7) given that, by January 2012, there plainly had been a change  in
    the applicant's circumstances.  Ms McCarthy denied that the applicant's
    case amounted to a "near-miss" argument of the kind deprecated  by  the
    Supreme Court in Patel.  On the contrary, the applicant's case was like
    that of the claimant in Huang, as described by Lord Carnwath at [56] of
    Patel:-

         "Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside  the  Rules  did
         not turn on how close she had come to compliance  with  Rules  317,
         but on the application of the family  values  which  underlie  that
         Rule and are at the heart also of Article 8. ...".


    F. Decision on application to amend


31.  In the circumstances of this  case,  I  consider  that  it  is  in  the
    interests of the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Upper Tribunal  Rules  2008  to  grant  permission  to  the
    applicant to amend her  grounds,  so  as  to  argue  the  relevance  of
    paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.  The applicant is  elderly  and
    the proceedings have been ongoing for a significant period of time.  It
    is desirable to both parties that some finality should be brought  soon
    to her claim to be entitled  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    paragraph 317 issue is closely related to the  assertion  in  ground  1
    that the respondent erred in law in her approach to Article 8. Finally,
    as is evident, thanks to Mr Malik  the  respondent  was  placed  at  no
    procedural disadvantage in engaging with the substance of  the  amended
    ground. Accordingly, I grant permission.

G. The correct version of paragraph 317

32.  I shall  deal  first  with  the  significance  of  paragraph  317(vii).
    Although both Mr Malik and Ms McCarthy assumed  that  this  deals  with
    "refusal under the general grounds of refusal" that is not in fact  so.
    The relevant wording of sub-paragraph (vii), so far as it concerns  the
    applicant, is as I have set out in paragraph 10 above.   The  amendment
    which substituted the reference to general grounds for refusal for  the
    reference to one or more unspent convictions within the meaning of  the
    1974 Act, took effect only on 13 December 2012.  The  primary  decision
    in the present case, to which the later decisions are supplemental, was
    made on 27 November 2012.

33.  Accordingly, paragraph  317(vii)  does  not  operate  to  preclude  the
    applicant from relying on paragraph 317 (Odelola v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25).  There is no  suggestion  that
    the applicant has unspent convictions.  I would,  in  any  event,  have
    found myself in agreement with Ms McCarthy, so far as reliance  by  the
    respondent upon paragraph 322(vii) is concerned.  It would indeed  have
    been irrational in 2012 for the respondent  to  have  relied  upon  the
    failure to honour an undertaking impliedly given  in  2007,  given  the
    subsequent changes in circumstances.  As  for  paragraph  322(1),  that
    does not apply for two reasons.  First, it concerns only  a  "variation
    of leave".  The applicant has no leave to vary.  Secondly, even if that
    were not so, paragraph 322(1) adds nothing to Mr Malik's argument  that
    the application was not, in reality,  an  application  made  under  the
    Rules.

H. The significance of paragraph 317 to  an  application  made  outside  the
Rules before 9 July 2012

34.  Accordingly, I turn to that issue.  It is, indeed, a  puzzling  feature
    of this case that the January 2012 application was not  made  expressly
    by reference to paragraph 317, being, instead, made outside the  Rules.
    It is in my view manifest from the material submitted to the respondent
    that the applicant had a compelling case under paragraph 317.

35.  Be that as it may, for the purposes  of  paragraph  A280(c)(i),  it  is
    undoubtedly the case that the applicant did not apply  "under  Part  8"
    or, indeed, under any other Part of the Rules.  But in  no  sense  does
    that dispose of the issue.  On the contrary, it throws into sharp focus
    the transitional provisions  of  HC  194,  which  (to  repeat)  are  as
    follows:-

         "... if an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012."


36.  The difference in wording between the HC  194  provision  and  that  of
    paragraph A280(c)(i) is immediately apparent (see paragraph 14  above).
    HC 194 does not contain the words "under Part  8".   In  Edgehill,  the
    Court of Appeal roundly rejected the respondent's attempt  to  restrict
    the HC 194 transitional provision to applications made under the Rules:
    see [24] to [33].  Despite the "different  approach"  in  Edgehill  and
    Haleemudeen, as identified by Nicol J in Singh, Mr Malik did  not  seek
    to persuade me to  depart  from  the  judgment  in  Edgehill.   On  the
    contrary, he relied upon it as authority for the proposition  that  the
    respondent's decision-making in the present case was not unlawful,   in
    that it did not rely upon the "new" Rules  (with  effect  from  9  July
    2012)  as  a  consideration  materially  affecting   the   respondent's
    decisions.

37.  I firmly reject that submission.  Both  the  decision  of  27  November
    2012 and that of 8 February 2013 commenced with a detailed exegesis  of
    why the applicant failed under the  new  Rules,  before  proceeding  to
    analyse whether the applicant should exceptionally be granted leave  by
    reference to Article 8 considerations.  By the same token,  the  latest
    letter, of 13 June 2014, begins by saying that "consideration has  been
    given whether there are any exceptional circumstances to grant leave to
    remain  outside  the  Rules.   However,  there   are   no   exceptional
    circumstances in your client's case which  require  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules".

38.  As is plain from Edgehill and Singh, on the basis that  the  new  Rules
    have no part to play in a case governed by the  transitional  provision
    in HC 194, the respondent can succeed in defending a challenge  brought
    on this basis, only if she can  demonstrate  that  the  decision  would
    undoubtedly have been the same, had  the  respondent  not  adopted  the
    wrong starting-point of the new Rules.

39.  I find Ms McCarthy has amply shown why that cannot be the  case.   Even
    if one puts paragraph 317 aside, the circumstances  of  the  applicant,
    including her age, country of origin,  state  of  health,  relationship
    with and dependency on her United Kingdom family and evidence regarding
    lack of alternative means of support, are such that it  is  simply  not
    possible rationally to conclude that the decision would have  been  the
    same in any event.

40.  But, even were I to be wrong about that, paragraph 317 does  not  cease
    to be relevant, notwithstanding that paragraph 280(c)(i) cannot  assist
    the applicant because she did not apply under Part 8 of the Rules.  The
    transitional provision in HC 194 required the respondent to decide  the
    application - albeit made on Form FLR (O) - "in  accordance  with"  the
    Rules in force before  9  July  2012.  Just  as,  now,  the  respondent
    routinely (and correctly) begins her consideration  of  a  post-8  July
    2012 application,  made  outside  the  Rules,  by  considering,  first,
    whether the applicant meets  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  before
    proceeding to consider Article  8,  so  in  the  applicant's  case  the
    respondent  should  have  considered  whether  the  applicant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 317 on the basis of the evidence put  forward
    because if the applicant did do so, then at the very  least  that  fact
    would have had a  significant  bearing  on  the  respondent's  decision
    whether to grant leave to remain.

41.  Ms McCarthy was, I find, entitled to rely upon the passage from  Patel,
    cited above at paragraph 27.  This is not an instance of a "near-miss".
     Rather, the fact that the applicant would (at the very least)have been
    likely to succeed by reference to paragraph 317, had  she  applied  for
    it, was of extreme significance in the pre-9 July 2012 world, which the
    transitional provision in HC 194 kept in being. Even if Haleemudeen had
    been relied on by Mr Malik as authority for the  proposition  that  the
    new Rules have a part to play in articulating the respondent's position
    as regards the public interest in enforcing immigration  control,  this
    still would not entitle her to  disregard  the  transitional  provision
    that she chose to include in HC 194 (and  which  is  not  mentioned  in
    Haleemudeen).

42.  For these reasons, on the basis of the arguments so far  considered,  I
    would find that the respondent's decision making, as  set  out  in  the
    three decision letters,  is  unlawful.  In  the  circumstances,  it  is
    unnecessary for me to spend much time on grounds 1 and  2.  So  far  as
    ground 1 is concerned, the respondent's error of  approach  as  regards
    Article 8 lay in her missing the significance of paragraph 317. I  find
    this led her to have insufficient regard to the material put before her
    in  the  application,  which  was  plainly   more   than   capable   of
    demonstrating a protected family life between  the  applicant  and  her
    United Kingdom family members. Ground 1 is therefore made  out.  Ground
    2, which asserts that leave should have been  granted  under  paragraph
    317, perhaps puts matters too high, given that the  applicant  did  not
    apply for such leave. But, again, the undoubted  significance  of  this
    ground is that it highlights the inadequacy of the respondent's Article
    8 decision-making, which, at the very least, failed to bring  into  the
    proportionality balance the relevance of paragraph 317 as negating  the
    State's  interest  in  maintaining  immigration  controls,  since   the
    applicant was a person who  met  the  relevant  requirements  of  those
    controls.

I. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

43.  Finally, I must deal with Mr Malik's submission  regarding  the  coming
    into force on 28 July 2014 of Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002  (inserted  in  that  Act  by  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014). Does Part 5A  apply  to  these  judicial  review
    proceedings and, if so, what is its effect?

44.  Section 117A of the 2002 Act provides that Part  5A  "applies  where  a
    court or tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision  made
    under the Immigration Acts-

        (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
        life under Article 8, and


        (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
        Rights Act 1998".


45.  The duty imposed by Part 5A arises  where  the  court  or  tribunal  is
    considering "the public interest question" (section 117A(2)).  This  is
    defined by section 117A(3) as "the question of whether an  interference
    with a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
    justified under Article 8(2)".

46.  Section 117A(2) provides that:

        "In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
        must (in particular) have regard-


           (a) in all cases to the considerations listed in  section  117B,
             and
           (b) in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,
           to the considerations listed under Article 8(2)".

47.   So  far  as  the  present  case  is  concerned,  Mr   Malik   referred
    specifically to section 117B(4)(a), which  states  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life that is established by a person at  a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. He might also
    have pointed to section 117B(1), wherein the "maintenance of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest".

48.  In two cases, the Court of Appeal has, in effect,  held  that  Part  5A
    has no application in an appeal from a decision of the Upper  Tribunal,
    unless an error of law is found in that  decision.  In  YM  (Uganda)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292,  the
    Court was concerned with the lawfulness of  a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal taken before 28 July 2014. Aikens LJ said this:

        36. By section 14(1) of the [Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
           2007], when the Court of Appeal has to consider an  appeal  from
           the Upper Tribunal, its first task is  to  decide  whether  "the
           making of the decision concerned involved the making of an error
           on a point of law". The Court's  task,  therefore,  must  be  to
           consider the law as it had to be applied at the time of the UT's
           decision.  It  cannot  be  to  consider  the  law  as   it   has
           subsequently developed. Thus, in my view, both the new  Part  5A
           to the 2002 Act and the 2014 Rules are irrelevant to  the  first
           task that we are faced with.


        37.  If, however, this Court considers that the UT's  decision  did
           involve "the making of an error on a point of  law",  there  are
           further decisions to be make. This Court can, but is not obliged
           to, set aside the decision of the UT: see  section  14(2)(a)  of
           the 2007 Act. If it does so,  then  the  matter  can  either  be
           remitted to the UT  or  this  Court  can  re-make  the  decision
           itself: see section 14(2)(b)(i) and (ii). If this court were  to
           set aside the decision of the UT and either remit the matter  or
           re-make the decision itself, then, at that stage  I  think  that
           both the new statutory  provisions  and  the  2014  Rules  would
           become relevant."


49.  In ZZ (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1404, the Court (per Bean LJ) took exactly the same approach:


        "20. I remind myself at this stage that an appeal from  the  UT  to
           this court lies only on  a  question  of  law.  It  is  not  the
           function of this court to substitute our view of proportionality
           for that of the UT unless and until an error of  law  is  shown.
           The correctness or otherwise in law of the  Tribunal's  decision
           is to be judged on the basis of the  statutory  provisions  then
           applicable.


        ...


        35. ... If this court were to accept that there had been  an  error
           of law by the UT it  would  then  be  appropriate  to  take  the
           decision ourselves. In that  event,  as  Mr  Westgate  accepted,
           section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002, inserted by the Immigration Act 2014 with effect  from  28
           July 2014, would apply..."


 50. Is the position different in a judicial  review  of  a  decision  by  a
      public authority involving ECHR article 8 rights? I was not  addressed
      in any detail on this matter; but the thrust of Mr Malik's  submission
      was that Part 5A has relevance to the present case.


51.  At first sight, one might think that the position  in  judicial  review
      cannot be different, compared with an appeal on a point  of  law,  for
      the obvious reason that the task of a court or tribunal in a  judicial
      review is  to  determine  whether  the  decision  is  legally  flawed.
      However, there is high authority to the effect that the judicial  task
      in a judicial review concerning human rights is (or, at least, may  on
      occasion be) such as  to  amount  to  deciding  whether  the  impugned
      decision breaches a person's human rights and is thus  unlawful  under
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act.


 52. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Nasseri  [2009]  UKHL
      23, a judicial review involving a decision to remove an asylum  seeker
      to Greece pursuant to the Dublin II Regulation, Lord Hoffmann said:


             "12.   ...  It  is  understandable  that  a  judge  hearing  an
             application  for  judicial  review  should  think  that  he  is
             undertaking a review of the Secretary of  State's  decision  in
             accordance with normal principles of administrative  law,  that
             is to say, that he is  reviewing  the  decision-making  process
             rather than the merits of the decision. In  such  a  case,  the
             court is concerned with whether the  Secretary  of  State  gave
             proper consideration to relevant matters  rather  than  whether
             she reached what the court  would  consider  to  be  the  right
             answer. But that is not the correct approach when the challenge
             is based upon an alleged infringement of a Convention right...


             ...
             14.  The other side of the coin  is  that,  when  breach  of  a
             Convention right is in  issue,  an  impeccable  decision-making
             process by the Secretary of State will be of no  avail  if  she
             actually gets the answer wrong.  This  was  the  basis  of  the
             decision of the House of Lords in Huang v  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home  Department    [2007]  2  AC  167,  in  which  the
             question was whether the removal of a  migrant  would  infringe
             his right to respect for family life under article 8..."


53.  In  R (Quila) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC
      45, a challenge to the legality of immigration rules concerning  entry
      as a spouse, Lady Hale said that the issue:


             "... is whether the Secretary of State has  acted  incompatibly
             with the Convention rights of these particular young people. By
             reason of section 6(1) of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  it  is
             unlawful for her to do so. This is  subject  to  section  6(2),
             where a public authority is  acting,  to  put  it  loosely,  in
             compliance with primary legislation which  cannot  be  read  or
             given effect in any other way.  This  is  not  this  case.  The
             Secretary of  State  has  acted  in  compliance  with  her  own
             Immigration Rules,  which  do  not  even  have  the  status  of
             delegated legislation: see Odelola v Secretary of State for the
             Home Department [2009] UKHL 25, [2009] 1  WLR  1230.  She  does
             have a choice and it is her duty to  act  compatibly  with  the
             Convention rights of the people with whom she is concerned.  Of
             course, where delicate and difficult judgments are involved  in
             deciding whether or not she has done so, this Court will  treat
             with appropriate respect the views taken by those whose primary
             responsibility it is to make the  judgments  in  question.  But
             those views cannot be decisive. Ultimately, it is for the court
             to decide whether  or  not  the  Convention  rights  have  been
             breached: R (SB) v Governors of Denbigh High School [2006] UKHL
             15, [2007] 1 AC 100; Belfast City Council v Miss  Behavin'  Ltd
             [2007] UKHL 19, [2007] 1 WLR 1420."


 54. In other contexts, however, pinning  down  the  nature  of  review  has
    proved more problematic. Thus, in WM (DRC) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495 Buxton LJ  held  that,  where  the
    Secretary of State in a paragraph 353 "fresh claim" matter,  had  asked
    herself the correct question regarding realistic  prospect  of  success
    before a hypothetical adjudicator and applied "anxious scrutiny" to  an
    applicant's submissions, the Secretary of State's decision could not be
    impugned on judicial review, even if the Court's own  view  might  have
    been different:


              "... for a court to say that it can adopt its own view because
             it is as good a position, as well qualified,  as  the  original
             decision-maker is the language of appeal, and not of review ...
             If Parliament had intended that that should be the approach  it
             would have provided for an appeal.. [16]


55.  Although in ZT (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] UKHL 6, Lord Phillips had "no reason  to  disagree"  with  those
    observations of Buxton LJ, the  House  decided  that  the  question  of
    whether a claim  could be certified under section 94 of the 2002 Act as
    clearly unfounded admitted of only one answer.  In  the  light  of  ZT,
    other divisions of the Court of Appeal have come to the conclusion that
    the same is, in fact, true of a fresh claim case:  KH  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 at [19]
    and R (YH) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ
    116 at [21].

56.  But, importantly, even so the process "remains a  process  of  judicial
    review, not a de novo hearing, and the issue  must  be  judged  on  the
    material available to the Secretary of State" (Carnwath LJ at  [21]  of
    YH). This point was emphasised in ZT by Lord Hope at [55]: "It must  be
    stressed that the  court  is  not  an  appellate  court.  Its  function
    throughout is that of review" and by Lord Carswell in the same case  at
    [65].

57.  The upshot of this admittedly brief analysis is that I  agree  with  Mr
    Malik that the effect of section 117A of  the  2002  Act  requires  the
    Tribunal in a judicial review, involving Article 8, to have  regard  to
    the considerations listed in section 117B and, where relevant,  section
    117C, when considering the question  whether  an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2). This is because the nature of  the  proceedings  is
    such as to require the Tribunal to determine the questions set  out  in
    section 117A(1)(a) and (b).

58.  The apparent anomaly, whereby a form  of  scrutiny  traditionally  (and
    rightly) regarded as less intense than an appeal is subject to Part  5A
    of the 2002  Act,  when  appeals  under  sections  11  and  13  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 are not (at  the  "error  of
    law" stage), is explained by the fact that those appeals  are  "second"
    appeals. Where a person who is the subject of the Secretary of  State's
    decision under the Immigration Acts is afforded a right  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, that Tribunal will  have  decided  for  itself
    whether the decision violates Article 8. Accordingly, the primary  (and
    possibly only) task of the Upper Tribunal in a  section  11  appeal  is
    properly confined  to deciding if the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment
    of where to strike the Article 8 proportionality balance  was  unlawful
    according to the error of law principles, set  out  in  R  (Iran)[2005]
    EWCA  Civ  982.  By  contrast,  an  Article  8(2)  decision  which   is
    susceptible only to judicial review has by definition not received such
    judicial scrutiny. It is the task of the reviewing court or tribunal to
    provide it, albeit via a process that remains different from that of an
    appeal.

59.  Does Part 5A assist the respondent  in  the  present  case?  The  short
    answer is, no. The applicant is not a  foreign  criminal  and  so  only
    section 117B is of potential relevance. Mr Malik pointed to  subsection
    (4)(a), where we find that little weight is to given to a private  life
    formed by a person at  a  time  when  she  is  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully. But the applicant's case is essentially  about  her  family
    life in the United  Kingdom,  about  which  section  117B  has  nothing
    express to say in her case. The most that section does is to offer some
    mild support for the applicant, rather than the respondent, in that the
    evidence makes plain that the applicant is  not  and  will  not  be  "a
    burden on taxpayers" (subsection (3)(a)),  with  the  result  that  the
    respondent cannot rely upon that as a public interest  factor  weighing
    against the applicant.

J. Decision

60.   I  grant  the  applicant  judicial  review  and  quash  the  decisions
    mentioned in paragraph 1 above.
