
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 16, 17, 19 and 20 June 2014       |                            |
|The Royal Courts of Justice          |                            |
|On 24 July 2014                      |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     AK
                                     SK

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Jegarajah and Ms S Pinder, Counsel instructed
                    by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting   Officer



1. Christians in Pakistan are a religious minority who, in  general,  suffer
discrimination but this is not sufficient  to  amount  to  a  real  risk  of
persecution.

2.  Unlike the position of Ahmadis, Christians in general are  permitted  to
practise  their  faith,  can  attend  church,   participate   in   religious
activities and have their own schools and hospitals.

3. Evangelism by its very nature involves some  obligation  to  proselytise.
Someone who seeks to broadcast their faith to strangers so as  to  encourage
them to convert, may find themselves facing a charge of blasphemy.  In  that
way, evangelical Christians face a greater risk than  those  Christians  who
are not publicly active. It will be for the judicial fact-finder  to  assess
on  a  case  by  case  basis  whether,  notwithstanding  attendance  at   an
evangelical  church,  it  is  important  to  the  individual  to  behave  in
evangelical ways that may lead to a real risk of persecution.

4. Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis  and  Hindus  may  all  be
potentially  charged  with  blasphemy.   Those   citizens   who   are   more
marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less  able  to
deal with the consequences of such proceedings.

5.   The risk of becoming a victim of a  blasphemy  allegation  will  depend
upon a number of factors and must be assessed  on  a  case  by  case  basis.
Relevant factors will include the place  of  residence,  whether  it  is  an
urban or rural area, and the individual's level of education, financial  and
employment status and level of public religious activity such as  preaching.
These factors are not exhaustive.

6. Non state agents who use blasphemy laws  against  Christians,  are  often
motivated by spite, personal or business disputes, arguments over  land  and
property. Certain political events may  also  trigger  such  accusations.  A
blasphemy allegation, without more, will not generally  be  enough  to  make
out a claim under the Refugee Convention. It has  to  be  actively  followed
either by the authorities in the form of charges being brought or  by  those
making the complaint. If it is,  or  will  be,  actively  pursued,  then  an
applicant may be able to establish a real risk of harm in the home area  and
an insufficiency of state protection.

7.  Like  other  women  in  Pakistan,  Christian  women,  in  general,  face
discrimination and may be at a heightened risk but this  falls  short  of  a
generalised real risk. The need for a fact sensitive analysis is crucial  in
their case. Factors such  as  their  age,  place  of  residence  and  socio-
economic milieu  are  all  relevant  factors  when  assessing  the  risk  of
abduction, conversions and forced marriages.

8. Relocation is normally a viable option unless an  individual  is  accused
of blasphemy which is being seriously pursued; in that situation  there  is,
in general, no internal relocation alternative.




TABLE OF CONTENTS                                         Paragraphs

Abbreviations

Introduction                                                    1- 2
    . Issues                                                        3
    . Format of the determination                                   4
    . Details of the appellants' claims                               5-10
    . Procedural background and findings of the First-tier Tribunal      11-
      17
    .   Evangelism   and   Christianity:   definition   and   interpretation
      18-19


Pakistan:       map,       general       facts        and        information
20-36


Legal Framework:
    .  The Pakistan Penal Code and the Blasphemy Laws                  37-50
    .              Relevant              International              Treaties
      51
    .                            The                            Constitution
      52-56
    .                  The                  Judicial                  System
                                   57-62
    .  The Police                                                63-66
    .  Legal Aid Groups                                                67-72


Frequency of Blasphemy Allegations                                    73-87


The experts and other witnesses                                       88-96


Country information:
    .   Reports   of   incidents   of   harm   to   Christians   and   those


                                   assisting                            them
                                        97-99
    . UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing
         the International Protection Needs of Members of
           Religious   Minorities    from    Pakistan    (14    May    2012)
        100-104
    . Christian Solidarity Worldwide (CSW). Briefing on
         Pakistan: Religious freedom in the shadow of extremism
                                     (June                             2011)
   105-111
    . Writenet Independent Analysis. Pakistan: The Situation
         of Religious Minorities (May 2009)                         112-117
    .  Amnesty  International   Annual   report   on   Pakistan   for   2013
        118
    . UK Home Office country of origin information service,
         Pakistan report (August 2013)                              119-131
    .    Human    Rights     Watch     report     on     Pakistan     (2014)
               132
    . Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. Pakistan:
         Situation of Christians in Pakistan including social
         and government attitudes, treatment and rights
         2010-2012 (14 January 2013)                                133-138
    .   Inter   Press   Service    News    Agency    (23    October    2013)
              139
    . US Commission for International Religious Freedom
                                    report                            (2013)
                                      140-141
    . The Federal Republic of Austria, Federal Asylum Agency
           Fact   Finding   Mission   report   on   Pakistan   (June   2013)
       142-154
    . Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Christians
                in        Pakistan        (16         December         2013)
                      155-161
    . Foreign & Commonwealth Office. Human Rights
         and Democracy report on Pakistan for 2012 (latest
         update 31 December 2013                                    162-163
    . Human Rights Commission of Pakistan report for 2013                164-
      169
    . Australian Government Refugee Review Tribunal.
           Issues   Paper:   Pakistan   Militant   Groups   (January   2013)
             170
    . Radio Free Europe: Pakistan religious leaders declare
           attack   on   Christians   un-Islamic   (24    September    2013)
       171-172
    .       BBC       news        article        (13        May        2014)
                             173
    .                  Other                  news                  articles
                                        174




Summary of submissions                                        175-177


Our assessment
    .                  The                  starting                   point
                                  178-185
    . The experts and other witnesses                               186-206
    .      The      risk      of      false      blasphemy       allegations
                  207-215
    .                           Religious                           practice
                                  216-218
    .                                                         Discrimination
                                   219-222
    .                                                            Evangelists
                                      223-224
    . Sufficiency of protection                                     225-226
    . Internal relocation                                           227-231
    . Women, Forced conversions and abductions                      232-239




Country guidance                                                   240-247


Our conclusions on the appellants                             248-262


Decision                                                263-264



Appendices:                                               Page

Appendix    1:               Decision    on    Rule    15(2A)    application
 81-82
Appendix 2:            Evidence of  AK                                   83-
91

Appendix          3:                      Evidence           of           SK
                         92-100

Appendix      4:                 Evidence       of       Zimran       Samuel
            101-109

Appendix 5:            Evidence of Asma Jahangir                   110-114

Appendix    6:               Evidence     of     Pastor     Jeremy     Sandy
        115-116

Appendix     7:                Evidence     of      Pastor      Taylor-Black
          117-118

Appendix   8:              Evidence   of   Bishop    Ijaz    Inayat    Masih
      119-122

Appendix      9:                  Evidence       of       Pastor       Waugh
          123

Appendix 10:     Evidence of Reverend Stuart Rodney Windsor       124-126

Appendix 11:     Submissions for the respondent                     127

Appendix     12:                Submissions     for      the      appellants
128-129

Appendix       13:                  Overview       of        Case        Law
130-135

Appendix      14:                 Agreed      Index       of       Materials
136-140













Abbreviations

AHRC:       Asia Human Rights Cell
AI:         Amnesty International
ALAC:       AGHS Legal Aid Commission
APMA: All Pakistan Minorities Alliance
APUC:       All Pakistan Ulema Council
BPCA:            British Pakistan Christian Association
CEDAW :     The Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
            Discrimination against Women
CLAAS:      Centre for Legal Aid, Assistance and Settlement
CII:        Council of Islamic Ideology
COIR:            Country of Origin Information Report
CRC:        The Convention on the Rights of the Child
CRPD:            The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CRSS:            Centre for Research and Security
CSC:        Christian Study Centre
CSW:        Christian Solidarity Worldwide
EAC:        Evangelical Christian Church
FCO:        Foreign and Commonwealth Office
FIEC:            Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches
FIR:        First Information Report
FSC:        Federal Shariat Courts
HRW:        Human Rights Watch
ICC:        International Christian Concern
ICCPR:      The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICERD:      International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
      Racial Discrimination
ICESCR:     The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
      Rights
IRB:        Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada
JAC:        Joint Action Committee
JI:         Jinnah Institute
LADS:       Legal Aid for Destitute and Settlement
NGO:        Non Governmental Organisation
NCJP:       National Commission on Justice and Peace
PATA:            Provincially Administered Tribal Areas
PAWLA:      Pakistan Women Lawyers' Association
PIL:        Pakistan Interfaith League
PILAP:      Pakistan Interfaith League Against Poverty
PML-N:      Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz
PPC:        Pakistan Penal Code
UNCAT:      The UN Convention Against Torture
UPR:        Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council
USCIRF:     United States Commission on International Religious Freedom
UNHCR:      United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WAF :               Women's Action Forum


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

   1.               These  appeals  involve  Christians   in   Pakistan. The
      appellants are a brother and sister who seek to  establish  that  they
      would be at real risk from extremist groups if  returned,  whether  to
      their home area or to other parts of the country. Their  appeals  were
      dismissed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge whose decision was set  aside
      for re-making.

   2.       The respondent does not take issue with the  appellants'  claims
      that they are Christians by birth and that they practise  their  faith
      in the UK in evangelical churches.

      Issues

   3.       The list of issues as agreed by the parties is:

      (i)   What is the risk of a false blasphemy allegation being  levelled
            against the appellants as Christians?
      (ii)  What is the risk of forced conversion to Islam?
      (iii)      Is there serious  discrimination  faced  by  Christians  in
Pakistan         which would amount to persecution?
      (iv)  What particular discrimination do Christian women face?
      (v)   Can Christian women expect a sufficiency of protection from  the
            authorities against assault and rape?
      (vi)  Are Christians able to practise their faith?
      (vii)      What risk do Evangelical Christians face?

      Format of determination

   4.       We begin by setting out the details of  the  appellants'  claims
      and the procedural history that has brought them to this stage of  the
      proceedings. Some basic facts and  information  on  Pakistan  and  the
      legal framework are then set out so as to aid an understanding of  the
      evidence and our conclusions. This is followed by  a  summary  of  the
      evidence by the experts and the other witnesses from churches here and
      in Pakistan and of the country material as it pertains to the  various
      issues. We summarise the submissions of the parties and in the context
      of all the evidence make findings and give country guidance.  We  then
      apply  it  to  the  appellants.   The  determination  concludes   with
      appendices which set out details of the evidence and  submissions  and
      an Index of the materials.



      Details of appellants' claims

   5.       The appellants are both Christians by birth.   They are  brother
      (AK) and sister (SK) born in Karachi in 1983 and 1987 respectively. AK
      is married to another Pakistani Christian; his wife and son remain  in
      Pakistan with his in-laws. SK is single. The appellants'  parents,  an
      older brother and older sister continue to live  in  Pakistan.  It  is
      claimed that the parents live  in  a  'safe  house'  provided  by  the
      church.


   6.       The  appellants  arrived  here  on  26  March  2011  with  entry
      clearance as Tier 4 students valid until 28 June 2012. On 20 May  2011
      they contacted the Asylum Screening Unit and claimed asylum  at  their
      appointments on 10 June 2011. Their case was that they both taught  at
      a school founded by their parents. According to the appellants, on  21
      October 2010 when teaching Dickens' A Christmas Carol to his students,
      AK entered into  a  discussion  with  them  about  Jesus  and  Prophet
      Mohammed. This angered the students who reported him to their  parents
      and that evening a group of them, including some extremists  from  the
      Sipah-i-Sahaba, visited the family home. AK was out  but  his  parents
      and SK were present and were verbally and physically attacked. Threats
      were made against AK. Neighbours intervened to end the attack. AK  was
      warned by his father on the telephone not to return home and he stayed
      at his grandmother's house.

   7.       Although the appellants claim to have been in hiding, they  both
      ventured out. AK went out on 2 November 2010. He  was  accosted  by  a
      group of individuals including a local Sipah-i-Sahaba member.  He  was
      beaten and when he  regained  consciousness  he  found  himself  in  a
      hospital. He sustained injuries to the upper part of an  ear  and  has
      marks on his shoulder and side. He spent a night in hospital and  then
      moved to his uncle's house. On 19 November 2010 he went out again  but
      was spotted and chased by men on bikes. He  managed  to  escape  them.
      After this, he relocated to his in-laws' home in Quetta with his  wife
      and son.

   8.       SK went shopping on 7 November 2010  but  was  attacked  by  the
      Sipah-i-Sahaba  member  and  three  others.  SK's  mother  and  sister
      intervened and managed to stop the attack. On 24 November  SK  decided
      to visit  her  cousin  but  was  against  attacked  by  three  men  on
      motorbikes, including the Sipah-i-Sahaba member. A group of  Christian
      scouts who happened to be passing by intervened to end the attack. She
      was taken to hospital and thereafter, she stayed with either  a  local
      pastor or Christian social worker in a nearby village and  then  moved
      to Sialkot.

   9.       Both the appellants then returned to Karachi for some months and
      when they obtained their visas they left Pakistan.  Upon arrival here,
      they lived with Reverend Isaac William, a Pakistani pastor. A week  or
      two after their arrival, they were informed by their father that on 27
      March 2011, First Information Reports (FIRs) had been lodged, accusing
      them of blasphemy, that on  28  March  a  Fatwa  had  been  issued  by
      militants calling for their deaths and, on 29 March,  the  police  had
      raided their family home.  These events led to their eventual decision
      to claim asylum.

  10.       Both appellants have continued to practise their  faith  in  the
      UK. AK is a member of Stockton on  Tees  Baptist  Church  and  SK  has
      joined Golding's Church in Loughton.

      Procedural background and findings of the First-tier Tribunal

  11.       The appellants were  both  interviewed  with  respect  to  their
      claims. Their applications were refused on 7 July 2011 and  they  were
      served notices informing them  that  they  were  illegal  entrants  by
      virtue of having gained entry by deception (i.e. having  no  intention
      to study or to leave the UK). Whilst the respondent accepted they were
      Christians, she did not believe their accounts of what had happened to
      them. It was not accepted that AK taught English  Literature  or  that
      the incident of 21 October, and hence  the  following  incidents,  had
      occurred. The respondent noted that despite claiming to be in fear  of
      their lives in Karachi, both returned there  for  several  months  and
      left Pakistan from Karachi  airport.  It  was  also  noted  that  they
      delayed in making an asylum claim until 10 June 2011.  The  respondent
      noted that the FIRs had allegedly been issued some five  months  after
      the claimed incident in October even though it was maintained that the
      Sipah-i-Sahaba had been after them since  that  time.  The  respondent
      observed that the FIR and other documents had been submitted late  and
      not with the asylum application. She considered that a sufficiency  of
      protection was available and that the  appellants  could  relocate  if
      they so wished.

  12.       On 25 July the appellants lodged appeals  against  the  decision
      and their appeals were jointly heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz
      at Hatton Cross on 22 August 2011. Both appellants gave oral evidence.
      The judge dismissed the appeal by way of a  determination  promulgated
      on 7 September. His decision was challenged  on  the  basis  that  the
      judge should have also considered the risk to the appellants solely on
      the  basis  of  religious  hostility;  that  the  background  evidence
      demonstrated that Christians faced a  risk  of  forced  conversion  or
      death, violence, expulsion and discrimination; that the judge did  not
      consider whether this met  the  persecutory  threshold;  and  that  he
      failed to determine the risk to the appellants as Christians  who  ran
      an English school[1]. Permission to appeal was granted on 27 September
      2011. On 12 October the respondent in her rule 24  response  indicated
      that she did not  oppose  the  appeal  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
      determine the appeal with a limited continuance  hearing  to  consider
      whether the appellants would be at risk because of their religion.  It
      was pointed out that the findings of the judge on specific matters had
      not been challenged and should stand.  On 31 October 2011 the decision
      was set aside.

  13.       The following findings of  fact  were  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal:
        1.   Both appellants are from Pakistan and are Christians
        2.  They may well have been exposed to some level of  societal  and
        governmental discrimination in Pakistan
        3.  It was not credible that the appellants' family had founded  an
        English grammar school or that AK was an English teacher
        4.   No weight could be attached to the FIR or Fatwa documents
        5.   The incident in October 2010 did not occur
        6.   The alleged attack on AK in November 2010 did not occur
        7.   SK's accounts of the two attacks on her lacked credibility
        8.  None of the claimed incidents of assault and ill  treatment  by
        members of the Sipah-i-Sahaba occurred.


  14.       These findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal Judge were not
      the subject of challenge to the Upper Tribunal and  we  consider  that
      they  should  stand,  notwithstanding  the  setting   aside   of   the
      determination.

  15.       The same is not true of the judge's finding at paragraph 105  of
      his  determination.  This  concerned  the   judge's   views   of   the
      consequences to a Christian of accusations of blasphemy brought by  'a
      militant Islamic group' and the capacity for bringing false charges of
      blasphemy.

  16.       These findings were obiter once the  judge  concluded  that  the
      appellants did not face any such charges or accusations.  Furthermore,
      the present appeals have been re-heard partly in order for  the  Upper
      Tribunal to give  country  guidance  on  the  risk  to  Christians  in
      Pakistan, by reference to substantially greater evidence and  argument
      than was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

  17.       On the second day of the hearing before us, Mr Walker on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State made an application pursuant to Rule  15(2a)
      of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules to  introduce  certain  evidence
      which had come to light by way of an  internet  search  following  the
      previous day's proceedings and the oral evidence  of  the  appellants.
      The material  in  question  consisted  of  a  newspaper  article  from
      December 2011 in online form relating to criminal proceedings  against
      Pastor William and his family.  The  application  was  opposed  by  Ms
      Jegarajah who argued that there had  been  an  unreasonable  delay  in
      producing the evidence. Following submissions  from  the  parties,  we
      decided it would not be  appropriate  to  admit  the  evidence  and  a
      written decision setting out our reasons was prepared and promulgated.
      It appears as Appendix 1.

      Evangelism and Christianity

  18.       As the appellants have  relied  heavily  on  their  position  as
      evangelical Christians, it is helpful to consider what that means.  Ms
      Jegarajah sets out the etymology  of  'evangelical'  in  her  skeleton
      argument. The word comes from the Middle English  'evangile'  and,  in
      turn, from the  Greek  'euangelion'/'euangelos'  meaning  'good  news;
      bringing good news'. Evangelism should not  solely  be  understood  as
      attempted  or  actual  conversion.  According  to  Professor  David  W
      Bebbington,  widely  known  for  his  definition  of   evangelicalism,
      referred to as the 'Bebbington quadrilateral'[2], that is just one  of
      the four main qualities used to define its convictions and  attitudes.
      The other three are biblicism (a particular regard for the  Bible  and
      the belief that all essential spiritual truth is to  be  found  within
      it), crucicentrism (a focus on the  atoning  work  of  Christ  on  the
      cross) and activism (the belief that the gospel needs to be expressed
      in effort).

  19.       This view was confirmed by Pastors  Sandy  and  Taylor-Black  of
      Golding's and Stockton Churches respectively. Pastor Sandy's  evidence
      was  that  Evangelism  did  not  just  concern  church   matters   but
      encompassed  one's  entire  life.  He  emphasised  the  importance  of
      enhancing worship by good deeds and a lifestyle whereby  a  worshipper
      helped others in the community and embraced all  cultures.  If  church
      members did  not  feel  comfortable  with  sharing  their  faith  with
      strangers, they were  not  berated  for  that;  indeed  there  was  no
      expectation on the Congregation to participate in the outdoor  "table"
      work that the church engaged in. He explained  that  the  aim  of  the
      church was to encourage personal independent evangelism  where  people
      were encouraged to lead a good life and share their faith as  part  of
      their lifestyle. Pastor Taylor-Black also emphasised the importance of
      support for the local community by way of practical help and  service.
      He explained it was important to demonstrate genuine care and  concern
      for others prior to any embarkation on a discussion of Jesus.





PAKISTAN: GENERAL FACTS AND INFORMATION

  20.       With a population estimated at  over  187  million  in  2012[3],
      Pakistan  is  the  sixth  most  populous   country   in   the   world.
      Approximately, 95% of the population are Muslim (75% are Sunni and the
      rest are  Shia).   The  remaining  5%  includes  1.85%  Hindus,  1.59%
      Christians and 0.22% Ahmadis, with 0.7% belonging to  other  religious
      minorities including Sikhs, Parsis, Jews, Baha'is and Jains[4].   Some
      sources, for eg, Writenet and the Ministry for National  Harmony,  put
      Christians first on the  list  of  religious  minorities  with  Hindus
      coming second. The US Commission for International  Religious  Freedom
      (USCIRF) report for 2006  reported  that  Christians  were  officially
      numbered at 2.09 million but,  according  the  COI  report,  Christian
      groups claim to have four million members. Writenet reports  that  the
      numbers range somewhere between three million and 20 million  but  for
      the purposes of its report, it accepts the figure of between three and
      five million.

  21.       Pakistan became an independent state in  August  1947  following
      the partition of British India. It consists of four provinces:  Sindh,
      Punjab, Baluchistan and Khyber Paktunkhwa  (formerly  the  North  West
      Frontier Province), the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)  as
      well  as  the  Capital  Territory  of  Islamabad[5].   The   Pakistani
      administered area of the disputed Jammu and Kashmir region consists of
      Azad Kashmir and the Northern areas which have their own political and
      administrative structures.

  22.        Pakistan's  principal  cities  (with  estimated  population  in
      brackets)   are   the   capital,   Islamabad   (800,000),   Rawalpindi
      (1,406,214),  Karachi  (11,624,219)  Lahore  (6,310,888),   Faisalabad
      (1,977,246) and Hyderabad (1,151,274). Islamabad hosts a large  number
      of foreign diplomats, politicians and government employees.  It  is  a
      modern city located in the north eastern part of the country  and  was
      built during the 1960s to replace Karachi as Pakistan's capital. It is
      the most well developed city in the country, has attracted people from
      all over the country and has the highest literacy rate. The percentage
      of Muslims in urban  areas  is  93.83%.  Christians  form  the  second
      largest group at 4.07% of the population. Gojra, in  the  Punjab,  and
      scene of the 2009 riots against Christians, is  a  stronghold  of  the
      Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and its political wing formerly known as the Sipah-i-
      Sahaba.



[pic]

  23.       The main ethnic  groups  are  comprised  of  Punjabis  (44.68%),
      Pashtuns/Pathans (15.42%) and Sindhis (14.1%). Although  the  national
      language of Pakistan is Urdu, 48% speak Punjabi as their mother tongue
      and 12% speak Sindhi. English is the official language spoken  by  the
      Pakistani elite and used in most government ministries[6].

  24.       In  development  terms,  Pakistan  is  ranked  125  out  of  169
      countries placing it in the lowest 30% globally.  The  adult  literacy
      rate was last recorded at around 55.2% (in 2010) and 22.6% of citizens
      live  below  the  poverty  line  with  the  proportion  said   to   be
      significantly higher  among  minorities[7].  Pakistan  allocated  just
      below 2% of its GDP to education and ranks at 180 in terms of literacy
      out of 221 countries with 5.5 million children out of school with only
      Nigeria  having  more.  Pakistan  has  the  third  highest  number  of
      illiterate adults in the world. There is a  housing  unit  backlog  of
      nine million and 33% of people live in accommodation with no drainage.
      Over one million are displaced due to internal conflict  and  national
      disasters.

  25.       Civilian rule returned to  Pakistan  in  February  2008  when  a
      coalition government formed by the Pakistan People's Party  (PPP)  and
      Nawaz  Sharif's  Muslim   League   defeated   General   Musharraf   in
      Parliamentary elections. In a move to relinquish some  of  the  powers
      accumulated  by  Pakistan's  presidency  for  decades  of   successive
      military rule, Parliament unanimously passed  the  18th  Amendment  in
      April 2010. This was aimed at restoring the  system  of  Parliamentary
      democracy and introduced several limits on presidential powers.

  26.       There is evidence that the  PPP/PML  coalition  government  took
      steps to improve the situation for religious minorities. Some of these
      are summarised in the Christian Solidarity Worldwide (CSW) report  and
      by the UNHCR[8]. Both reports were prepared  before  the  government's
      defeat in the elections last year and include:

         1.  The declaration of a National Minorities Day to  be  celebrated
         on 11 August each year, the date of Jinnah's landmark speech to the
         constituent assembly of 1947. This was  celebrated  for  the  third
         time in 2013.
         2. The creation of a 5% quota for minority  applicants  in  federal
         government jobs and the eventual extension of this principle to the
         provincial level
         3.  The  official  celebration  of  festivals  of   ten   religious
         minorities (including Christmas)
         4.   A 50% increase in the state development fund for minorities
         5.  The  re-establishment  of  district  level  Interfaith  Harmony
         committees
         6.  The establishment of a National Interfaith Council  to  promote
         religious diversity and tolerance
         7.  Remission  during  religious  festivals  of  the  sentences  of
         prisoners from minority communities involved  in  minor  crimes,  a
         privilege already granted to Muslims
         8.  The introduction of four reserved minority seats in the  Senate
         and seats for representatives  from  religious  minorities  in  the
         provincial assemblies
         9.  The reservation of ten seats  in  the  National  Assembly  (the
         lower House of Parliament)
         10. The allocation of property rights to  the  minority  population
         living in Islamabad's slums, a majority of whom are Christians
         11. The construction of prayer rooms  for  non-Muslims  in  prisons
         across the country, previously  only  available  in  a  handful  of
         prisons
         12. The setting up of a 24 hour hotline to report acts of  violence
         against religious groups
         13.  A plan for a National Commission for Minorities to review laws
         and policies relating to minorities and to investigate  allegations
         of discrimination and abuse (to consist of two representatives each
         from the Christian and Hindu communities, a representative from the
         Sikh and one from the Parsi communities and two Muslims).


  27.       Further steps to promote interfaith understanding were taken  by
      the government after the 2 March 2011 assassination of Shahbaz Bhatti,
      the Minister of Minorities Affairs and an outspoken Catholic critic of
      the blasphemy laws. The Ministry of Minorities Affairs was renamed the
      Ministry of National Harmony and Bhatti's brother, Paul, was appointed
      in his place.  On 24 March 2011 the UN Human Rights Council  passed  a
      newly  worded  resolution  introduced   by   Pakistan.   It   affirmed
      traditional human rights and called for a  "global  dialogue  for  the
      promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels, based  on
      a respect for human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs".

  28.       These examples are described as  clear  signs  that  the  senior
      echelons within the government were responding  to  the  interests  of
      minorities. CSW state that the coalition government was vocal  in  its
      dedication to minority  rights  in  both  international  and  domestic
      settings.  We were not told that the new government had  reversed  any
      of these actions. Although in June  2013,  the  Ministry  of  National
      Harmony was merged with a larger ministry, the Ministry of  Religious
      Affairs, there is nothing which would suggest that  the  new  Ministry
      has not continued the tasks of its predecessor.

  29.       Pakistan's new government formed by the Pakistan Muslim League-N
      (PML-N) took office on 5 June 2013 following elections on 11th of  May
      with  Mamnoon  Hussain  as  President  and  Nawaz  Sharif   as   Prime
      Minister[9]. It was the  first  time  in  Pakistan's  sixty  six  year
      history that power had transferred democratically between one civilian
      government and another after the completion of  a  full  Parliamentary
      term. The elections  are  said  to  be  among  the  most  credible  in
      Pakistan's  history,  representative  of  progress  with  an  improved
      electoral register and the highest ever number of women and first-time
      voters. Voter turnout for women was an unprecedented 40% of all  votes
      cast[10] .

  30.        Historians  report  that  the  ancestors  of   most   Pakistani
      Christians  were  oppressed  low  caste  Hindus   who   converted   to
      Christianity  in  the  1800s  when  European  evangelists  spread  the
      Christian gospel on the subcontinent under British colonial  rule[11].
      The reports before us vary as to the  distribution  of  the  Christian
      population.  Writenet reports that  approximately  80%  of  Christians
      live in the Punjab, with around 14% in Sindh, 4% in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
      and 2% in Baluchistan. Other  reports,  notably  the  USCIRF  and  the
      Austrian Fact Finding Mission report, put the percentage of  Christian
      residents in the Punjab at ninety. There is consensus  that  they  are
      based mainly in the central areas  with  almost  half  in  Lahore  and
      Gujranwala[12]. There are 54 Christian villages in Punjab and four  in
      Sindh. In Lahore there are  50  Catholic  Church  schools  along  with
      schools of other Christian confessions. Islamabad is also  home  to  a
      large number of Christian communities.

  31.       There are approximately 15 Sikh Gurdwaras in Pakistan, 50  Hindu
      temples and 500 Christian churches, of which 100 are  still  from  the
      days of British rule. Lahore, alone, has 65 churches.  New  places  of
      worship must register with the district administrative authorities and
      must  be  proportionate  to  the  religious  breakdown  of  the  local
      population but there are reports that churches continue to be built.

  32.       According to information supplied by the  Austrian  Fact-Finding
      Mission  Report,  Catholics  constitute  approximately  half  of   the
      Christians in Pakistan[13]. There are 116 Catholic parishes in as many
      districts[14] and about  350  Catholic  priests  and  2000  nuns.  The
      Catholic diocese of Karachi estimated that 120,000 Catholics lived  in
      Karachi,  40,000  in  the  rest  of  Sindh,  and   5000   in   Quetta,
      Baluchistan[15]. Protestants who make up the other half of  Christians
      are divided into the Church of Pakistan,  a  member  of  the  Anglican
      Communion, which unites  the  Anglican,  Methodist,  Presbyterian  and
      Lutheran churches, the United Presbyterian Church  and  the  Salvation
      Army. There are also evangelical churches such as  the  Baptists,  the
      Seven-Day Adventists,  the  Full  Gospel  Assemblies  Church  and  the
      Pentecostal Church. Many  small  and  independent  church  communities
      prosper in the slum areas.

  33.       There are Christian schools, missions, cemeteries, hospitals and
      leaders, some of whom are described as being very vocal.  Due  to  the
      high quality of these schools, many  of  the  students  are  from  the
      majority Muslim population and indeed, the former President  Musharraf
      attended a Christian school. Foreign missionaries continue to  operate
      in the country. The largest Christian Mission  group  has  engaged  in
      Bible translation for the Church of Pakistan. An  Anglican  missionary
      group fielded several missionaries to assist the Church of Pakistan in
      administrative and educational work. Catholic missionaries  work  with
      persons with disabilities. Some Hindus have voluntarily  converted  to
      Christianity.

  34.        According  to  Writenet,  Christians,  along  with   Jews   and
      Zoroastrians are treated by the Muslims as 'people of  the  book'[16].
      It is reported that Pakistani Christians do not wear  distinct  dress;
      however, some have Anglicised Christian names. Masih (meaning Messiah)
      is a common Christian surname  in  Pakistan.  Passports  set  out  the
      holder's faith. Identity cards do not. Some  places  also  have  their
      origins in Christianity. For example, the northern resort of Murree is
      a derivative of Mary.

  35.       Overall, it is reported that churches keep a  low  profile.  For
      special occasions such as public worship assemblies  and  processions,
      police protection is provided. We did not see any  reports  suggesting
      that  these  have  been  targeted  in  any  consistent  way.  Churches
      communicate with  one  another.  A  certain  freedom  of  religion  is
      present. Symbols such as the cross can  be  displayed.  Marriages  are
      governed by the Christian Marriage Act 1872 and the Christian Marriage
      and Divorce Act of 1869. Courts accept proof  of  Christian  marriages
      from priests.

  36.       Christians are generally described as belonging to  the  poorest
      strata of society, largely uneducated and employed in menial jobs such
      as cleaning and domestic work. Bonded labour is also  prevalent  among
      Christians, mostly in the agricultural and in the brick, glass, carpet
      and fishing industries. According to reports, more  than  1.8  million
      people are in bondage,  mostly  in  Sindh  and  Punjab.  However,  the
      majority of such labourers are low caste Hindus.

THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK IN PAKISTAN

      The Pakistan Penal Code and the Blasphemy Laws

  37.       Chapter XV of the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) outlines 10 offences
      relating to  religion.  The  provisions  can  be  separated  into  two
      categories; those pertaining to Quadianis/Ahmadis  (298B  and  C)  and
      those covering all citizens. Sections 295B and C pertain to blasphemy.
       The blasphemy provisions  were  introduced  by  the  former  military
      leader, General Zia Ul Haq, in 1982 and  1986  through  amendments  to
      existing legislation which had been introduced in 1860 by the  British
      in India as a response to Hindu-Muslim clashes and  were  designed  to
      prevent religious violence[17].  Contrary to  the  previous  blasphemy
      laws that addressed all religious beliefs, the changes  were  specific
      to particular religious beliefs (the Ahmadis/Quadianis) and prohibited
      them from indulging  in  any  activity  that  might  be  construed  as
      offending the feelings of Muslims (298B and C). General Zia introduced
      life imprisonment as the punishment under 295C (in 1982) but  in  1986
      this was amended to life imprisonment or the death sentence and on  20
      April 1991, replaced by "death only" by  court  order  of  30  October
      1990.

  38.       Between 1947 and 1982, there were  hardly  any  cases  in  which
      section 295A (offences concerning religion) was used.   From  1947  to
      1985, Muslims and non-Muslims in Pakistan  lived  largely  in  harmony
      with very few cases of religiously motivated killings.  However,  with
      the introduction of the new clauses, it is  reported  that  there  has
      been a marked deterioration in the treatment of  religious  minorities
      which  is  in  large  part  linked  to  the  laws  and  the  religious
      intolerance they  encourage.  There  are  no  separate  anti-Christian
      provisions, as there are for Ahmadis.

  39.       Article 295 prohibits "injuring or defiling  place  of  worship,
      with the intent to insult the religion of any class" with imprisonment
      for up to 2 years or a fine or both.

      This was enacted under British rule.

  40.       Article 295A states:

      Whoever, with malicious and  deliberate  intention  of  outraging  the
religious   feelings of any class of the citizens  of  Pakistan,  by  words,
either spoken or       written or by  visible  representations,  insults  or
attempts to insult the religion   or religious beliefs of that class,  shall
be punished with imprisonment of either      description for  a  term  which
may extend to 10 years, or with fine, or with      both.

      This was enacted by General Zia.

  41.       Article 295B states:

      Whoever wilfully defiles, damages or desecrates a  copy  of  the  Holy
Quran or of      an extract therefrom or uses it in  any  derogatory  manner
or for any unlawful    purpose shall be  punishable  with  imprisonment  for
life.

      This was enacted by General Zia.

  42.       Article 295C states:

       Who  ever  by  words,  either  spoken  or  written,  or  by   visible
representation or by   any imputation, innuendo,  or  insinuation,  directly
or indirectly, defiles the    sacred  name  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Mohammad
(peace be upon him) shall be      punished with death  or  imprisonment  for
life and shall also be liable to a fine.

      This was enacted by General Zia.

  43.       Although there have been convictions where the death penalty has
      been handed down, to date the government  has  never  carried  out  an
      execution for blasphemy.

  44.       The PPC also legislates in respect of religious  gatherings  and
      places of worship. The disturbance of  lawful  religious  assembly  is
      punishable with up to a year in prison and/or a fine.  Trespassing  on
      burial places or any place set apart for the  performance  of  funeral
      rites is subject to punishment of up to one year in  prison  and/or  a
      fine (Articles 296-7).

  45.       Article 298 states:

      Whoever, with the  deliberate  intention  of  wounding  the  religious
feelings of      any person, utters any word  or  makes  any  sound  in  the
hearing of that person       or makes any  gesture  in  the  sight  of  that
person or places any object in the       sight  of  that  person,  shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description    for  a  term  which  may
extend to one year or with fine, or with both.

      This was enacted by the British.

  46.       Article 298A prohibits the use of derogatory remarks in  respect
      of holy personages.    This can be 'either spoken  or  written  or  by
      visible representation or by any imputation, innuendo or insinuation'.
      Holy personages include the names of any wife or members of the family
      of the Prophet or any of  his  Caliphs  or  companions.  This  offence
      carries up to 3 years' imprisonment and/or a fine.

      This was enacted by General Zia.

  47.       The misuse of epithets, descriptions  and  titles  reserved  for
      certain holy personages or places is prohibited by  Article  298B  but
      this  provision  pertains  to  Quadianis/Ahmadis.  Article  298C  also
      pertains to Ahmadis. These two  sections  are   also  referred  to  as
      Ordinance XX.

  48.       Clauses 295B and 295C  are  described  as  the  blasphemy  laws.
      Section 295A  can  be  distinguished  because  it  carries  a  lighter
      sentence and also acknowledges intent.

  49.       The provisions conflict with the Constitution which provides for
      the equality of citizens. Not only do  they  undermine  the  religious
      freedom provisions contained within the constitution but they  portray
      Islam in a way that leads to a perception of  non-Muslims  as  second-
      class citizens; this is said to promote  an  atmosphere  of  religious
      intolerance and  increase  the  potential  for  religiously  motivated
      problems particularly against the Ahmadi community.

  50.       Although  the  blasphemy  offences  carry  a  mandatory  capital
      punishment, there are no reports of any death sentence  being  carried
      out.

      Relevant International Treaties

  51.       Pakistan has  ratified  the  following  international  treaties:
      the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
      Discrimination (ICERD) on 22 September 1966, the  Convention  on  the
      Rights of the Child (CRC) on 12 November 1990, the Convention on the
      Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) on 12
      March  1996,  the  International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and
      Cultural Rights (ICESCR) on 17 April 2008, the UN Convention  Against
      Torture (UNCAT) and the International Covenant on Civil and  Political
      Rights (ICCPR) (with two reservations  regarding  articles  3  and  25
      [18]) on 23 June 2010 and    the Convention on the Rights  of  Persons
      with Disabilities (CRPD) on 5 July 2011.

      The Constitution

  52.       The Constitution establishes Islam as  the  state  religion  and
      requires that laws be consistent with it. Nevertheless, the  right  to
      freedom of religion in Pakistan was contained  in  Jinnah's  inaugural
      speech on the creation of Pakistan and is set out in Article 20 of the
      Fundamental Rights Chapter:

      Freedom to profess religion and to manage religious institutions.
      Subject to law, public order and morality:-
      1) every citizen  shall  have  the  right  to  profess,  practice  and
      propagate his religion; and
      2) every religious denomination and every sect thereof shall have  the
right to    establish, maintain and manage its religious institutions.

  53.       This Chapter  also  includes  safeguards  against  people  being
      expected to make payments for religious  purposes  outside  their  own
      faith (Article 21), against  religious  compulsion  or  discrimination
      within the education system (Article 22)  and  against  discrimination
      concerning access to public places (Article 26)  and  public  services
      (Article 27).

  54.       Minority interests are referred to throughout the  Constitution.
      The preamble includes the provision that:

      ... adequate provision shall be made  for  the  minorities  freely  to
profess and      practice their religions and develop their cultures.

      The word "freely" was removed from this text under  Zia's  regime  but
      reintroduced in 2010 as part of the package of constitutional  reforms
      known as the 18th Amendment.

  55.       Furthermore, on the protection of minorities, Article 36 states:

      The states shall safeguard the  legitimate  rights  and  interests  of
minorities,      including their  due  representation  in  the  federal  and
provincial services.

  56.        The  Constitution  also  guarantees  freedom  of   speech   and
      expression in Article 19. The  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
      Political Rights (ICCPR) permits a number of specific restrictions  on
      freedom of expression relating  to  the  "respect  of  the  rights  or
      reputations of others'' and "the protection of national security or of
      public order... or of public  health  or  morals".  In  the  Pakistani
      context this is taken further as the right is limited "in the interest
      of the glory of Islam". Non-Muslims are therefore said  to  be  at  an
      automatic disadvantage and  interpretation  of  the  provision  varies
      according to the dominant Islamic theology at any given time.

      The Judicial System

  57.       The legal system in Pakistan is based on  a  common  law  system
      with Islamic law influence. The judicial system  comprises  a  Supreme
      Court, Provincial High Courts and Federal Islamic (or Shariat)  Courts
      (FSC). The Supreme Court is Pakistan's highest court.  Each  province,
      as well as Islamabad, has a high court,  the  justices  of  which  are
      appointed by the President after conferring with the Chief Justice  of
      the Supreme Court and the Provincial Chief Justice. The  judiciary  is
      proscribed from issuing any order contrary to  the  decisions  of  the
      President. Federal Shariat courts hear cases  that  primarily  involve
      Islamic law and tend to be limited to family law. Legislation  enacted
      in 1991 gave legal status to Shari'a  law  but  did  not  replace  the
      existing legal code. Certain areas  operate  under  separate  judicial
      systems. For example, Azad Kashmir has its own judicial system as does
      Gilgit-Baltistan.  There  are  also  separate   procedures   for   the
      Provincially Administered Tribal Areas (PATA).

  58.       The Supreme Court's decisions are binding in  principle  and  in
      law on all other courts. At the district level, civil cases are  dealt
      with by District Judges and Civil Judges whilst criminal  matters  are
      heard in Courts of Sessions  and  Courts  of  Magistrates.  Courts  of
      Sessions can hear cases which carry  the  death  sentence.  There  are
      special courts and tribunals to deal  with  specific  types  of  cases
      including banking, customs,  traffic,  drugs,  labour,  insurance  and
      income tax. According to the US State Department, there are delays  in
      civil and criminal cases due to antiquated procedural rules, weak case
      management systems and weak legal education. There are  several  court
      systems with overlapping and sometimes competing jurisdictions such as
      criminal, civil, terrorism, commercial, family, military and Shariat.

  59.       The Supreme Court may bypass the  Shariat  Appellate  Bench  and
      assume jurisdiction in Hudood cases. The Shariat courts  may  overturn
      legislation they judge to be inconsistent with Islamic tenets but such
      cases are appealed to the Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court
      and ultimately may be heard by the full bench of the Supreme Court. In
      cases relating to Hudood laws, the FSC  deal  with  Muslims  and  non-
      Muslims. Non-Muslims are allowed to consult the FSC in  other  matters
      that affect them or violate their rights, if they so choose.

  60.       There are a number of Shari'a law provisions incorporated within
      the PPC. In 1991 the  Federal  Shariat  Court  declared  Article  295C
      inconsistent with Shari'a law in that the court could not accept  life
      imprisonment as an alternative to the death sentence, stating that the
      penalty for contempt of the Prophet had to be death and nothing else.

  61.       Pakistani law  strictly  forbids  forced  conversions,  as  does
      Islam. The Supreme Court has actively pursued cases related to  forced
      conversion and discouraged it. In such cases, the courts have  ensured
      that concerned individuals have an opportunity to express their wishes
      to convert or complain about any threat or pressure they may be facing
      in complete privacy and safety. The Supreme Court has also given  them
      a period of reflection away from all sources that may influence  their
      decision.

  62.       It is reported by the UNHCR that the lower courts remain plagued
      by endemic corruption and  their  judges  are  said  to  be  prone  to
      intimidation by local  officials,  powerful  individuals  and  Islamic
      extremists. Heavy backlogs of cases can result  in  lengthy  pre-trial
      detention. Corruption within the police  forces  is  widely  reported,
      ranging from the acceptance of bribes for registering false complaints
      or  the  bringing  of  charges  to  intimidate  political   opponents.
      Allegations of torture in police custody are  commonplace,  despite  a
      prohibition of arbitrary arrest and detention  in  law.  An  FIR,  the
      legal basis for all arrests, can  be  issued  by  the  police  at  the
      request of a complainant upon reasonable proof that a crime  has  been
      committed and allows detention of a suspect for 24 hours.  The  filing
      of an FIR does not  however  necessarily  lead  to  arrest.  A  police
      investigation is then required and according to recent  amendments  in
      the procedures, a senior officer must assess whether the charges  have
      any substance. Once a report is prepared confirming the charges, trial
      proceedings ensue. If the police are unable  to  arrest  the  accused,
      they may apply to the courts for a warrant. Failure to  respond  to  a
      warrant means the accused is classed as an absconder and is likely  to
      be listed on the  Exit  Control  List  monitored  by  the  Immigration
      Service at the airports.


The Police

  63.       The police have primary internal security  responsibilities  for
      most of the country. The local police fall within the jurisdiction  of
      the Ministry of Interior. The Rangers,  a  paramilitary  organization,
      are also under the authority of the Ministry  of  Interior,  and  have
      branches in Sindh and Punjab. The armed  forces  are  responsible  for
      external security. They may, however, be  assigned  domestic  security
      responsibilities by the government. A  different  set  of  regulations
      provide the framework for law and order in FATA  and  they  have  been
      described as containing harsh provisions,  albeit  mitigated  to  some
      extent in August 2011

  64.       The US State Department, cited in  the  Country  of  Information
      Report, observes that police effectiveness varied greatly by district,
      ranging from reasonably good to ineffective. Some  members  of  police
      were said to have committed human rights abuses or to be responsive to
      political interests. Other reports note that the police are  perceived
      to be corrupt with corruption responsible for the weak prosecution  of
      criminals, the failure of trial prisoners to appear  in  court  within
      required time limits, flawed court processing, and  lengthy  pre-trial
      detentions.  The  UNHCR  reports  that  there   is   institutionalised
      discrimination   against   religious   minorities   which   reportedly
      contributes  to  a  sense  of  insecurity.  The  Asian  Human   Rights
      Commission reported in March 2012 that  the  security  law  and  order
      situation had become chaotic and that members of all faiths had become
      victims of human rights violations, although the Ahmadis were said  to
      be the main focus of attacks. It is also  reported  that  there  is  a
      general mistrust of the police amongst civilians.

  65.       Some  improvements  in  police  professionalism  were,  however,
      reported by the US State Department. As in previous years, the  Punjab
      provincial government conducted regular training in  technical  skills
      and protection of human rights for police at all  levels.  During  the
      past year police were active in thwarting attempts  by  protesters  to
      reach foreign embassy property during protests  against  a  film  that
      protesters believed  defamed  the  Prophet  Muhammad  and,  unlike  in
      previous years,  the  police  did  not  indiscriminately  fire  lethal
      weapons into the crowd.

  66.       As at 2011, the police force's total strength was reported to be
      354,000, up from 325,000 officers in 2008. The police themselves  have
      come under attack from Taliban and other militant extremist groups  in
      recent years.





Legal Aid Groups

  67.       A number of legal aid groups exist all over Pakistan and provide
      assistance to minorities as well as to citizens generally.   Some  are
      specifically set up to cater to women; others to children and some  to
      minorities. Religious groups have also set up their own organisations;
      for example, the Catholic Bishops  Conference  of  Pakistan  runs  the
      National Commission on Justice and Peace and, amongst other  services,
      provides legal assistance to those accused of blasphemy. Assistance is
      provided to all, however most clients are Christians. There are  eight
      regional offices.

  68.       The Ahmadi community possesses the necessary financial means and
      capacity to represent its own members.

  69.       The AGHS Legal Aid Cell in Lahore, where one of  the  witnesses,
      Ms Jahangir, works, is a human rights and legal aid organisation  that
      commenced its operations in 1980. It focuses in the main on the rights
      of women, children and minorities in Pakistan but has, over the years,
      expanded its scope of concern to other sectors of society it  sees  as
      disadvantaged. AGHS is also an  important  partner  in  several  human
      rights and NGO networks at the national,  regional  and  international
      levels.  Its  experience,  especially  in  the  area  of  women's  and
      children's rights, has enabled it to influence public opinion,  policy
      initiatives and law making.

  70.       The organisation provides free legal aid,  paralegal  education,
      books and pamphlets on legal  awareness,  human  rights  advocacy  and
      women's shelters. It also undertakes research on  related  issues  and
      monitors human rights violations.

  71.       The Centre for Legal Aid, Assistance and Settlement  (CLAAS)  is
      an  interdenominational  organisation  working  for   Christians   and
      religious freedom. It has an  office  in  Lahore  and  aims  to  raise
      awareness,  disseminate  information  and  highlight  the  plight   of
      Christians on an international level. It also provides assistance  via
      campaigns and advocacy. It provides  free  legal  aid  to  victims  of
      religious intolerance, well as shelter and financial support  for  the
      victims and their families.

  72.       Other organisations providing assistance include the Asia  Human
      Rights  Cell,  World  Vision,  Pakistan  Interfaith  League,  Pakistan
      Interfaith League Against Poverty and the Pakistan Lawyers' Foundation
      (in  Karachi).  APMA  is  a  nationwide  network  of  individuals  and
      organisations representing minors and the JAC is an umbrella group  of
      approximately thirty NGOs. There  are  organisations  specifically  to
      assist women such as the Legal Aid Women's  Trust  in  Islamabad,  the
      Pakistan Women Lawyers' Association in Karachi (PAWLA)  and  the  INP-
      INSAF network in Islamabad.

FREQUENCY OF BLASPHEMY ALLEGATIONS

  73.       It is reported by Christian Solidarity Worldwide in their report
      on religious freedom in Pakistan  that  in  the  absence  of  a  clear
      definition of what constitutes a violation, no mens  rea  requirement,
      and the lack of procedural safeguards, the blasphemy laws are open  to
      widespread abuse and have reportedly been used to  harass  and  target
      religious minorities as well as to settle personal scores or carry out
      personal vendettas and have little or nothing to do with religion. The
      report records that two thirds of all blasphemy cases are filed in the
      province of Punjab where land grabbing is particularly problematic  in
      rural areas.

  74.       There is agreement in  the  evidence  that  extremist  religious
      groups present the largest obstacle to freedom of belief in  Pakistan.
      The risk of blasphemy allegations emanate almost entirely from, or  at
      the instigation of, extremist groups. Much of the violence carried out
      by militants does not distinguish between the faiths of the  civilians
      targeted.

  75.       The  HRCP,  UNHCR  and  other  sources  report  that  since  the
      amendment in 1986,  cases  have  risen  steadily.  Ahmadis  and  other
      religious minorities initially felt the brunt of these accusations but
      Pakistanis of any faith are now potential victims with reportedly half
      of the blasphemy cases registered being  against  the  majority  Sunni
      Muslim population.

  76.       Attempts by successive  governments  to  reform  or  repeal  the
      blasphemy laws have failed under the pressure of  hard-line  religious
      groups.  Two high profile public figures, Salman Taseer, the  Governor
      of Punjab,  and  Shahbaz  Bhatti,  Pakistan's  Minister  for  Minority
      Affairs, were killed on 4  January  and  2  March  2011  respectively,
      purportedly due to their opposition to the blasphemy laws[19].

  77.       In an  attempt  to  curb  the  abuse  of  application  of  these
      provisions, a law was introduced requiring a senior police officer  to
      investigate blasphemy complaints  before  registering  them  with  the
      courts. Mr Samuel,  one  of  the  witnesses,  reported  that  bail  is
      generally  not  granted  in  blasphemy  cases  on  the  grounds   that
      individuals facing the death penalty are likely to abscond  however  a
      refusal of bail is not always the case and  one  of  Mr  Samuel's  own
      examples demonstrates this; in November 2013 an Ahmadi man accused  of
      blasphemy was granted bail. UNHCR reports that although some blasphemy
      convictions are overturned on appeal (indeed the evidence  shows  this
      happens on a regular basis), first instance courts are  often  subject
      to intimidation from religious  extremists.  Intimidation,  harassment
      and acts of violence against lawyers defending  such  individuals  are
      also reported. Some accused are reportedly tortured or  killed  whilst
      in police custody or detention. Those acquitted of  blasphemy  charges
      are reportedly subject to death threats by radical religious  elements
      and often have to relocate or go into hiding following acquittal.  The
      Centre for Research and Security Studies (CRSS), based  in  Islamabad,
      in an April 2013 report, lists a number  of  cases  that  resulted  in
      acquittal by the courts between 1990 and July 2012 (B169).

  78.        Several  reports  including  those  by  Amnesty  International,
      Writenet,  CSW,  UNHCR  and  USCIRF[20],  record  that  the  Christian
      minority is subject to discrimination and harassment as well  as  acts
      of religiously motivated violence at the hands of militant groups  and
      fundamentalist  elements.  Criminal   provisions,   particularly   the
      blasphemy laws, are said to be  used  by  militant  organisations  and
      members of some Muslim communities to intimidate and harass Christians
      as well as to exact revenge or settle personal or  business  disputes.
      Interfaith marriages may attract reprisals from the  Muslim  community
      but these are more likely where a Muslim woman marries  a  non  Muslim
      man. Muslim men are permitted to marry women outside their  faith[21],
      the assumption being  that  the  woman  will  convert  to  Islam.  The
      Austrian FFM reports that mixed marriages are common.

  79.       There are varying reports about the  frequency  and  numbers  of
      blasphemy allegations.  Listing the blasphemy cases filed in 2012, the
      Human Rights Commission of Pakistan report  published  in  March  2013
      noted that 23 cases against  27  Muslims,  two  of  them  women,  were
      registered in 2012 for  offences  relating  to  religion.  Eight  were
      charged under  the  blasphemy  provision  and  the  rest  under  other
      sections. Fifteen of the cases were from Punjab and five  from  Sindh.
      The source added that during the same year seven  cases  on  religious
      grounds were registered against members of  the  Christian  community,
      three of them under section 295C. Six  of  these  were  registered  in
      Punjab and one in Sindh (Karachi).  Five  new  cases  were  registered
      against members of the Ahmadi community during 2012, all of them under
      section 298C except one under 295A and all of them in Punjab.

  80.       Different figures are provided by the  National  Commission  for
      Justice and Peace (NCJP) which reported that 30 cases were  registered
      under the blasphemy laws between January and November 2012. Of  these,
      11 were against  Christians,  five  against  Ahmadis  and  14  against
      Muslims. The CSW reports 30 or  35  cases  registered  for  2012  with
      either seven or eleven being Christians.

  81.       The Asian Human Rights Commission reported that 161  individuals
      were charged with blasphemy in 2011 and that  there  were  four  cases
      against Christians. The UNHCR reported a lower figure of 26 new  cases
      with four being against  Christians.  For  2010  UNHCR  report  on  67
      Ahmadis, 17 Christians, eight Muslims and  six  Hindus  being  charged
      whereas the HRCP and CSW put the total figure at 64.

  82.       The NCJP reported that the authorities  registered  a  total  of
      1170 blasphemy cases between 1987 and 2012. The UNHCR cited  a  figure
      of 1060 charged with blasphemy between 1986 and 2010 with 450 of those
      being Muslims, 456 Ahmadis, 133 Christians and  21  Hindus.  The  CRSS
      reported a far lower figure of blasphemy cases; 434 between  1953  and
      July 2012, consisting of 258 Muslims, 114 Christians, 57  Ahmadis  and
      four Hindus[22]. A Freedom House special report published  in  October
      2010[23] stated that a total of 695 people were accused  of  blasphemy
      between 1986 and April 2006, a higher figure over a shorter time  span
      than those provided by the CRSS. Of those, it is said  that  362  were
      Muslims, 239 were Ahmadis, 86 were Christians  and  ten  were  Hindus.
      UNHCR reported that  1060  individuals  were  charged  with  blasphemy
      between 1986 and 2010 (450 Muslims, 456 Ahmadis, 133 Christians and 21
      Hindus). The  Pakistani  daily  newspaper,  Dawn,  cites  the  highest
      figures: 964 people charged with blasphemy between 1984  to  2004  and
      5000 cases registered in total on religious charges.

  83.       According to Human  Rights  Watch  "dozens"  were  charged  with
      blasphemy in 2013. The figures provided  by  the  expert  witness,  Ms
      Jahangir, are more specific with 17 Ahmadis, 13  Christians  and  nine
      Muslims being charged. Two Christians were acquitted;  it  is  unclear
      whether these are two from the total of 13 or from a  figure  relating
      to a different year. Her figures contradict the HCRP report  of  March
      2014 which report that 68 citizens were charged  with  penal  offences
      relating to religion; of these nine were Christians but only  four  of
      those were for blasphemy charges.

  84.       According to a report dated April 2013 by the  CRSS,  52  people
      had been extra judicially murdered between 1990  and  2012  for  being
      implicated in blasphemy charges.  Among  these  were  25  Muslims,  15
      Christians, five Ahmadis, one Buddhist and a Hindu. The HRCP  reported
      that 34 individuals accused of blasphemy were killed between 1986  and
      the end of 2010 (of these half  were  Muslims).  The  CSW  provides  a
      figure  of  33  between  1986  and  October  2009  (with   45%   being
      Christians). In 2013 HRW reported that 16 individuals  were  on  death
      row for blasphemy and 20  were  serving  life  sentences.  That  would
      suggest a large number of releases or acquittals given the far  higher
      numbers reportedly charged.

  85.       As the above reports show, Shi'as are a  particular  target  and
      attacks against  them  have  increased.  Between  2001  and  2002  the
      Christian community was the target of a series of  terrorist  attacks.
      The NCJP reports that  the  strategy  and  targets  of  the  militants
      changed thereafter and that the Ahmadis and  Shi'as  became  the  main
      targets. The NCJP recorded 11 incidents involving Christians for 2012.
      The HRCP reported there were eight[24].

  86.       The Austrian Fact Finding Mission report (AFFM)  concludes  from
      interviews they carried out that in daily life  communication  between
      different  faiths  is  relatively  unproblematic.  Mixed  marriage  is
      frequent and members of  different  religions  largely  live  together
      peacefully. Peace is, however, unstable because  an  incident  like  a
      blasphemy accusation can incite people and  lead  to  riots.  Although
      there are scattered riots against Christian settlements,  Ahmadis  are
      targeted time and time again. The report suggests more tension amongst
      Muslims and  Muslim  related  minorities  (Ahmadis  and  Shi'as)  than
      between Muslims and the other minorities. This  was  confirmed  by  Mr
      Samuel who, in his oral evidence, expressed the view that Ahmadis were
      in a far worse position than Christians.

  87.       Although it is easy to accuse an individual  of  blasphemy,  and
      despite the claims that the situation is deteriorating year  by  year,
      the statistics tend to show modest  numbers[25].   The  Austrian  Fact
      Finding Mission reports that accusations, which soared during  General
      Zia's term, are  decreasing  but  can  still  result  in  wide-ranging
      consequences for victims. Although the majority of such  cases  result
      in acquittal, at least in the  appeal  court,  the  danger  of  prison
      sentences or, in extreme cases, 'lynch justice' against the accused by
      angry crowds exists. A few examples of the  latter  are  reported  and
      included in our summary at paragraphs 97-99.

THE EXPERTS AND OTHER WITNESSES

  88.       We heard evidence from two expert witnesses, Asma  Jahangir  and
      Zimran Samuel; two pastors in the UK, a Bishop in Pakistan and the two
      appellants. Additionally we have written reports from two priests.

(i)    Zimran  Samuel  is  a  barrister  at  Bedford  Row  in   London   who
predominantly practises in children's law and human  rights.  He  has   been
elected to the Executive Committee of the Bar Human Rights    Committee  and
prior to that he worked at  the  United  Nations       headquarters  in  New
York. He has researched issues concerning the      rights of  minorities  in
Pakistan for many years and currently works  alongside  Paul  Jacob  Bhatti,
the former Minister  for  National  Harmony      to  offer  pro  bono  legal
support to victims of religious discrimination.    He is in the  process  of
writing a review of blasphemy laws across the      Commonwealth,  a  project
founded by the Commonwealth Lawyers     Association. He is due  to  commence
a part time position at the School       of  African  and  Oriental  Studies
later this year.

(ii)  Asma Jahangir is a leading Pakistani advocate, human rights  activist,
      Director of the AGHS Legal  Aid  Cell  (ALAC)  in  Lahore  and  former
      President of     the Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan. On the
      international level, she has served  as  U.N.  Special  Rapporteur  on
      Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions for the U.N. Commission
      on Human Rights (1998-2004) and U.N. Special Rapporteur on Freedom  of
      Religion or Belief for the U.N. Human Rights Council (2004-2010).  She
      was the President of the Supreme Court  Bar  Association  of  Pakistan
      between 2010 and 2011 and is an executive member of the  international
      crisis groups and founder member of the Women's  Action  Forum  (WAF).
      Between 2005 and 2010 she was the chairperson of the  HRCP.  She  gave
      expert evidence to the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  MN  and  others
      (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389
      (IAC).

(iii)       Pastor Jeremy Sandy of Golding's Church,  attended  by  SK,  has
been a      pastor for 15 years; prior to which he worked  in  the  security
industry.

(iv)  Pastor Taylor-Black is  the  Assistant  Pastor  at  Stockton  on  Tees
Baptist     Tabernacle, attended by AK, and an accredited  minister  of  the
Baptist     Union of Great Britain.

(v)   Dr Ijaz Inayat Masih was elected to the  role  of  Bishop  of  Karachi
within      the Church of Pakistan in October 1997 but his consecration  was
      blocked and since 2002 he shares the role with  Sadiq  Daniel.  He  is
based       at the Holy Trinity Cathedral in Karachi. Litigation to  resolve
      the issue of the office of Bishop of Karachi is still pending  in  the
civil       courts.

(vi)  Rev. Stuart Rodney  Windsor,  who  did  not  give  oral  evidence  but
      provided a written statement, is the special ambassador for  Christian
      Solidarity Worldwide (CSW), an NGO, specialising in religious  freedom
      for all and exclusively undertaking advocacy work at  the  UNHCR,  the
      British Parliament, the EU, and the Congress and Senate  in  the  USA.
      They also have international partners in Norway, Denmark,  Hong  Kong,
      Australia, New Zealand and India. They advised the UK  government  and
      the Foreign and Commonwealth Office     as well  as  the  USCIRF.  CSW
      works in 26 countries where there are serious religious freedom issues
      including Pakistan. Between 1993 and 2011 Rev.  Windsor  was  national
      director of CSW. He has acted as an expert witness in some  20  asylum
      hearings and has visited  Pakistan  on  four  occasions.  He  has  had
      contact with members of the Minorities Party in Pakistan over the last
      20 years and worked personally with the late Shahbaz Bhatti.   He  has
      personally been involved in  a  number  of  high-level  blasphemy  and
      apostasy cases where the  converts  have  moved  to  the  UK.  He  was
      involved in campaigning for  Christians  as  well  as  others  charged
      unjustly under the blasphemy laws. He is also a Minister  of  Religion
      in the Assemblies of God, one of the mainstream  Pentecostal  churches
      in the UK.

(vii)       Pastor Andrew Waugh is the senior Minister of Stockton  on  Tees
Baptist Tabernacle and an  accredited  Minister  of  the  Baptist  Union  of
Great       Britain. We have  an  undated  and  unsigned  written  statement
from him.

  89.       The evidence of the witnesses is recorded in the  appendices  to
      this determination but a brief summary appears below. Our  conclusions
      on their evidence are set out below at paragraphs 186-206.

  90.       Mr Samuel's evidence (fully summarised at Appendix 4) was to the
      following effect:

      (1) Pakistan has a colonial history with a missionary influence;  many
   leading schools have Christian origins and founders  yet  are  frequented
   by Muslims
      (2)  There  are  many  denominations  of  Christians  and  evangelical
      Christians are not generally at  greater  risk  than  other  Christian
      groups; evangelical churches have operated for decades and have  never
      had  an  accusation  of  blasphemy  but  evangelical  Christians   are
      charismatic and their emphasis on preaching makes them more vulnerable
      to attacks and accusations from extremists
      (3) Expressions of evangelism usually take place within the church but
      there have been some rallies
      (4) Praying, singing and teaching are thriving  within  the  Christian
   communities; there  have  been  no  clampdowns  on  such  activities  and
   new members are joining all the time
      (5) Foreign churches organise rallies in Pakistan from time to time
      (6) Preaching on the streets is unsafe
       (7)  Information  received  from  individuals  who  were  interviewed
   indicate that Christians  are  allowed  to  express  themselves  although
   sometimes the situation could be uncomfortable
      (8) Outward symbols of Christianity such as crosses can be worn but in
      some circumstances and some places may cause some societal discomfort
      (9) The situation for Ahmadis is far worse than  for  Christians;  the
   former have no leaders, schools or hospitals and  are  not  permitted  to
   express themselves
      (10) Attacks and accusations of blasphemy are sporadic and more  often
   related to the political climate or a property/land/personal or  business
   dispute than a particular form of worship
      (11) Blasphemy victims are often subjected to vigilante violence
      (12) For someone accused of blasphemy or  attacked  because  of  their
      faith, repeat violence is likely
      (13)  The  requirement  that  a  senior  police  officer  investigates
   blasphemy charges prior to the lodging of a complaint  is  not  uniformly
   enforced
      (14) State agencies are unwilling or unable to offer protection
      (15) Judges hearing blasphemy cases  and  lawyers  representing  those
accused can also be at risk
      (16) Bail is usually denied in blasphemy cases
      (17) Relocation is not always possible where cases are reported in the
      press (usually high profile cases)
      (18) There were some attempts under  the  PPP  government  to  protect
   Christians through political means  and  the  court  process  where  they
   were  falsely accused
      (19) During the PPP term of office, leading figures of the  government
   who  spoke  out  against  the  misuse  of   the   blasphemy   laws   were
   threatened (one) or killed (two)
      (20) Forced conversions largely occur in  the  Punjab  and  Sindh  and
   typically involve Christian and Hindu  (but  largely  Hindu)  girls  aged
   between 12 and  25  from  poor  economic  backgrounds  who  are  targeted
   because of their lower status and for sexual  gratification  rather  than
   for      reasons of faith
      (21) Girls working in households as maid and cleaners are particularly
      vulnerable
      (22) There  is  no  effective  protection  for  females  targeted  for
   conversion or abduction
      (23) Although the National Assembly passed  the  Prevention  of  Anti-
   Women Practices (Criminal Law Amendment Act) in  November  2011     which
   rendered forced marriage a criminal offence punishable by up to  10 years
   in prison, it has made little difference in practice
      (24) In some  instances  Christians  are  under  pressure  to  convert
   because of strong outward expressions of faith or  following  accusations
   of blasphemy
      (25) Christians are routinely  discriminated  against  in  matters  of
   land,     property,  employment,  civil  liberties,  court   proceedings,
   education and  political representation at local and federal levels
      (26) Christians are generally poor, low class and employed  in  menial
   jobs
      (27) Islamabad is a tolerant city for those who  want  to  speak  out;
   many Christians live  and  work  there  in  large  organisations  and  in
   politics
      (28) Middle  class,  educated  Christians  have  fewer  problems  than
   their poorer counterparts but no one is completely safe
      (29) Christians are less likely to speak out  openly  in  rural  areas
   when     they are dependent upon Muslims for work
      (30) Christians are represented in politics
      (31) Christian literature is available
      (32) There is more systematic discrimination in conservative areas
      (33) The priority of the current government is to deal with  terrorism
   rather than the protection of minorities
      (34) The Ministry  of  National  Harmony  was  dissolved  by  the  new
   government[26]
      (35) Wearing of the  veil  by  women  is  not  the  norm  in  Pakistan
   regardless of faith.


  91.       Ms Jahangir's evidence was as follows:

      (1) Violence by militant groups is on the rise and even the police and
      local administration can be intimidated by religious terrorism
      (2) The situation in the last  few  years  had  deteriorated  for  all
   citizens
      (3) There is no rationale behind the actions of extremists  and  those
   they target
      (4) Anyone can become a victim of a blasphemy accusation
      (5) Non-Muslims have been targeted because of the war in Iraq
      (6) The propagation of any religion other than Islam is dangerous  and
   illegal
      (7) In 2010, 64 people were charged with blasphemy
      (8) Between 1986 and 2010, 34 of those accused  were  extra-judicially
      killed and half of these were Muslims
      (9) Thousands of FIRs have been registered  which  cover  people  from
   all faiths
      (10) The AGHS Legal Aid Cell had approximately 7000  clients  a  year;
   although  their  religious  background  was  not   documented,   it   was
   estimated that about 12 would be Christians
      (11) AHGS clients did not have to  go  into  hiding  as  a  result  of
   seeking  legal assistance
       (12)  The  Christian  community  amounted  to  1.69%  of  the   total
   population in 1998 and was 1.59% in 2011
      (13) There is discrimination against all religious minorities  by  the
   state    and society
      (14) Large numbers of religious minorities are bonded  labourers;  the
   Christians tend to be in Punjab with Hindus in Sindh
      (15) Christians largely undertake menial jobs
      (16) The educated middle class is not as vulnerable as the poor. Large
      numbers of Christians emigrated from Pakistan in 2002
      (17) Forced conversions of Christians are  very  rare  unlike  amongst
   Hindu women
      (18) Poorer women are more vulnerable to rape
      (19) Christian women are seen as less conservative  and  therefore  as
   easy targets but there are no figures for rape  victims  based  on  their
   religion
      (20) There were no instances of forced conversion in Baluchistan
       (21)  An  outspoken  Christian   wanting   to   engage   Muslims   in
   discussions about Christianity was generally asking for trouble
      (22) Whilst Islamic  studies  are  compulsory  in  schools,  Christian
   students can take Moral Sciences[27] instead
      (23) There are a large  number  of  English  medium  schools  some  of
   which    are Christian and some are not; they are open to students of all
      faiths.
      (24) The viability of relocation depended on one's circumstances
      (25) Women do not generally wear veils, regardless of their faith.

  92.       Pastor Sandy said:

      (1) He had known SK for about three years
      (2) He saw her at church
      (3) She had  developed  from  a  timid  young  woman  to  someone  who
   was more confident
      (4) Christianity was fundamental to her life
      (5) The church was involved  with  missionary  work  in  Pakistan  and
   was currently building a school near Lahore
      (6) The visiting missionaries had not had any problems on  account  of
   their faith and no visas had been refused.

  93.       Pastor Taylor-Black said:

      (1) He had known AK for about two years
      (2) Since attending church, AK's trust in Jesus had developed and  his
   faith had strengthened
      (3) AK had been baptised
      (4) The church had missions in Africa.


  94.       Bishop Masih's evidence was essentially as follows:

      (1) He knows the parents of the appellants
      (2) They contacted him at the time of the October 2010 incident and he
      had tried to calm the situation by  speaking  to  the  Elders  in  the
   community
      (3) The parents left their home in March 2011 and are living off their
      pensions in a "safe house" provided by the church, although  they  are
   not in hiding
      (4) They cannot relocate as they  would  be  recognised  as  they  had
   spent much of their lives interacting with people
      (5) They used to be employed by the government
      (6) He withdrew cash from their accounts on their  behalf  with  their
   bank cards at an ATM
      (7) Their school is still operational and they receive a share of  the
   profits
      (8) Forced marriages are taking place
      (9) Christian and Hindu women are forced to convert to Islam
      (10) His diocese consists of many churches in Karachi and Baluchistan;
      these are made up of thirty parishes with thousands of members
      (11) Over the last year  there  has  been  an  increase  in  blasphemy
   allegations
      (12) Evangelism was not relevant to the issue of risk
      (13) Christians were targeted  equally,  regardless  of  economic  and
   social  status or education
      (14) Islamabad is a comparatively safe city for Christians
      (15) The appellants' parents and siblings still attend church
      (16) The appellants speak to their parents on the telephone  but  only
   via a phone line not registered to them
      (17) AK's wife and son are back in Karachi having left Quetta after  a
   few months. They attend church
      (18) World Vision  dealt  with  approximately  80%  of  all  blasphemy
   cases.

  95.       The evidence of Pastor Waugh, by way of his  written  statement,
      is as follows:

      (1) He has known AK for two years
      (2) They meet at church
      (3) AK is a devoted Christian
      (4) AK would not be able to practise his  faith  in  Pakistan  without
   falling foul of the blasphemy laws.


  96.       Rev. Windsor's statement was that:

      (1) He has met AK and has spoken to SK and is of the  view  that  they
   are both devout Christians
      (2) People in Pakistan can  be  traced  via  their  ID  cards  and  so
   somebody       accused of blasphemy cannot hide
      (3) Extremist groups and the intelligence services have the  technical
   know-how to trace and locate anyone of interest to them
      (4) As an FIR has been issued in respect of the appellants, they would
      not have the ability to relocate.

COUNTRY INFORMATION

  97.       Much of the contents of the reports we have before us  has  been
      set out in our discussion of the general situation in Pakistan and the
      blasphemy laws. We now set out a compilation of the  reported  attacks
      on Christians and on those who have assisted them in the legal process
      and summarise other relevant matters which have not been covered.

      Reports of incidents of harm to Christians and those assisting them

  98.       The following incidents covering the  period  between  2009  and
      2014 are referred to in the documentary evidence before us. Some  were
      also referred to in oral  testimony.   There  are  a  few  others  are
      referred to in Ms Jahangir's report but as details  are  not  provided
      and sources are not stated,  they  have  not  been  included  in  this
      compilation. Incidents prior to 2009, though noted, are  not  set  out
      here.

2009

      (1) August: up to eight Christian people died in Gojra, Punjab,  in  a
       fire in the course of riots. Some reports state the riots took  place
       after accusations of blasphemy; others report that they followed  the
       elopement of a Christian youth with his Muslim girlfriend  (RB  813).
       70 people were named as suspects, 68 were granted  bail  and  in  the
       case of the other two, the verdicts are  outstanding.  The  incidence
       was legally investigated by Justice Iqbal Hameeduddin who was at  the
       time a judge at the High Court in Lahore. The conclusion was that the
       blasphemy laws must be amended in order to prevent  abuse  but  these
       recommendations have not yet been taken up.

2010

      (2) December: Gulfan, a 9 year old Christian girl was raped.

      (3) November: Asia Noreen AKA Asia Bibi, a Christian mother  of  five,
       was convicted of blasphemy. She was the first  female  to  receive  a
       death sentence under the blasphemy laws  and  her  case  attracted  a
       great deal  of  attention  worldwide.   She  is  in  the  process  of
       appealing the verdict.

      (4) November: Shazia, a 12 year old  Christian  girl,  was  raped  and
       killed.

      (5) October: Lubna, a 12  year  old  Christian  girl,  was  raped  and
       killed.

        (6) 2 July: two brothers, Rashid and Sajjad Emmanuel, were  arrested
       for having published a blasphemous pamphlet. They were shot dead when
       leaving court on 19 July.

      (7) January: a 12-year-old Christian girl who  worked  as  a  maid  in
       Lahore was killed by her employers.

      (8) 2010: Three individuals were given life sentences  for  killing  a
       Christian businessman

      (9) 2010: Sherry Rahman of the PPP attempted to  amend  the  blasphemy
       laws by introducing a private members bill  seeking  to  abolish  the
       death penalty and replace it with a 10 year prison term. She received
       death threats and withdrew the bill.

2011

      (10) December: Amirah, a teenage girl, was killed during an  attempted
       rape.

      (11) October: Anna, a 12 year old, was  raped  and  held  captive  for
       eight months before escaping.

      (12) October: Saqib Masih, a 22 year old Christian man, was killed  by
       a mob of around 60 extremists  who  came  to  the  village  of   Mian
       Chiannu, Punjab to claim a plot of land 'sold' to two Muslims.

      (13) September: a Muslim man was sentenced to jail for  25  years  for
       the rape of a Christian girl.

      (14) August: a group of Christians was attacked  by  extremists  while
       watching a film about Jesus Christ in Abbotabad in northern Pakistan.

      (15) May: bookshop owners Gulzar Masih  and  his  son,  Suleman,  fled
       Sialkot, Punjab, after they were accused of burning  a  copy  of  the
       Koran. Problems began when Suleman discovered some burnt pages of the
       Quran under their shop's protective shutter when  he  opened  up  one
       morning.  Employees  of  the  rival  bookseller,  Mr  Masih's  former
       business partner, began to shout and accuse them of  blasphemy.  They
       fled. A mob tried to set fire to the shop  but  was  stopped  by  the
       police. It is reported that the burnt pages were planted by the rival
       bookseller to frame the businessman.

      (16) May: a Christian street sweeper was  reportedly  stabbed  in  the
       chest and killed by a local shopkeeper for not immediately  complying
       with a demand to clean in front of the shop.

       (17) May: Farah Hatim a 24-year-old Christian woman,  from  southern
       Punjab  was  abducted,  forced  to  convert  and  marry  one  of  her
       kidnappers. Her family claim that she had been put under pressure but
       the Supreme Court ruled that she should stay with her new family.

      (18) April: the Islamic group, Tahreek-e-Ghazi Bin  Shaheed,  ambushed
       a Protestant clergymen and his family in Lahore,  seriously  wounding
       the minister's  24-year-old  son  (who  recovered).  His  father  had
       earlier received demands for money but had refused to pay.

      (19) April: Sehar Naz, a 24-year-old Christian woman  in  Lahore,  was
       abducted and raped by a man claiming to  be  a  police  officer.  The
       police opened a file against the man but no  one  with  his  identity
       could be traced.

      (20) April: Babar Masih, a Christian man, was reported to have  walked
       past a mosque in Chichawatni, Punjab, shouting criticisms  about  the
       Prophet. Muslim clerics surrounded his house and demanded that he  be
       handed over to them but the police  intervened  and  charged  him  in
       connection with  the  blasphemy  law.  He  is  said  to  be  mentally
       unstable.

      (21) March: a group of Muslims  disrupted  a  church  gathering  in  a
       Christian settlement in Hyderabad, which led to clashes in which  two
       Christian men were shot dead. Three  of  the  six  perpetrators  were
       arrested.

      (22) 2 March: the Minister of Minority Affairs,  Shahbaz  Bhatti,  was
       shot and killed in Islamabad. He was a Catholic who had  long  fought
       for religious freedom including changes to the  blasphemy  laws.  The
       Tehreek-i-Taliban, a militant Islamic group,  claimed  responsibility
       for his death.

      (23) 28 March: a Catholic Church was attacked. It followed the  public
       burning of a Quran in the USA. Men hurled stones at  the  church  and
       tried to set fire to it. No one was hurt.

      (24) February: Imran Masih, a Christian man, who  died  in  suspicious
       circumstances was, according to his family, killed  by  his  employer
       for  reasons  connected  with  his  faith.  His   death   was   being
       investigated at the time of reporting.

      (25) 4 January: Salman Taseer, a Christian  Governor  of  Punjab,  was
       killed by his own bodyguard, Malik Mumtaz Qadri,  near  his  home  in
       Islamabad for criticising the blasphemy laws. It is reported that  he
       was influenced by clerics who  had  pronounced  a  fatwa  against  Mr
       Taseer. Qadri was arrested and sentenced to death.

      (26) 2011: a 12-year-old Christian girl from Punjab was kidnapped  and
       raped. When she escaped the police reportedly advised her  family  to
       return her to her abductors because she had already been forced  into
       marriage with one of them.

      (27) 2011: three individuals were sentenced to life in prison for  the
       murder of a Christian who refuse to convert to Islam.

2012

      (28) September: a group of people protesting against an  American-made
       anti-Islamic film burnt down a church in Mardan, north-west  Pakistan
       and looted surrounding areas. The police made 64 arrests.

      (29)  16  August:   Rimsha  Masih,  an  illiterate  girl  with  Down's
       syndrome living  in  the  urban  slums  of  Islamabad  and  described
       variously as being 11, 12, 14 and 16 years old, was accused of having
       burnt  pages  from  the  Quran.  The  case  provoked   national   and
       international outrage. After some weeks in prison, she was  acquitted
       and released and has since  left  for  Canada  with  her  family.  It
       transpired that one Khalid Jadoon Chishti had planted  pages  of  the
       Quran in a bag  containing  ash  which  was  seized  from  the  girl.
       Although he was then arrested, a district court found that there  was
       no case to be heard against him.

      (30)  August: a 13 year old Christian girl from Punjab was gang  raped
       and killed, reportedly  by  a  group  of  Muslim  men.  The  Pakistan
       Christian Post reported in November 2012 that the girl's  father  had
       been threatened with death if he did not withdraw  the  case  against
       the accused perpetrators.

       (31)   August:  a  Christian  boy  from  Faisalabad  was  killed  and
       mutilated.

      (32)  June: a 13 year old Christian girl was gang raped.

      (33) March: Shamim Bibi, a 42 year  old  Christian  woman  in   Gojra,
       Punjab,  was  beaten  and  stripped.  Two  members  of  the  family's
       landlord, have been accused of the attack.

2013

      (34)  12 October: Adnan Masih, a Pastor in  Lahore,  was  arrested  on
       for allegedly writing derogatory remarks about an Islamic book.

      (35) September: A double suicide bomb at a  church  in  Peshawar,  the
       capital of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, along the Pakistan Afghan
       border, killed around 81 worshippers. Protests broke out  across  the
       country and Government officials joined clerics in demanding  heavier
       security  for  minorities  and  expressed   second   thoughts   about
       attempting dialogue with militant Islamists. The All  Pakistan  Ulema
       Council (APUC),  an  association  of  Muslim  clerics  and  scholars,
       branded the attacks as shameful and expressed  solidarity  with  "our
       Christian brothers and sisters in this time of grief and sorrow". The
       National Assembly Speaker, Deputy  Speaker  and  the  Prime  Minister
       unanimously condemned the attacks and the militants and called for an
       increase in security at religious sites. World Watch Monitor  reports
       that the Police Superintendent in Peshawar  set  up  a  committee  to
       investigate the attacks and that a new plan to  provide  security  to
       minorities had been created which included increased  police  patrols
       at religious sites. The  Provincial  Chief  Minister  promised  $6000
       compensation for every bereaved family and  $2000  for  every  person
       injured in the attacks. Three days of national mourning were ordered.
       The Chairman of the Free Legal Aid Committee and Bar Council  offered
       affected families free legal assistance to pursue  their  claims  for
       compensation.

      Responsibility for the attack has been claimed by Jandullah  (Soldiers
       of God) which is part of the Tehrik-i-Taliban and closely linked with
       Al Qaeda. This is reported to have  been  the  first  suicide  attack
       specifically targeted at Christians. Other suicide attacks have  been
       primarily carried out on Shi'a places of worship, Sufi shrines or  on
       security personnel and their facilities. Khadim Hussain, a  Pakistani
       political analyst, considered the attacks to  be  linked  to   NATO's
       planned pullout from Afghanistan and an attempt by  the   Taliban  to
       divide the population  between  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  and  cause
       instability which they could then use to re-capture Afghanistan after
       the US and NATO withdrawal.

      Whilst three previous attacks on Christian churches are  reported  (in
       October 2001, in March 2002, and in August 2002,)  it  is  maintained
       that there has been no serious attack on a church in the  intervening
       period. Ms Jahangir reports of six churches being attacked in Karachi
       during 2012 but details are not provided, there  are  no  reports  of
       casualties, they do not appear to be reported elsewhere and  are  not
       mentioned by Bishop Inayat  who  is  based  in  Karachi.  We  assume,
       therefore, that these were minor attacks.

      (36) 13 July: 29-year-old Sajjad Masih, a Christian from Gojra in  the
       Punjab, was convicted of blasphemy. It is reported  that  some  young
       Muslim men had plotted to punish him for being friends with  a  local
       Christian girl although it is not clear what interest they had in his
       relationship with a fellow Christian.

      (37) June: in Punjab, three Christian women, the  daughters-in-law  of
       a Christian, Sadiq Masih, were beaten and paraded naked in the street
       by armed men  employed  by  Mohammed  Munir,  who  had  earlier  been
       involved in an altercation with Mr Masih whose goats had damaged  his
       crops.

      (38) April: Younis Masih, who had been sentenced  to  death  in  2005,
       was acquitted by the Lahore High Court.

      (39) 4 April: a  Muslim  mob  attacked  Francis  Colony,  a  Christian
       neighbourhood in Gujranwala, injuring five Christians and damaging  a
       church and dozens of shops and vehicles. The riots occurred following
       an argument between Muslim and Christian youths about playing music.

      (40) March: Sawan Masih  a  Christian  man  living  in  Lahore  became
       involved in an argument with a Muslim and was  accused  of  blasphemy
       and arrested. Three days after the accusation,  a  mob  attacked  the
       poor Christian neighbourhood of  Joseph  Colony  in  Lahore.  Reports
       suggest that the time lapse indicated that  the  riots  were  not  an
       outburst of spontaneous anger but were planned and incited. According
       to the National Commission on Justice and Peace (NCJP), the  mob  did
       not consist of local people but of students from madrassas  in  other
       areas, as local religious groups are  said  to  get  on  well.  These
       circumstances and suspicions  were  echoed  in  the  press.  A  large
       contingent of police was deployed into the area after the  riots  and
       up to 150 suspects were arrested; around  50  of  them  were  charged
       under the Anti-Terrorism Law. Four police officers have been  removed
       from their posts for negligence.

      At a subsequent hearing, the police were strongly criticised  for  the
       failure to protect the rights and the homes of the Christians and the
       Court observed that Articles 9 and 14 of the  Constitution  had  been
       violated. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court condemned  the  fact
       that  only  lower  ranking  superintendents   were   suspended.   The
       government took immediate action  after  the  riots.  Representatives
       condemned the violence and visited the community in order to  express
       solidarity and support. Each affected family was paid Rs. 500,000  in
       compensation within a few  days  and  the  government  paid  for  the
       reconstruction of their homes. The reporting of the media was seen as
       accurate and was highly critical of the violence.

      The Pakistan Interfaith League (PIL)  and  NCJP  expressed  suspicions
       that the violence  was  orchestrated  as  a  means  of  delaying  the
       forthcoming elections. They believed that  the  incident  was  not  a
       random outbreak of violence but was planned and incited and had to be
       seen in combination  with  the  recent  increase  in  other  attacks,
       particularly on Shi'as. In their view, the attacks  were  planned  by
       certain actors who wanted to cause  insecurity  and  destabilise  the
       situation.

      (41) February: a 56-year-old pastor, Karma Patras, was  exonerated  of
       blasphemy offences after his accuser said he was mistaken  in  filing
       the complaint.

2014

      (42) 7 May: Rashid Rehman,  a  well  known  lawyer  and  regional  co-
       ordinator of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, was  shot  dead
       in his office in Multan. It is suspected this was due to  his  recent
       defence of a blasphemy victim.

      (43) 5 April: Shafqat Emanuel and Shagufta Kausar, a Christian  couple
       from Gojra in the Punjab, were found guilty of sending a text message
       to the Imam at their local mosque insulting  the  Prophet.  They  are
       appealing.

      (44) 28 March: Sawan Masih , a Christian man, was sentenced  to  death
       for blasphemy. His arrest,  in  March  2013,  led  to  the  riots  in
       Lahore's Joseph Colony dealt with above (at section 40).

  99.       In his report, Mr Samuel refers to four new cases since the  new
      government took power but two of these do not pertain  to  Christians.
      Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, these are  set  out  below
      before we proceed to our list of Christian cases:

      (1) January 2014: Mohammed Asghar, a  British  Pakistani  Muslim  man,
was  sentenced  to  death  for  blasphemy.  He  was  arrested  in  2010   in
Rawalpindi, near Pakistan's capital of Islamabad, for  claiming  to  be  the
Prophet Muhammad but  his  lawyer  said  the  case  was  really  a  property
dispute  with   a   tenant   and   that   Asghar   suffers   from   paranoid
schizophrenia.  He is appealing.


       (2)  November  2013:  Masood  Ahmed,   a   British   Pakistani,   was
imprisoned for reciting  a  passage  from  the  Quran.  He  belongs  to  the
Ahmadi community. He is now back in Britain.

       UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for   Assessing   the   International
Protection Needs of Members of Religious Minorities from Pakistan   (14  May
2012)

 100.       These guidelines contain helpful background material and set out
      the following list of UNHCR's recommendations:
      (1) That the asylum claims made by  members  of  religious  minorities
require particularly careful  examination  of  possible  risks.  Members  of
the Ahmadi, Christian, Hindu,  Sikh,  Baha'i,  Shi'a  and  Sufi  communities
may, depending on the individual circumstances  of  the  case,  be  in  need
of international protection

      (2) That an internal flight or relocation alternative  will  generally
not be      available in FATA, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and  Baluchistan  province
which are currently affected by security and  military     counterinsurgency
operations. Internal relocation will also generally       not  be  available
to individuals at risk of being targeted by some armed   militant groups  or
to those who are liable  to  criminal  prosecution     under  the  country's
blasphemy and/or anti-Ahmadi laws

      (3) That exclusion  considerations  may  arise  in  individual  asylum
claims  made  by  members  of  religious  minorities  with   the   following
profiles: current and  former  members  of  the  military,  police  security
and  intelligence  forces,  current  and  former  members  of  the   Islamic
militant groups or persons involved  in  sectarian  violence,  officials  in
the local and federal administrations and members of the judiciary

 101.       According to the UNHCR, members of religious minorities  may  be
      subject to religiously motivated harassment and violence at the  hands
      or  instigation  of   extremist   elements.   Failure   to   prosecute
      perpetrators  of  such  violence,   as   well   as   institutionalised
      discrimination against religious minorities, reportedly contributes to
      a climate of impunity and the  growing  sense  of  insecurity  amongst
      these communities. There  have  been  reports  of  sectarian  violence
      including militant attacks targeting religious processions and  places
      of  worship[28].  Although  these  are  more  frequent  in  the  areas
      bordering Afghanistan, in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the FATA as  well  as
      Baluchistan, there have been attacks on civilian populations in  urban
      centres in other parts of the country.  The  attacks  during  2011  in
      Karachi were allegedly conducted as retaliation for the  arrest  of  a
      senior Al Qaeda member in Quetta.
 102.       Christian women and girls are said to be at particular  risk  of
      sexual and gender-based  violence,  forced  conversion  to  Islam  and
      forced marriage by Muslim men as well as discrimination and  violence,
      including honour killings at the hands of their own  communities.  Law
      enforcement authorities are reportedly unable or unwilling to  protect
      victims of forced marriage and other forms of  gender-based  violence.
      In a positive development, on 15 November 2011, the National  Assembly
      passed the prevention of anti-women practices (Criminal Law  Amendment
      Act) 2011 which renders forced marriages a criminal offence punishable
      by imprisonment for up to 10 years.

 103.       There is  reference  to  the  inclusion  of  derogatory  remarks
      against minority religious  groups,  particularly  Hindus,  in  public
      school textbooks. It is reported that the  government  has  made  some
      effort to revise the public schools curriculum with a view to removing
      Islamic overtones from secular subjects and in some  instances  Ethics
      is offered as an alternative to Islamic studies classes.

 104.       The  UNHCR considers that members of  the  Christian  community,
      including those targeted by Islamic extremist elements or charged with
      criminal offences under the blasphemy provisions,  victims  of  bonded
      labour, severe discrimination, forced conversion and forced  marriage,
      as well as Christians perceived as  contravening  social  mores,  may,
      depending on the individual circumstances of the case, be in  need  of
      international protection on account of their religion or membership of
      a particular social group.

      Christian Solidarity Worldwide Briefing on Pakistan: religious freedom
      in the shadow of extremism (June 2011)

 105.       CSW reports that discrimination against religious minorities  is
      visible at  all  levels  of  society  and  within  the  education  and
      employment  sectors.  The  poorest  and  least  influential  are  most
      affected.  Sixty four blasphemy accusations were  registered  in  2010
      (but no break down of religious affiliation is provided). Between 1986
      and October 2009, at least 966 people were accused under the blasphemy
      laws; half of these were Muslims. However the former coalition PPP/PML
      government is said to have been more  disposed  towards  human  rights
      than its predecessors and the appointment of the late Shahbaz  Bhatti,
      a Christian, to a ministerial position,  raised  hopes  for  religious
      freedom prospects. Further encouragement came from the setting  up  of
      District Interfaith Harmony Committees and the Christian Study  Centre
      in Rawalpindi.  Reference is made to the liberal  elite  who  are  not
      representative of the majority of Pakistanis in ideology or status and
      to negative perceptions of the West and of the US in  particular  with
      Christians being viewed as representatives of the West.
 106.       Lawyers and human rights activists are also said to  face  death
      threats and harassment when defending people accused of blasphemy.

 107.       It is reported that religiously motivated violence does not just
      affect religious minorities but also different sections of the  Muslim
      community. The years 2009 and 2010 are singled out as representing  an
      increase in violence against minorities. The majority of  the  attacks
      reported on Christians took place in the Punjab. This period also  saw
      an increase in  violence  against  minority  sections  of  the  Muslim
      community with the  Shi'a,  Sufi  and  Ahmadi  communities  all  being
      targeted.

 108.       It is reported that Ahmadis have frequently been the  target  of
      explicit discrimination in the education sector. School textbooks  are
      reported to encourage a bias  towards  them  while  fuelling  negative
      perceptions of minorities. Although Islamic studies are compulsory  in
      schools, non-Muslims are not obliged to attend and can instead take an
      alternative course known as ethics. However, these courses  are  often
      under re-sourced.

 109.       The report does not assess trends in  employment  discrimination
      except to say  that  there  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  religious
      discrimination in this form is a pervasive issue. CSW  has  been  told
      that there is an unwritten rule that Hindus may  not  join  the  armed
      forces and that Christians are denied promotion to the top  levels  of
      public service. There are also frequent  instances  of  discrimination
      against Ahmadis in employment and business.

 110.       There are sections in the report on apostasy and the position of
      Ahmadis but these are not pertinent to this determination.

 111.       The report concludes with a summary of the work of the Christian
      Study Centre (CSC). The majority of this work is carried  out  in  the
      Punjab and in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa because of the high concentration  of
      Christians and extremist groups there. The  CSC  has  established  660
      peace networks in these areas and  minorities  represent  44%  of  the
      participants (41% of these are Christian).  CSC  has  a  weekly  radio
      program on a station broadcast within a 100 mile radius of  Islamabad.
      It also has slots on Radio Pakistan, Lahore,  which  is  broadcast  to
      most of the Punjab.

      Writenet Independent Analysis. Pakistan: The  Situation  of  Religious
Minorities (May 2009)

 112.       This is a paper commissioned by the UNHCR but  with  the  caveat
      that it expresses the views of the authors. It is prepared  mainly  on
      the  basis  of  publicly  available  information.  It   reports   that
      Christians are the largest minority group. It acknowledges  that  some
      managed to achieve positions of wealth or power but reports  that  the
      vast majority are vulnerable to intimidation, oppression  and  assault
      at the  hands  of  their  neighbours,  often  with  the  collusion  or
      indifference of law enforcement bodies or the legal profession. It  is
      reported that religious minorities with the inferred ties  to  outside
      states are subject to particularly strong  pressure;  thus  Christians
      suffer as proxies for 'the West' and Hindus as  proxies  for  'India'.
      Ahmadis are viewed as not being Muslims and  are  severely  repressed.
      With Pakistan in a state of national peril and  the  rise  of  Taliban
      influence, religious minorities are described as being more vulnerable
      than ever.

 113.       It is reported that  the  experience  of  members  of  religious
      minorities in Pakistan is diverse. There are those who are members  of
      Pakistan's political-military elite and urban  middle  class  who  may
      have relatively benign experiences with many having reached  positions
      of political power, senior ranks in the military or success  in  other
      areas of life such as business or the law. However, the report focuses
      on the rural and urban poor and on  whether  their  situation  is  any
      worse than that of  their  Muslim  counterparts  who  also  experience
      poverty,   poor   education,   political    corruption,    insecurity,
      powerlessness, bondage, state repression, intimidation  and  sometimes
      violence.  It  notes  that  a  minority  status  that   makes   people
      additionally vulnerable.

 114.       The report sets out a summary of the creation of  Pakistan,  the
      constitutional legal and political context  which  have  already  been
      dealt with.  Like the other evidence, it  criticises  the  educational
      curriculum  for  promoting  prejudice   and   discrimination   towards
      minorities but points  out  that  the  Education  Sector  Reform  Plan
      introduced in 2002  was  intended  to  modernise  and  secularise  the
      curricula. Included within these reforms were measures to curtail  the
      embedded prejudice against minorities but progress has  said  to  have
      been slow partly because of the  lack  of  state  attention  to  these
      issues and partly due to insufficient resources in  education.  It  is
      reported that, paradoxically, as a legacy of  the  colonial  era,  the
      higher  reaches  of  private  education  are  strongly  populated   by
      Christian schools and colleges many of which are attended by the upper
      strata of society. The former president  General  Musharraf,  himself,
      attended a Christian school. The quality of these schools and colleges
      pays off in a degree of respect for Christians amongst  the  Pakistani
      elite however this is not reflected elsewhere in the country.

 115.       Reference is made to a package of  measures  introduced  by  the
      administration  in  2008  to  improve  the  situation   of   religious
      minorities. In further liberalising  moves  in  2009,  the  government
      lifted restrictions on visas allowing Hindus from outside Pakistan  to
      attend religious festivals. Religious tourism has also been encouraged
      for Buddhists wishing to visit many of the shrines and  archaeological
      sites scattered throughout the country.

 116.       It is reported that there is no reliable data on the numbers  of
      those members of       religious minorities who have left the  country
      to seek asylum elsewhere.

 117.        The  report  concludes  that  there  are  profoundly  important
      economic, caste and class elements in  the  persecution  of  religious
      minorities and that members who tend to be relatively  affluent,  well
      educated and largely confined to  urban  areas  find  themselves  left
      alone provided they do not challenge the Muslim majority.  It  appears
      that their status offers them much protection from  problems  suffered
      by others  who  are  not  so  fortunate  in  their  status.  Prominent
      Christians provide important  evidence  for  the  Pakistani  state  of
      religious pluralism and tolerance and thus are useful to the state and
      are ceded privileges accordingly. Those who suffer the  most  and  are
      the most acutely vulnerable to the vagaries of their Muslim neighbours
      and the oppression  or  indifference  of  local  law  enforcement  and
      judiciary, are the rural and urban poor.

      Amnesty International Annual report on Pakistan (2013)

 118.       This report covers the period between January to December  2012.
      It  summarises  violations  by  security  forces,  unlawful  killings,
      enforced disappearances, abuse by armed groups, freedom of expression,
      discrimination against religious minorities,  violence  against  women
      and girls and the death penalty. The relevant sections  observed  that
      armed groups targeted security forces and civilians including  members
      of religious minorities,  that  the  government  occasionally  blocked
      websites including YouTube, for content deemed offensive to  religious
      sentiments. It reports that religious  minorities  remain  at  serious
      risk of violence and intimidation and that there were at least seventy
      nine attacks on Shi'a Muslims, the most for any religious group in the
      country. It reports that the death penalty has only been enforced once
      since 2008 when one  Muhammad  Hussain  was  executed  for  killing  a
      superior officer.

      UK  Home  Office  Country  of  Origin  Information  Service,  Pakistan
report (August 2013)

 119.       This report is a compilation of  information  available  in  the
      public domain. Much of its content has been covered by  other  reports
      and is therefore not repeated.
 120.       The  Human  Rights  Council  Universal  Periodic  Review  (UPR),
      undertaken  in  October  2012,  noted   some   positive   achievements
      including:
            1. The adoption of laws and steps taken to  protect  women  and
      girls      from violence and discrimination
         2. The ratification of a number of international and  human  rights
            instruments
         3.      Efforts to uphold human rights
         4.      The  creation  of  an  independent  National  Human  Rights
         Commission
         5.      Constitutional reform
         6.      The application of  a  de-facto  moratorium  on  the  death
         penalty
         7.      The adoption of measures  to  eliminate  early  and  forced
         marriages
         8.      Measures to promote and protect the rights of  human  right
         defenders
         9.      Enhancing efforts to promote and protect the  human  rights
         of      religious minorities, investigating  attacks  and  violence
         against        such  minorities  and  holding   accountable   those
         responsible for     such acts
         10. Providing adequate  resources  to  the  National  Human  Rights
         Commission.

 121.       Large extracts are cited from the  US  Commission  International
      Religious Freedom report for 2012 published in May 2013 which  reports
      that religious freedom is restricted by legislation, policies  and  in
      practice. The government's limited capacity and will to investigate or
      prosecute the perpetrators of  increasing  extremist  attacks  against
      minorities and on members of the Muslim majority promoting  tolerance,
      allowed the climate of impunity to continue.

 122.       There were reports of societal abuses or discrimination based on
      religious affiliation with increasing attacks against members  of  the
      Shi'a Muslim  community.  Attacks  against  religious  minorities  and
      candidates deemed un-Islamic took place in the run-up to the elections
      in May 2013. The blasphemy laws were used predominantly in the  Punjab
      province but there were accusations nationwide with religious minority
      members and dissenting Muslims also targeted.

 123.       It is reported that there  are  some  16  individuals  on  death
      row[29] and twenty more serving life sentences under these provisions.
      Hindus have suffered badly from the  climate  of  violence.  Religious
      freedom is increasingly under assault, particularly for women, members
      of religious minority communities and those  in  the  majority  Muslim
      community whose views are  deemed  un-Islamic.  Religiously  motivated
      violence is chronic, especially against Shi'a Muslims. The Asian Human
      Rights Commission,  reporting  in  March  2012,  maintained  that  the
      security and law and  order  situation  had  become  chaotic  and  the
      authorities appeared to have no control over providing  protection  to
      minorities. Although  members  of  all  faiths  had  been  victims  of
      violations of human rights, the main focus of the  brutality  was  the
      Ahmadi community.

 124.       Women from  religious  minorities  were  said  to  be  the  most
      vulnerable targets of violence. The Asian Human Rights  Commission  in
      its 2010 report maintained that members of religious  minorities  were
      regularly assorted, tortured or  murdered  and  their  properties  and
      places of worship ransacked and desecrated.  It  reported  that  women
      were disproportionately affected and that it was common in rural areas
      for Muslim fundamentalists to abduct, forcibly convert and marry women
      from minority communities.

 125.       The blasphemy laws are  said  to  be  misused.  The  UN  General
      Assembly reported in 2012 on concerns about the misuse of  these  laws
      which are described as neutral in nature. It was said that there is  a
      misunderstanding that this law is used to target minorities  and  that
      the fact is that it is generally invoked against people of all faiths,
      and mostly Muslims, to settle personal disputes and that mainly  cases
      involving minorities get more media and public attention.

 126.       The USCIRF report of 2013  stated  that  blasphemy  allegations,
      often false, resulted in the  detention  of  and  occasional  violence
      against religious  minorities  and  members  of  the  Muslim  majority
      community. Reportedly, more cases were brought under these  provisions
      against Muslims than any other faith groups. Two thirds  of  all  such
      cases are filed in Punjab. Because the law requires neither  proof  of
      intent nor evidence to be presented after  allegations  are  made  and
      includes no penalties for false  allegations,  blasphemy  charges  are
      commonly used to intimidate members of religious minorities or  others
      with whom the accusers disagree or have business or  other  conflicts.
      Most complaints  under  these  laws  are  reported  by  the  US  State
      Department as being filed against the majority Sunni Muslim  community
      by others Sunnis. Among the minority communities, Ahmadis are the most
      affected, followed by Christians.

 127.       The Asian Human  Rights  Commission  stated  in  its  report  of
      December 2012 that on average some 700 Christian and 300  Hindu  girls
      are forcibly converted to Islam each year notably  in  Punjab,  Khyber
      Pakhtunkhwa and Sindh provinces. The police refused  to  intervene  in
      such cases and courts are said to be complicit in this, by  nullifying
      women's previous non-Islamic marriages and  recognising  their  forced
      marriages instead.

 128.       International Christian Concern (ICC)  reported  in  April  2011
      that forced conversions to Islam, rapes and forced marriages  were  on
      the rise. The victims are said to be mostly Hindu and Christian girls.
      Christian girls are described  as  the  weakest  and  most  vulnerable
      because their communities are  poor  and  they  are  therefore  easily
      exposed to harassment and threats. The USCIRF in 2012 reported  on  20
      to 25 women and girls from the Hindu community  being  abducted  every
      month and being forced to convert to Islam. It further  reported  that
      poverty makes the  Christian  community  vulnerable.  Sexual  assaults
      against underage Christian girls  by  Muslim  men  are  reported.  The
      USCIRF reported that in September 2011  a  woman  was  allegedly  gang
      raped and the police reportedly pressured her not  to  press  charges.
      The same month it was reported that a  court  ruled  in  favour  of  a
      Christian girl sentencing her rapist to  prison  for  25  years.   The
      report for 2012  cited  one  case  of  alleged  abduction  and  forced
      conversion of a Christian woman. In  2013  it  reported  on  two  such
      cases.

 129.       Extracts from the Writenet report and  the  IRB  of  Canada  are
      cited. These reports are dealt with separately in this determination.

 130.       The USCIRF report for 2012  noted  that  discrimination  against
      Christians in employment was widespread and that they  had  difficulty
      finding jobs, other than those involving  menial  labour.  The  report
      added that there were no reports of discrimination against  Christians
      when they applied  for  entry  to  universities  and  medical  schools
      (B212). The Christian website,  Asia  News,  reported  in  July  2012,
      however,  that  Christian  students  were  victims  of  exclusion  and
      discrimination because of their faith.

 131.       A report from May 2010 from  Worldwatch  Monitor  reported  that
      Muslim  teachers  at  a  government  high  school  in  Punjab  derided
      Christian students, beat them, pressured them to  convert  and  forced
      them to clean school bathrooms.



      Human Rights Watch report on Pakistan (2014)

 132.       This report essentially repeats in brief what is covered  above.
      It maintains that the blasphemy laws are often used to settle personal
      disputes. Dozens of people are said to  have  been  charged  with  the
      offence in 2013. At least 16 remained on death  row  and  twenty  were
      serving life sentences[30] (no breakdown of their faith is  provided).
      Members of the Ahmadi community are said  to  be  a  major  target  of
      blasphemy accusations.

      Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada.  Pakistan:  Situation  of
Christians  in  Pakistan  including   social   and   government   attitudes,
treatment and rights 2010-2012 (14 January 2013).

 133.       The IRB reports that Christians  generally  had  good  relations
      with other religious minorities and more liberal Muslims.

 134.       According to the information in this report, as in  others,  the
      majority of Christians live in Punjab, mostly in the rural areas. Most
      incidents are reported to occur  there.  Christians  are  said  to  be
      amongst the poorest people in the country. This is  confirmed  by  the
      USCIRF which in 2006 reported  that  many  Christians  belong  to  the
      poorest socio economic groups. They face societal  discrimination  and
      stigma based on stereotypes. Sources report that they are  subject  to
      employment restrictions and  work  mainly  in  menial  jobs  partially
      because of their illiteracy and partially because they are  considered
      to be unclean. However the Jinnah Institute  (JI)  disagrees,  stating
      that Christians are robustly represented in  a  variety  of  positions
      such as teaching, social work,  the  arts  and  institution  building.
      Government sources indicate that 5% of government  jobs  are  reserved
      for religious minorities.

 135.       There are  reports  from  the  BPCA  that  some  Christians  are
      pressured to convert to Islam. It also reports on  the  abductions  of
      Christian women or girls (said to be two a day) who are often forcibly
      converted to Islam and married to Muslim man. The same  source  stated
      that in rural Punjab rich landlords and businessmen  target  Christian
      communities and institutions with the aim of taking ownership of their
      land. A large proportion of anti-Christian  incidents  in  Punjab  are
      associated with land grabbing.

 136.       According to the representative of the Evangelical Asian  Church
      (EAC), Christians are denied equal opportunity in education. There  is
      a suggestion that Christian  students  face  religious  discrimination
      when applying to  university  (although  this  is  disputed  in  other
      reports). The BPCA stated  that  most  Christian  children  must  work
      instead of going to school, thus continuing the  cycle  of  illiteracy
      and poverty. The same  source  complained  that  there  were  problems
      preventing Christians from practising  their  faith  and  that  girls,
      attending prayer meetings, faced sexual harassment and abuse by Muslim
      youths gathering outside churches. It reported  that  Christians  must
      self monitor because they risked being attacked if, for example,  they
      played  loud  music  during  church  services  but  according  to  the
      Evangelical Asian Church, Christians are generally allowed to practice
      their religion in Pakistan and are allowed to build churches.

 137.       There are reports that militant extremist groups such as Lashkar-
      e-Taliban and Sipah-i-Sahaba have orchestrated violent attacks against
      Christians including one in 2009.  The  Sipah-i-Sahaba  are  based  in
      Punjab.

 138.       The report sets out examples  of  ill  treatment  to  Christians
      which are covered earlier in this determination.

      Inter Press Service News Agency (23 October 2013)

 139.       This article  reports  that  there  is  a  trend  amongst  young
      Christians to get an education and well-paid jobs. They are  unwilling
      to take up cleaning work and many have  graduated  from  colleges  and
      universities. One interviewee is quoted as  stating  that  many  young
      Christians see a better future than their parents had known, they  had
      Muslim friends and  would  sit  together,  eat  together  and  discuss
      politics  and  other  matters  together.  It  is  reported  that  most
      Christian girls join nursing because local Muslim  girls  do  not  and
      that they also obtain work as teachers in private and  government  run
      schools.

      US Commission for International Religious Freedom report (2013)

 140.       It is reported  that  violence  against  Christians  is  usually
      perpetrated by banned militant groups or other societal actors. During
      the  reporting  period,  the  organisation  received  reports  of   16
      incidents of violent attacks against Christians.  Punjab  province  is
      the  locus  for  the  majority  of  violence,  blasphemy   cases   and
      discrimination  against  Christians.  Poverty  makes   the   Christian
      community vulnerable and sexual assaults  against  underage  Christian
      girls continue to be reported. Catholic NGOs  estimate  at  least  700
      Christian girls are kidnapped and forced to  convert  to  Islam  every
      year. During the reporting period, two reports surfaced  of  Christian
      women being forcibly converted to  Islam  and  married  with  the  law
      enforcement agencies hesitant to act. Three kidnapping cases were also
      reported.

 141.       Schoolbooks are reported as fostering prejudice and  intolerance
      of religious minorities. Hindu beliefs and  practices  are  contrasted
      negatively with those of Islam. Bangladesh's struggle for independence
      from Pakistan is blamed in part on the  influence  of  Hindus  in  the
      education sector  of  the  former  East  Pakistan.  Textbooks  contain
      stories,  bibliographies  and  poems  regarding   exclusively   Muslim
      characters. Researchers visited 37 middle schools and high schools and
      19 madrassas in 2011.


      The Federal Republic of Austria, Federal Asylum Agency Fact    Finding
Mission report on Pakistan (June 2013)

 142.       This report covers  the  security  situation,  the  position  of
      religious minorities, land rights, medical and  social  provision  and
      Afghan refugees. The researchers  were  in  Lahore,  Punjab,  for  the
      course of the mission. They had contact with the  National  Commission
      on Justice and Peace (NCJP), the Pakistan Interfaith League (PIL), the
      Pakistan Interfaith League Against Poverty (PILAP)  and  the  National
      Ministry for Harmony. The NCJP  is  a  legal  assistance  organisation
      established by the Catholic Bishops' conference of Pakistan. It offers
      legal  assistance  and  rehabilitation,  in  particular  in  cases  of
      accusations of blasphemy. A particularly important aspect is  lobbying
      for the concerns of the Christian  minority,  nationally  as  well  as
      internationally. It deals with approximately hundred cases  per  annum
      which include blasphemy, discrimination in the workplace or  education
      as well as violence against women. The PIL is a  social  movement  for
      inter-religious tolerance in Pakistan and co-operates with the  United
      Council of Churches of Islamabad and the National Supreme  Council  of
      Bishops. It employs members  of  various  religious  groups  including
      Sunnis, Shi'as, Christians and Hindus. The Christian leader of the PIL
      is the adviser to Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (Movement  for
      Justice) Party on national minorities' affairs. The PILAP  is  an  aid
      organisation for the reduction of poverty. It is linked  to  the  PIL.
      The National Ministry for Harmony (now merged  with  the  Ministry  of
      Religious Affairs)  is  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  the
      national policy on religious minorities.

 143.       The Ministry  for  National  Harmony  promoted  inter  religious
      tolerance. It ran a special  programme  for  minorities  which  has  a
      dedicated budget for social welfare and financial assistance  for  the
      support of poorer minorities. Alongside the special  institutions  for
      minorities, the Minister of the Interior and  the  Ministry  of  Human
      Rights are responsible for internal  security  and  the  human  rights
      respectively for all citizens including  minorities.  Offices  of  the
      Ombudsman have  been  established  in  all  provinces  for  complaints
      against  human  rights  violations.  Violations  of  the   rights   of
      minorities fall into their responsibility.  These  offices  have  been
      expanded in recent years by virtue  of  the  new  law  against  sexual
      harassment of women in the  workplace.  The  law  allows  licences  to
      produce alcohol to be provided to  non-Muslims.  There  are  breweries
      operated by Christians.

 144.       In cases under sections 295A and B[31], bail until the trial  is
      normally granted. In case of charges under section 295C[32], insulting
      the Prophet, it is regularly  not  granted[33].  Convictions  in  such
      cases frequently follow but  are  usually  overturned  by  the  higher
      courts. In total, more cases result in acquittal or are  dropped  than
      result in conviction. Only a few end up in prison. Some of  those  who
      are acquitted need resettling on safety grounds.  The  NCJP  organises
      and  assists  with  the  resettlement.  However  in  prominent   cases
      resettlement is not possible and the victims have to look for  another
      country that will accept them.

 145.       In daily life there is no  active  conflict;  however  there  is
      discrimination in the economic and  social  areas,  in  education  and
      health and government and the  minorities  are  not  happy  with  this
      situation. The discrimination does not  however  reach  the  level  of
      actual disassociation.

 146.       A five percent quota is stipulated for minorities in  all  state
      departments. There is said to be an  open  admission  policy  with  no
      discrimination and many army officers are  Christians  or  Sikhs.  The
      late Shahbaz Bhatti's father, Jacob, served in  the  army.  There  are
      currently no Christians in the upper courts or the Supreme  Court  and
      only a few in the lower courts.

 147.       Employment in the labour market depends  more  on  the  fact  of
      which family one belongs to and which connections  one  has,  than  on
      religious affiliation. Nevertheless it is  reported  that  non-Muslims
      are not well treated  and  Christian  girls  often  work  as  domestic
      servants. Poverty and illiteracy are  seen  as  the  causes  of  their
      vulnerability. Access to schools and hospitals is  not  discriminatory
      but  poverty  can  be  a  problem  if  minorities  cannot  afford  it.
      Christians do  however  have  their  own  hospitals  and  schools  and
      Christian women are said to have better  access  to  these  facilities
      than Muslim women. The media is independent  and  criticises  problems
      and would immediately  report  if  someone  was  turned  away  from  a
      hospital because he or she belonged to a minority. There are, however,
      disadvantages in the education sector  with  school  books  containing
      derogatory statements and the idea that  Muslims  are  superior  still
      persists in textbooks.

 148.       Marriages between religious groups are common particularly where
      a Muslim marries a Christian woman;  but  the  reverse  situation  can
      cause trouble.

 149.       Sindh is relatively liberal and Hindus and  Muslims  have  lived
      together for centuries. In Islamabad too, just a few  problems  arise.
      In general, discrimination in the cities is less than in rural  areas.
      Ahmadis suffer the most severe problems.

 150.       Women do not generally cover their heads in public and, if  they
      do, they use the traditional, loosely wrapped lightweight cotton shawl
      called a dupatta.

 151.       The majority of Pakistanis endorse  tolerance  and  are  against
      extremists. There are various organisations which work  for  tolerance
      and cooperation between religions. The importance of education for the
      promotion of tolerance and the avoidance of violence  is  stressed  by
      all those interviewed by the mission. Steps have been taken in teacher
      training and in the curricula to eliminate discrimination and  promote
      tolerance. At the national level, school books and curricula have been
      changed but in some other schools derogatory points of view are  still
      taught.

 152.       The PIL states that  the  police  have  a  negative  mindset  in
      relation to the minorities. Often they are not taken  seriously  while
      many members of minority groups are fearful of going  to  the  police.
      The PIL holds training sessions for the traffic  police  in  order  to
      sensitise them. Some programmes of the PIL aim  to  instruct  minority
      citizens about their rights. The  PIL  stresses  the  great  value  of
      cooperation with Muslim scholars. It held a press conference  together
      with  the  Pakistan  Ulema  Council  following  the   attack   against
      Christians in  Lahore  in  March  2013.  United,  they  demanded  more
      compensation and public investigation, the criminal prosecution of the
      offenders as well as the punishment of the police officers who took no
      action. The government  were  strongly  criticised  and  many  protest
      marches were held in a number of cities.

 153.       Inter  religious  dialogue  is  promoted  on  the  part  of  the
      government. The Ministry for  National  Harmony  hosted  the  National
      conference on inter religious solidarity in February 2013 in Islamabad
      the city administration holds  regular  meetings  with  all  religious
      leaders in order to build the foundation  of  mutual  trust  with  the
      representatives of the minorities.

 154.       The  Christian  community  is  described  as  one  which  fights
      strongly. They do not remain silent, they are a  vocal  community  and
      fight strongly for their rights and are politically active.

       Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office:  Christians   in   Pakistan   (16
December 2013)

 155.       Officially there are around 2.8 million Christians  in  Pakistan
      but Christian communities believe the number is too low and that  they
      constitute between five and 10 percent of the population  rather  than
      the official 1.5%. The vast majority are based  in  the  Punjab  where
      they form the largest religious minority. A significant number live in
      and around Lahore and Faisalabad, some 2 million in Lahore and half  a
      million in the rest  of  the  province.  The  other  large  centre  of
      Christians in Pakistan is  in  Karachi.  The  majority  of  Christians
      belong to either the Roman Catholic Church or the Anglican  church  of
      Pakistan although increasing numbers belong  to  other  Protestant  or
      evangelical churches sometimes called charismatic churches.

 156.       While the majority of those charged under the blasphemy laws are
      Muslim, Christians do make a high proportion  of  those  accused.  The
      majority of blasphemy cases come from the Punjab.

 157.       Violent extremism against  Christians  in  Pakistan  is  not  as
      commonplace as against some minorities such as the Shi'as but it  does
      exist. In 2013  there  were  two  prominent  incidents.  In  March,  a
      Christian Colony in Lahore was attacked by a mob  following  unfounded
      allegations of blasphemy against a resident. In September there was  a
      double suicide bombing at a church in Peshawar.

 158.       There are many Christian churches in Pakistan which  are  mostly
      safe. There  are  also  Christian  schools.  Christian  colleges  were
      nationalised in the 1970s by  the  Bhutto  government  but  some  have
      recently been de-nationalised and returned to their former owners.

 159.       A citizen's religion is included in  his/her  passport.  In  the
      1990s, the government attempted to include a  religion  column  on  ID
      cards but this was dropped after protests by non-Muslim groups.

 160.       A Christian woman  marrying  a  Muslim  man  is  permissible.  A
      child's religion is held to be the same as that of the child's mother.



 161.       In church weddings, Christians  are  married  under  the  Indian
      Christian Marriage Act of 1872 and, unlike Hindus, their marriages are
      recognised by the authorities.

      Foreign & Commonwealth Office. Human Rights and  Democracy      report
on Pakistan for 2012 (update: 31 December 2013)

 162.       Following the September  2013  Peshawar  church  bombing,  civil
      society groups formed human shields outside  churches  in  Lahore  and
      Islamabad in mid-October. Groups expressed solidarity with the victims
      of  the  bombing,  sending  out  the  message  that  the  majority  of
      Pakistanis opposed militant attacks on the  Christian  community.  The
      National Assembly unanimously condemned the suicide bombing and  there
      was a public outcry across all sections of Pakistani society.
 163.       In October 2013 the Pakistan Hindu Council in  Karachi  reported
      that around  20  Hindu  girls  a  month  are  kidnapped  and  forcibly
      converted to Islam. Shi'a Muslims were attacked in sectarian violence.

      Human Rights Commission of Pakistan report for 2013

 164.       It is reported that 68 citizens were charged under the penal law
      offences relating to religion. However not all of these were under the
      blasphemy laws. Ms Jahangir cites  this  figure  in  her  report.  The
      breakdown according to the religion of the accused is: 17 Ahmadis,  13
      Christian and nine Muslims although that equates to  39  and  not  68.
      Also, rather confusingly, the report later states that there were nine
      cases against 14 Christians (not 13 as stated a  few  pages  earlier).
      Executions  remained  suspended.  There  were  two   attacks   against
      Christian communities during the  year;  one  in  Lahore  (the  Joseph
      Colony incident) and one in Peshawar  (the  suicide  bombings  at  All
      Saints' Church). The Jundullah branch of the Tehreek-e-Taliban claimed
      responsibility for the suicide attacks saying  that  the  assault  was
      revenge for the killing  of  innocent  people  in  US  drone  attacks.
      Following the Lahore incident, the government announced three days  of
      mourning. Compensation of Rs. 500,000 was paid to each affected family
      and the government paid to reconstruct their houses.

 165.       Much of the faith-based violence in 2013 targeted members of the
      Shi'a community especially in Baluchistan.

 166.       There is reference to the old slaughterhouse Colony Lyari  where
      hundreds of Hindu and Christian families reside in abject poverty.  It
      is reported that the colony was in the news towards the  end  of  2013
      due to fights between criminal gangs.

 167.       Three cases of alleged forced conversions were reported in 2013.
      The girls were aged 8, 13 and 15.

 168.       Two Christian men who  had  been  arrested  for  blasphemy  were
      acquitted during the year[34]. It is however reported that for some of
      those acquitted of blasphemy, problems do not end with their  release.
      Relocation is often the only real option for them.

 169.       Following the Joseph Colony attack in Lahore,  there  were  some
      calls for reform of the blasphemy laws. In September, the  Council  of
      Islamic Ideology (CII), the constitutional body responsible for giving
      legal  advice  on  Islamic  issues  to  Parliament,   considered   the
      prevention of abuse of the blasphemy laws. One of the clerics  on  the
      council said the abuse of the law was earning a bad name for  Pakistan
      and religious scholars were being maligned.  He  proposed  that  those
      making a false accusation  also  needed  to  face  the  death  penalty
      because the words attributed to the accused were actually  uttered  by
      the accuser. This annoyed some members who maintained that section 194
      of the PPC already envisaged punishment for lodging a false  case  and
      there was no need to amend the law. The following day parliamentarians
      from PTI (the third last  largest  party  in  the  National  Assembly)
      called on lawmakers to review the blasphemy law in  the  wake  of  the
      recommendations from CII.

       Australian  Government  Refugee  Review   Tribunal.   Issues   Paper:
Pakistan Militant Groups (January 2013)

 170.       This report provides information  about  eight  militant  groups
      operating in Pakistan including the Sipah-i-Sahaba which is the  group
      the appellants claimed had targeted them. The Sipah-i-Sahaba (Corp  of
      the Prophet's Companions or Guardians of the Friends of  the  Prophet)
      is described as a Punjab-based Sunni sectarian  group  that  has  been
      involved in violence primarily targeted  against  the  minority  Shi'a
      community. It is one of  the  five  groups  that  work  proscribed  by
      President Musharraf in January 2002. Although it sought to  circumvent
      the proscription by renaming itself twice, the reinvented groups  were
      also proscribed.

      Radio Free  Europe:  Pakistan  religious  leaders  declare  attack  on
Christians un-Islamic (24 September 2013)

 171.       Following the attack on a church in Peshawar in September  2013,
      Islamic leaders issued an edict declaring  the  killing  of  religious
      minorities as un-Islamic. They stated that "there  is  no  concept  in
      Islam" to kill religious minorities or attack their places of worship.
      Islamic figures all over the country condemned the attack  and  called
      for the perpetrators to be punished.

 172.       The report states that fewer  than  2%  of  the  population  are
      Christian and that whilst they face  discrimination,  attacks  against
      them are rare.

      BBC news report (13 May 2014)

 173.       This report covers the incident Mr Samuel  referred  to  in  his
      oral evidence of 68 lawyers being arrested and charged with  blasphemy
      after the killing in Multan of a lawyer  defending  an  individual  of
      blasphemy. Contrary to Mr  Samuel's  claim  that  these  lawyers  were
      arrested for protesting about the killing of their colleague, the  BBC
      reports that they protested about the detention of a colleague in  the
      city of Jhang  and  had  been  campaigning  for  the  arrest  of  five
      policemen they accused of illegally detaining him.


      Other news articles

 174.       The contents of other news reports in the bundles cover the same
      ground as already summarised and set out various incidents  which  are
      listed above.

SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS

 175.       The details of the submissions are set out in Appendices 11  and
      12.

 176.       In summary, Mr Walker submitted  that  whilst  Christians  as  a
      minority faced  discrimination,  they  were  able  to  practise  their
      religions, received some state protection and were not at a real  risk
      of persecution.  Generally,  internal  relocation  was  possible.  The
      appellants would not be at risk because  of  their  membership  of  an
      evangelical church.

 177.       The combined submissions of Ms Jegarajah and Ms Pinder were that
      Christians lived with discrimination which,  whilst  not  meeting  the
      threshold of persecution, was an important factor in risk  assessment.
      The sporadic and ad hoc nature of attacks  and  blasphemy  accusations
      was also important in  this  assessment.  Pakistani  Muslims  did  not
      distinguish between evangelical and non evangelical Christians.  There
      was no internal flight option for those accused of  blasphemy  and  no
      possibility  of  state  protection.  The  appellants  were  both  very
      different individuals and both proselytised in their own way.

OUR ASSESSMENT

      The starting point

 178.       In assessing  the  country  guidance  issues  in  this  case  we
      undertake  a  holistic  assessment  consisting  of  a  wide  range  of
      considerations.  We are aware from the guidance of the Court of Appeal
      in Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ  1605  (guidance  unaffected  by  the
      subsequent decision of the House of Lords in  the  same  case:  [2005]
      UKHL 38) that in most cases, a risk  of  ill-treatment  will  be  more
      readily established in state-agency  cases  than  in  non-state  actor
      cases (at paragraph 11). We also bear in mind that  an  assessment  of
      risk necessarily involves an assessment of the  sufficiency  of  state
      protection (ibid; paragraph 12).

 179.       Our guidance is made in the context of the developments  of  the
      law as set out in the decision of HJ (Iran) UKSC 31.

 180.       We also have regard to the relevant provisions  of  The  Refugee
      and  Persons  in  Need  of  International  Protection  (Qualification)
      Regulations 2006 which implement EU Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on
      minimum standards for the qualification and status  of  third  country
      nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise
      need international  protection  and  the  content  of  the  protection
      granted (hereafter 'the Directive').

 181.       Reflecting Articles 9, 6 and 7 of the Directive, the  Protection
      Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of  acts  of  persecution
      (at  regulation  5),  actors  of  persecution  or  serious  harm   (at
      regulation 3) and actors of protection (at regulation 4).

 182.       Regulation 5(1) states:

      In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act of  persecution  must
be:

      (a) sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as to  constitute
a     severe     violation of a basic human right,  in  particular  a  right
from  which  derogation        cannot  be  made  under  Article  15  of  the
Convention for the Protection of  Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;  or


      (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a  violation  of  a
human right which is sufficiently severe as to affect  an  individual  in  a
similar manner as specified in (a).

 183.       Regulation 4 provides:

      1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible  for
      humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or  serious  harm
can be      provided by:

      (a) the State; or

       (b)  any  party  or   organisation,   including   any   international
organisation,     controlling  the  State  or  a  substantial  part  of  the
territory of the State.
      (2) Protection shall  be  regarded  as  generally  provided  when  the
actors      mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b)  take  reasonable  steps  to
prevent the      persecution or suffering of serious harm  by  operating  an
effective legal system       for the detection, prosecution  and  punishment
of acts constituting persecution  or serious harm, and the person  mentioned
in paragraph (1) has access to such     protection.

 184.       We have had regard to the case law provided by  the  parties  as
      contained in the bundles and in the appellant's  schedule.  There  was
      reliance upon cases decided in Australia, New Zealand  and  Canada  as
      well as in the UK. The last country guidance on Christians in Pakistan
      is AJ (Risk - Christian Convert) Pakistan CG [2003]  UKIAT  00040.  As
      the title indicates, this case addressed the risk  to  those  who  had
      converted from Islam to Christianity but certain elements, to which we
      shall refer, are nevertheless applicable  here.  Similarly  there  are
      relevant  issues  arising  from  MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -  country
      conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT  00289  (IAC).  A  complete
      overview of the case law is contained in Appendix 13.

 185.       We take the view that asylum claims made by members of religious
      minorities in Pakistan require particularly careful examination.

      Our conclusions on the evidence of the experts and witnesses

 186.       We were impressed by Mr Samuel's evidence, although there were a
      few difficulties with some parts of it. On the  whole,  we  found  his
      evidence to be measured, unexaggerated, informed and a fair reflection
      of the picture painted by other sources. We are satisfied that he  has
      a considerable grasp of the history of the blasphemy  laws  and  their
      development. His visits to Pakistan and interaction  with  members  of
      different religious communities provide, in  our  view,  valuable  and
      informative first hand accounts of their experiences.

 187.        We  note,  however,  that  Mr  Samuel's  claim  that  blasphemy
      accusations are without logic appears to conflict  with  his  evidence
      that they are  triggered  by  personal  vendettas,  property  or  land
      disputes,  business  disagreements  or  by  political  events.   These
      triggers do tend to show there is some  purpose  to  the  allegations,
      however unjust they might be and it may be that Mr Samuel intended  to
      refer to their unpredictability.

 188.       Mr Samuel complained that the protection of minorities was not a
      priority of the current government however we cannot find any evidence
      to suggest that it was high on the list of priorities for the previous
      government either. We do not find, therefore, that it would be correct
      to conclude that the current  government  is  less  well  disposed  to
      minority rights on that basis alone. Mr Samuel criticised Nawaz Sharif
      for having been Chief Minister of the Punjab when the  blasphemy  laws
      were amended under General Zia's office but there is no evidence as to
      whether Mr Sharif had any direct input into the legislative changes or
      what his views about them were. Mr Samuel also points out  that  under
      his premiership in 1997 a Christian village was burnt down and no  one
      was prosecuted. However, there are no details of whether there  was  a
      police investigation and whether the perpetrators  were  identifiable.
      In reports  before  us,  Mr  Sharif  has  been  reported  as  speaking
      positively about the importance of minority rights. Whilst this may be
      just rhetoric, it cannot be wholly disregarded.

 189.       Mr  Samuel  claimed  that  accusations  against  Christians  had
      increased since the PML-N came to power but this is not  supported  by
      any statistics or hard evidence. Mr Samuel gave us only four  examples
      to support his contention and we note that of those four  cases,  only
      two relate to Christians. In his oral evidence he added the case of  a
      human rights lawyer (who appears to have been a Muslim) who defended a
      blasphemy victim and was shot in his Multan office. He then maintained
      that 68  legal  colleagues  who  protested  about  this  killing  were
      themselves arrested on blasphemy charges. However the BBC news  report
      on this incident[35], not provided by Mr Samuel but contained  in  the
      respondent's  bundle,  sets  out  completely  different  circumstances
      leading up to the arrests. The BBC reports that the lawyers  protested
      about the detention of a colleague in the city of Jhang and  had  been
      campaigning for the arrest of five policemen they accused of illegally
      detaining him. We have concern about this factual error in Mr Samuel's
      evidence. We note Ms Jegarajah's submission that  Mr  Samuel  was  not
      certain of this part of his evidence and we do not suggest he intended
      to mislead the Tribunal or misrepresent the facts.  However,  it  does
      mean that some caution must be applied when assessing any  unsupported
      claims made in his evidence.

 190.       Mr Samuel stated that the prevention of terrorism was top on the
      present regime's agenda. Given the problems with terrorist attacks and
      suicide bombings in Pakistan over the last few years, we do  not  find
      this  surprising;  it  cannot  be  seen  as  an  indication   of   the
      government's  approach  to  minority  rights.    He   criticised   the
      government for dissolving the Ministry of  National  Harmony  but  the
      Ministry has been merged into a larger  department;  the  Ministry  of
      Religious Affairs. There is nothing in the evidence  to  suggest  that
      its functions would not be continued there.

 191.       Mr Samuel maintained that bail was denied  in  blasphemy  cases.
      However, his own example of the British Pakistani accused of blasphemy
      contradicts that. The Ahmadi man was granted bail and  then  made  his
      way back to the UK. This appears to have been despite the fact that as
      an individual in the midst of court proceedings, his name  would  have
      been on the Exit Control List at the airport. There is  no  suggestion
      that the British government intervened in any way for his release  and
      return.

 192.       We note that Mr Samuel appears to have prepared his report  with
      the instruction that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  accepted  that
      if an allegation of blasphemy,  whether  true  or  not,  was  levelled
      against a Christian then the appellants would have a well founded fear
      of persecution. We address this point at paragraphs  14-16  but  would
      add here, that the judge made  no  such  finding  in  respect  of  the
      appellants.

 193.       We also note  some  inconsistency  or  lack  of  clarity  in  Mr
      Samuel's written evidence that evangelical Christians do not face  any
      greater risk than non-evangelicals and the opinion given later in  the
      report that  because  of  their  emphasis  on  preaching,  evangelical
      Christians  are  more  vulnerable  to  attacks  and  accusations  from
      extremists. The latter assertion does not accord with his  claim  that
      there are thriving evangelical churches and that he had not  heard  of
      any accusations levelled against them or their members.

 194.       We accept, however, Mr Samuel's evidence on the everyday matters
      pertaining to Christians. We note that he has made several  visits  to
      Pakistan and has spoken to members of Christian and other  minorities.
      We consider that strengthens the reliability of his evidence  in  that
      respect.

 195.       Ms Jahangir is well known to  this  Tribunal  for  her  laudable
      human rights work in Pakistan. She has undertaken  advocacy  work  for
      minorities including Christians  and  has  interaction  with  them  as
      clients and co-workers. She does, of course, also  live  in  Pakistan,
      being based in Lahore, and so has first  hand  knowledge  of  everyday
      life, although her privileged position must mean that  her  experience
      of the poorer and lower class strata of society is  limited.  We  also
      note that she does not claim to have current experience in  the  lower
      courts. She does not suggest that she has experienced any problems  as
      a result of her work, or that it has  adversely  affected  her  career
      advancement.

 196.       We find that there are aspects of her evidence which could  have
      been better explained. Ms Jahangir notes that the Christian population
      has decreased from forming 1.69% of the population in 1998 to 1.59% in
      2011. However, we are not  given  any  information  on  the  sizes  of
      Christian and Muslim families. If  Christian  families  were  smaller,
      that could explain this decrease but without  further  information  we
      cannot speculate on the reasons.

 197.       Ms Jahangir reports on a large scale  exodus  of  Christians  in
      2002. We were  not  given  any  information  on  whether  that  was  a
      particularly bad period for Christians but in any event no other large
      scale emigration is reported.

 198.       We did not find it helpful that most of the examples of  attacks
      cited were out of date. Only one for 2013 was cited. The way in  which
      the examples were spread all over the report made  them  difficult  to
      compile; a chronological list would have been far more useful.

 199.       It would also have been helpful to have had an  explanation  for
      the difference between the figures  cited  in  the  report  and  those
      reported by the  CCRS,  a  research  centre  based  in  Islamabad.  Ms
      Jahangir's figures put the number of those accused of blasphemy at  64
      in 2010 (with half of these being Muslims) but the CCRS  reports  that
      eight cases a year are registered.

 200.       Ms Jahangir reports that "thousands"  of  FIRs  are  registered,
      covering all faiths. We find it would have been helpful to have had  a
      more specific figure and a time frame.

 201.       A copy of the First-tier Tribunal's determination was  not  made
      available to Ms Jahangir and so her views as regards the specifics  of
      the case cannot be given any weight.

 202.       We did not have the advantage of hearing oral evidence from  Rev
      Windsor whose report is before us. We note that his assessment of  the
      case is premised on an acceptance of the appellants' accounts  without
      any reference to the adverse findings of the First-tier Tribunal.  For
      example, he relies on the appellants' inability to relocate due to the
      registration of an FIR, but this document was rejected by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. We also note a claim in the report of a  'Dr  NA'
      being unsafe throughout Pakistan. There is no such individual in  this
      case and this causes us concern because it suggests  that  the  report
      has not been prepared from scratch for these appellants  but  involves
      some 'cutting and pasting'.  Rev. Windsor also relies heavily  on  the
      situation for converts to Christianity  and  indeed  the  examples  he
      cites are of converts. However, that issue is not  pertinent  to  this
      case.

 203.       We accept that the appellants attend church in the UK  in  their
      respective residential areas. We  also  accept  the  evidence  of  the
      pastors that they are devoted to their faith and participate  actively
      in church activities. We find this is similar to what  they  had  been
      doing in Pakistan. We note that in her written evidence, SK  described
      being brought up in a Christian family, having been  taught  Christian
      values from a young age, attending church regularly with  her  family,
      going to Sunday School, being a member of a Christian youth group  and
      a choir and participating in Christian dramas, debates  and  speeches.
      We find that this evidence clearly shows that the appellants were able
      to, and did, practise their faith in an active way in Karachi. We note
      that additionally, SK  claimed  to  have  helped  out  with  religious
      classes.

 204.       We accept the written letters of support  from  members  of  the
      Congregation at Golding's and Stockton Churches. We have no reason  to
      doubt that they mean what they say and that the appellants  have  made
      friends here.

 205.       We have also considered the letter of  support  from  the  Great
      Commission Outreach for Christ dated  9  June  2011  from  Rev.  Isaac
      William. Rev. William provided accommodation for the  appellants  upon
      arrival and some months thereafter. He was  not,  however,  called  to
      give oral evidence and there was no explanation for this. We  give  no
      weight to his letter which purports to confirm AK's  "story,  tragedy,
      misery and all incidents he had been facing in Pakistan"  there  being
      no indication whatsoever of  how  the  Commission  has  been  able  to
      confirm these claims.  We take a similar view of the letter  from  the
      Pakistan Christian Scouts of 20 June 2011 who report  "it  is  in  our
      knowledge that SK is under accusation of blasphemy law  and  there  is
      report against her police station" and that her "parents  are  on  run
      and police is looking to arrest. Moreover a dangerous Muslim Militants
      extremist gang is searching to kill her". The letter does not  provide
      any information about how the two writers of the letter  possess  such
      knowledge.

 206.       We are somewhat troubled  by  Bishop  Masih's  reliance  on  the
      appellants' account of the October 2010 incident  and  the  subsequent
      flight of their parents given  that  those  claims  were  rejected  as
      untrue by the First-tier Tribunal. We note that he does not appear  to
      have seen a copy of the  determination.  We  also  consider  that  the
      Bishop, who we accept, campaigns vociferously  for  Christian  rights,
      has a  tendency  to  emphasise  and  exaggerate,  though  perhaps  not
      consciously, the difficulties faced by  his  community.  We  say  this
      because parts of his evidence are not borne out by the reports  before
      us. His insistence that all Christians  are  at  risk,  regardless  of
      their  socio-economic  status,  is  against  numerous  reports   which
      indicate that the poorer and less socially mobile Christians are  more
      vulnerable to societal violence. We also note that despite  his  claim
      that attacks on Christians are common place, he does not cite examples
      of any attacks upon members of his  diocese.  Nor  does  he  refer  to
      Christians being targeted in other churches. We note that despite  his
      active campaign for Christian rights over a number of  years  and  his
      outspokenness  in  the  press  and  electronic  media,  no   blasphemy
      allegations have ever been levelled against him. Though he  refers  to
      threats by extremists, no further details are provided and they do not
      appear to have manifested themselves.  He  claims  his  movements  are
      limited but also maintains that he covers parishes in Karachi,  Sindh,
      and in the neighbouring province of Baluchistan. We accept that he was
      imprisoned for a month on one occasion but note  that  was  almost  20
      years ago and followed the conversion of a Muslim to Christianity.  Dr
      Masih disagreed with  the  Mr  Samuel's  view  that  Islamabad  was  a
      relatively safe place, maintaining that the expert did not know  about
      the situation in Pakistan. Nor did he accept  Mr  Samuel's  contention
      that the better off, educated Christians faced less  of  a  risk  than
      their poorer counterparts. However  we  prefer  Mr  Samuel's  evidence
      because it accords more with the other material before us than with Dr
      Masih's views. Further, Dr Masih's claim that over the last year there
      has been an increase in blasphemy accusations is not supported by  any
      available statistics or by specific examples.

      The risk of false blasphemy allegations

 207.       The evidence is unanimous in its conclusion that the  number  of
      accusations of  blasphemy  increased  dramatically  following  General
      Zia's  legislative  amendments.  Despite   the   provisions   of   the
      Constitution,  which  provide  for  the  equality  of  citizens,   the
      blasphemy laws have increased the potential for religiously  motivated
      violence. The vagueness of the definition of blasphemy has resulted in
      spurious accusations which, more often  than  not,  have  no  link  to
      religion  at  all.  Whilst  Ahmadis  and  other  religious  minorities
      initially bore the brunt of the increased accusations,  the  situation
      now appears to be  that  any  citizen  can  become  the  victim  of  a
      blasphemy accusation. According to  evidence  from  the  BBC,  Muslims
      constitute the majority of those prosecuted for blasphemy, followed by
      the Ahmadis. This is confirmed in the latest COI report  which  stated
      that most blasphemy complaints were filed  against  Sunni  Muslims  by
      other Sunnis although the law has  a  greater  impact  per  capita  on
      minority religious faiths. As far as physical attacks were  concerned,
      Amnesty  International  reported  in  May  2013  that  Shi'a   Muslims
      experienced more during the reporting period  than  any  other  group.
      Barnabas Aid reported that around one  in  six  attacks  were  against
      Christians although the time frame is unclear.

 208.       We do not doubt that where such an accusation is made, and where
      it proceeds to trial, the accused is at real  risk  of  serious  harm.
      Although the evidence indicates that large numbers of convictions  are
      overturned by the higher courts, the accused  will  still  have  spent
      long periods in prison and faces the risk of societal  violence  after
      acquittal, although this appears to be more  common  in  high  profile
      cases. Persons accused of blasphemy often receive a prison sentence of
      at least three years (according to the IRB) and the  figures  indicate
      that in 2012 there were 40 prisoners accused of blasphemy of which  19
      were serving life sentences.

 209.       We note that the reports  we  have  seen  and  summarised  above
      repeatedly emphasise that  accusations  are  made  for  a  variety  of
      reasons. They can be triggered by international events;  for  example,
      at the start of the war with Iraq, Christians were viewed  as  proxies
      of the West and became a  target  for  extremist  groups.  When  drone
      attacks by  the  US  took  place  last  year,  Christians  were  again
      perceived as being associated with the West  and  therefore  targeted.
      The suicide bombings at a church in  Peshawar  in  September  were  an
      example of this. The arrest of a senior Al Qaeda member in  Quetta  in
      2011 prompted attacks against the general population  in  Karachi  and
      when Muslims in India face problems, Hindus  in  Pakistan  suffer  the
      repercussions. More routinely, however, accusations are  motivated  by
      factors that have nothing to do with an individual's  faith  and,  for
      that reason, all citizens are potentially at risk of  false  blasphemy
      charges. Accusations are made for personal reasons, to exact  revenge,
      to settle a score or where they have been business or other  disputes.
      They are made  where  there  have  been  disagreements  over  land  or
      property. For these reasons we disagree with Mr Samuel and Ms Jahangir
      when they say accusations are random and without  rationale.  We  find
      that there usually are reasons which act as triggers,  albeit  unjust,
      however it is difficult to foresee or to prevent  them  and,  in  that
      sense, they can be described as unpredictable.

 210.       That said, the numbers have to be considered against  the  large
      population of between 187-193 million and the Christian population  of
      some 3-5 million. The location of the individual must also be borne in
      mind. A substantial majority, some two thirds of all cases, emanate in
      the  Punjab,  particularly  in  rural  areas,  as  a  means  of  'land
      grabbing'. As Christians are poor and generally landless,  they  would
      not run the risk of falling into  this  category.  Militant  extremist
      groups, however, operate in the Punjab and the  political  climate  is
      likely to dictate their behaviour. The  proscribed  Sipah-i-Sahaba  is
      based there. Despite the presence and activities of these groups,  the
      evidence demonstrates that the vast majority of Muslims  are  tolerant
      of the various religious minorities living in Pakistan and that it  is
      a very small number who seek to target them.  Attempts  were  made  by
      the government to counter abuses of the law through the 2004 amendment
      to the penal  code  and  through  the  high  courts  which  invariably
      overturn cases of wrongful convictions.

 211.       We do not find that the evidence supports a conclusion that  the
      making of an allegation in  itself  always  or  necessarily  leads  to
      further adverse consequences. Accusations may be made for all kinds of
      reasons and the complainant may not always follow it through. We  note
      that although Mr Samuel maintained that those accused of blasphemy  or
      attacked because of their faith were at risk of violence, he  did  not
      offer examples or figures to support that and,  as  we  see  from  the
      figures cited, the numbers of accusations made vary substantially from
      those which are actively pursued.

 212.       The reliability of figures is a concern. It is noted by CSW that
      accuracy of reporting can be compromised  by  competing  organisations
      striving  to  report  the  'story'  first.   CSW  also  suggests  that
      blasphemy statistics might be higher due to an unwillingness to report
      them, however this reasoning is difficult to follow.  If  a  blasphemy
      accusation was made, then the individual  making  it  would  file  the
      complaint so it is difficult to see why unwillingness should come into
      it and, if a blasphemy charge were filed, it would be  on  record.  In
      2010 CSW and HRCP reported there were 64 blasphemy charges  registered
      but no breakdown of figures is available. The UNHCR, however, cited  a
      higher figure with blasphemy charges  filed  against  67  Ahmadis,  17
      Christians, eight Muslims and six Hindus, a total of 98. In  2011  the
      UNHCR reported that 26 blasphemy cases were filed of which  four  were
      against  Christians.  It  also  reported  that  all  convictions   for
      blasphemy in that period related to Muslims.  In  2012,  the  Austrian
      Fact  Finding  Mission,  citing  NCJP,  reported  charges  against  11
      Christians (of the 30 charges registered) and CSW for  the  same  year
      gave internally contradictory figures of 30 or 35 charges  with  seven
      or 11 respectively against Christians. The HRCP reported a total of 16
      charges for blasphemy in 2012 with three being against Christians. The
      NCP reported a total of 30 cases with 11 against Christians. For 2013,
      HRW reported "dozens" of cases. In 2013 the  HRCP  reported  35  cases
      religious offences with eight against  Muslims  for  blasphemy,  seven
      against Christians and  five  against  Ahmadis.  Elsewhere,  the  same
      organisation reported 68 blasphemy accusations  in  2013  with  13  of
      these involving Christians. It also reported  that  between  1986  and
      October 2009 there  were  966  blasphemy  cases  of  which  half  were
      Muslims. UNHCR, citing Inter-press Service News Agency,  reported  133
      blasphemy charges brought against Christians between 1986 and 2010.

 213.       Even taking the higher figures, when set against the  number  of
      Christians, the number of those accused is low. It may be that in some
      individual cases the level of risk will be  sufficiently  enhanced  on
      particular facts to engage the Refugee Convention but the general risk
      falls well below the  level  necessary  to  show  a  real  risk  of  a
      blasphemy charge being brought against a Christian.

 214.       Members of the religious minorities who are relatively affluent,
      well educated and confined to urban areas are  generally  left  alone.
      Their status offers them some protection.  Prominent  Christians  also
      provide  good  examples  to  the  state  of  religious  pluralism  and
      tolerance and are therefore viewed as useful.  Those  who  suffer  the
      most are the rural poor.  Bishop  Masih  is  wrong  to  say  that  all
      Christians face an equal risk of ill-treatment. The evidence does  not
      support that. Nor  is  it  the  case  that  Christians  are  the  most
      frequently targeted minority. Shi'as and Ahmadis also face  a  greater
      risk both in terms of general attacks and blasphemy allegations.

 215.       In 2012 the  UN  General  Assembly  maintained  that  it  was  a
      misunderstanding to claim that blasphemy  laws  were  used  to  target
      minorities because it was invoked against individuals  of  all  faiths
      and mostly Muslims.[36] The US State Department  confirms  that  Sunni
      Muslims are targeted the most  (no  doubt  because  of  their  greater
      numbers) and that Ahmadis and Shias take second and third  place  with
      Hindus and Christians next in line. This represents a  change  in  the
      situation from that examined in MJ and ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG
      [2008] UKAIT  00033  in  2007  where  there  were  more  problems  for
      Christians and Hindus than for Ahmadis.

      Religious practice

 216.       Varying figures have been given for the number of Christians  in
      Pakistan and sources disagree  over  whether  they  form  the  largest
      minority group or come second to Hindus. We proceed on the basis  that
      there are around 3-5 million Christians who represent  about  1.5%  of
      the population. The largest numbers of Christians live in Punjab  with
      half of these in Lahore and Gujranwala. The proportion  of  Christians
      in Gojra is 6.58% of the population,  more  than  twice  the  national
      average.

 217.       There are a number of registered Christian churches in Pakistan;
      reports suggest there are some hundreds but there are  also  churches,
      as described by  Mr Samuel, formed in houses and basements. There  are
      also some cathedrals. Unlike the position with Ahmadis, Christians are
      permitted to profess their faith, wear symbols of Christianity such as
      the cross, use Christian  names,  attend  church  and  church  related
      activities, celebrate  religious  events,  marry  in  church,  undergo
      baptisms and attend Sunday  schools.  They  have  a  well  established
      infrastructure with their own school and hospitals. There are very few
      reports of attacks on churches. The double suicide bombing of a church
      in Peshawar last September was the first time a church was targeted in
      this way. There are no provisions in the penal code which specifically
      pertain to Christians. They have their own cemeteries and we have seen
      no reports of desecration. They have a flourishing  media  with  their
      own radio channels, television programmes  and  newspapers.  They  are
      permitted to call their place of worship a church and the building  of
      churches,  albeit  with  some  regulations,   is   allowed.    Foreign
      missionaries are admitted and there  are  large  numbers  of  Catholic
      priests and nuns. Whilst the UNHCR referred to  attacks  on  religious
      processions, the clarifying footnote  in  the  report  disclosed  that
      these were all against Shi'a processions.  There  is  little  evidence
      that Christian activists or organisations have been targeted.

 218.       There is reference in the  UNHCR  report  to  serious  reprisals
      being attracted by interfaith marriages but marriage between a  Muslim
      man and a Christian woman is permitted and other reports confirm  that
      mixed marriages are not unusual.  We  have  seen  no  reports  of  any
      problems arising in such cases. The one example  cited  in  the  UNHCR
      report involved the elopement of a Christian boy with a Muslim girl in
      2010 where,  we  observe,  the  elopement  itself  may  have  been  an
      exacerbating feature. We note there is no confirmation of any marriage
      between the two and no follow up by the authors of  the  report  which
      was prepared two years later.

      Discrimination

 219.        Religious based discrimination may amount to persecution  where
      it seriously restricts an individual's enjoyment of fundamental  human
      rights with consequences of a substantially prejudicial nature for the
      person concerned. The UNHCR  Guidelines  on  International  Protection
      give the examples of serious restrictions  on  the  right  to  earn  a
      livelihood or to access normally available educational  facilities  or
      health care. There is undoubtedly societal  and  state  discrimination
      against  Christians  who  are  described  as  poor,   illiterate   and
      marginalised. The appellants and the experts  referred  to  derogatory
      remarks in school text books which,  they  maintained,  supported  the
      view of teachers and Muslim students that Christians are inferior. The
      reports before us indicate that derogatory remarks in school books are
      aimed particularly against Hindus where Hindu  beliefs  and  practices
      are  contrasted  negatively  with  those  of  Islam.  The   historical
      hostility between Muslims and Hindus that has existed ever since  1947
      when India was partitioned is, no doubt, to blame and it  is  reported
      that Bangladesh's struggle for independence is blamed on the influence
      of the Hindus in what  was  then  East  Pakistan.   Ahmadis  are  also
      singled out for  criticism  in  school  books.  Apart  from  anecdotal
      evidence,  however,  from  the  experts  and  the  evidence  from  the
      appellants, of non Muslim students being beaten by teachers,  made  to
      sit on the floor and generally ill treated, we were directed  to  only
      one report which cited  one  school  in  the  Punjab  where  Christian
      students were derided and made to clean bathrooms[37].

 220.       The government has made some effort to revise the curriculum  in
      public schools by its Educational  Sector  Reform  Plan.  It  aims  to
      remove Islamic overtones  from  secular  subjects  and  Ethics  (or  a
      similarly named subject) is offered to non Muslim students in place of
      Islamiat (Islamic studies). The progress of reform has been  slow  due
      to insufficient resources and the lack of  state  attention  to  these
      issues but there is  some  will  to  improve  the  situation.  Private
      schools already have the choice of  disregarding  offending  textbooks
      altogether and as  reported  by  CSW,  some  omit  large  sections  of
      distorted text. The US State  Department  reports  that  there  is  no
      discrimination with respect  to  entry  to  universities  and  medical
      schools.

 221.       As a legacy of the colonial era, there are a number of Christian
      schools and colleges in Pakistan located  throughout  the  country  as
      well as many with Christian origins. Indeed, as  pointed  out  in  the
      evidence, many of these have excellent reputations and are  frequented
      by non Christian students from the upper strata  of  society.  General
      Musharraf himself attended a Christian school.  The  evidence  of  the
      appellants[38] was that their family school was very well received  in
      their community due to its excellent standards. Christians who  prefer
      to receive an education in  a  Christian  school  therefore  have  the
      opportunity to do so. It should be borne in mind, however, that only a
      small number of Christians are educated; most belong to a  low  socio-
      economic class.

 222.       In other areas of life, Christians also face discrimination. Due
      to their illiteracy and the perception of being unclean, they find  it
      difficult to obtain anything other than  menial  work.  Many  work  as
      domestic servants and there are large numbers in Punjab who are bonded
      labourers. Even so, there are Christians who  are  affluent  and  well
      educated. Many army officers are  Christians  and  there  is  an  open
      admissions policy in state departments Five percent of government jobs
      are reserved for Christians,  a  percentage  much  higher  than  their
      representation of the population. There are also reserved seats at the
      various levels of Parliament. They are, however,  underrepresented  in
      the judiciary. Christians also work  in  the  fields  of  nursing  and
      teaching. The large proportion of nurses may be due to the  fact  that
      Muslim women do not seek such work.




      Evangelists

 223.       We  have  not  drawn  a  distinction  between  evangelising  and
      proselytising or preaching,  following  the  approach  in  SZ  and  JM
      (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT  00082.  We  consider
      that no useful purpose would be served and that in any  event  Muslims
      would not see  any  difference  between  these  different  activities.
      However, that is different to Ms Jegarajah's submission that Pakistani
      Muslims  do  not  distinguish  between   Evangelical   Christian   and
      'ordinary' Christians.

 224.       We find that a Christian who speaks out in non Christian  public
      places about Christianity is more likely to draw adverse attention  to
      himself than those who do not. Although Ms Jahangir suggested this may
      not cause any serious   difficulties  in  certain  areas  and  amongst
      certain people, generally she considered,  and  we  agree,  that  this
      would be risky behaviour     which would create problems. The evidence
      largely suggests  that  there   is,  on  the  whole,  a  tolerance  of
      Christianity but where it is taken  out  into  the  public  arena  and
      flouted, there is a serious risk of a blasphemy allegation being made.
       Those Christians who  genuinely  believe  that  it  is  an  essential
      element of their Christianity to preach  in  public  and  to  try  and
      convert others to their faith would, we find, be reasonably likely  to
      encounter serious problems.

      Sufficiency of protection

      It is a well  established  principle  that  a  well  founded  fear  of
persecution      will not exist if there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection
against serious harm   (Horvath [2000]  UKHL  37).  This  must  be  assessed
holistically. Evidence       showing ineffective protection can  shed  light
on whether a well      founded fear exists and vice versa. The situation  of
Christians is such      that,  in  our  opinion,  where  an  individual  can
establish a real risk of     serious harm by virtue of  a  blasphemy  charge
being brought against  him or her, it is in general unlikely that he or  she
will have available    protection.

      This does not mean that the evidence establishes that the  authorities
      never protect minorities.  There  is  evidence  that  the  police  and
authorities  have  on  occasions  acted  to  assist  minorities   and   that
Christians are able to asset effective legal  remedies.  For  example,  when
in April  2011,  a  mob  attacked  the  Christian  community  in  Gujranwala
in Punjab,  the  police  intervened.  They  also  increased  protection  for
churches after threats made around Christmas in 2012 and after  an    attack
on a Christian neighbourhood in Lahore in March  2013,     compensation  was
offered to families and they  were  assisted  with  the       rebuilding  of
their homes. Large-scale demonstrations took place        calling  for  more
rights and protection for Christians and there are no    reports that  those
resulted in any problems. However,  predominantly,   the  evidence  suggests
that there is a failure to protect Christians  from        attacks  and  the
consequences of abusive allegations of blasphemy.  Apart  from  the  actions
of the high courts in overturning unfair     verdicts, no  effective  action
is taken by the authorities to protect and   defend Christians or to  punish
their attackers although it has to be said   that the same  applies  to  non
Christians  accused  of  blasphemy.   Whether       this   stems   from   an
unwillingness or an inability to protect, is  not  the      issue.  Overall,
there has been and there continues  to  be  an  insufficiency      of  state
protection in cases where serious allegations  of  blasphemy  are       made
and pursued, regardless of the religious faith of the accused.

      Internal relocation

      Figures of blasphemy  charges,  deaths  and  attacks  on  individuals,
communities and churches  are  all  of  concern  but  they  must  be  viewed
against the size of the population and the fact  that  most  take  place  in
Punjab where radical  Islamists  have  a  strong  presence.  The  option  of
internal relocation must be viewed against that background.

      The correct approach as laid out by  Lord  Bingham  in  Januzi  [2006]
UKHL  5  is  whether  an  individual   can   reasonably   be   expected   to
relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to  do  so.
The test must not be  equated  with  a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution
or a real risk of ill treatment.

      According to the UNHCR, internal relocation will generally not  be  an
option in areas of FATA, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Baluchistan which   are  all
currently   affected   by   security   and    military    counter-insurgency
operations and retaliatory attacks. In other areas, the  availability  of  a
viable relocation option needs to be assessed on an individual basis.

      Individuals who are being seriously pursued by armed  militant  groups
such as the Lashkar-e-Jhangvi  and  Sipah-i-Sahaba  will  generally  not  be
safe in Punjab where these  groups  are  based.  They  may  also  be  unsafe
elsewhere due to the wide geographical reach of these groups.  The    nature
of the threats received,  the  individual's  personal  circumstances     and
availability of  support  from  influential  connections  are  all  relevant
considerations. It is  not  likely  that  ordinary  community  members  will
have the resources or the inclination to pursue their  victims  outside  the
local area and so those facing harm from localised  groups  or   individuals
will generally be able to relocate  to  one  of  the  many  large    cities.
However,   individuals   subject   to   criminal   prosecution   under   the
blasphemy laws will not generally be able to relocate.

       Those  against  whom  an  FIR  has  been  issued   may   in   certain
circumstances be able to relocate. The seriousness  with  which  an  FIR  is
lodged and pursued will need to be assessed along with  the     individual's
personal circumstances, the existence of traditional     support  mechanisms
such as the presence of friends and relatives in   the area  of  prospective
relocation and whether the  individual  would  be      readily  identifiable
there. Relocation to urban centres will generally be     possible where  the
factors identified above do not come into play.

      Women, abductions, conversions and forced marriages

      Gender-based violence may amount to persecution  where  the      state
is unwilling or unable to provide protection.


      Forced conversion is a serious violation of the fundamental  right  to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion and will,  generally,     amount
to persecution.

      Pakistan law strictly forbids forced conversion  as  does  Islam.  The
Supreme Court has  actively  pursued  cases  related  to  forced  conversion
but notwithstanding  that,  there  are  reports  of  abductions  and  forced
conversions. According to Amnesty International, the majority of     victims
are from the Punjab.


235.  Christian females are reportedly at  particular  risk  of  sexual  and
      gender  based violence, forced conversion to Islam and forced marriage
      to Muslim men. According to the USCIRF report of 2013, victims tend to
      be underage. In a  positive  development  on  15  November  2011,  the
      National  Assembly  passed  the  Prevention  of  Anti-Women  Practices
      (Criminal   law Amendment Act) 2011 which renders  forced  marriage  a
      criminal    offence punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years


236.  Although the UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  also  assert  a  risk  of
      "honour" killings of Christian females  at  the  hands  of  their  own
      communities, the evidence on this  is  sparse.  Of  the  943  "honour"
      killings recorded for 2011, only seven were Christians and there  were
      11 in 2010. The killings are the most prevalent in rural areas and the
      perpetrators are usually family members of the victims.

237.  The evidence tends to combine abductions and forced  conversions  into
      one group and the figures vary wildly. Hindu females of  lower  castes
      are said to be the most vulnerable and considered  the  most  sexually
      available but the figures  from  some  sources  contradict  that.  The
      Jinnah Institute reported that in 2009, 18 Hindu females  were  forced
      to convert to Islam. The NCJP reported that during 2009, 21 Hindus and
      20 Christians were forced to convert to Islam. A news report  of  2010
      cited by Mr Samuel claimed five Hindu girls a  month  were  forced  to
      convert. IRIN reports that about 15-20 Hindus were abducted a month in
      2012, although the US State Department puts the figure slightly higher
      at 20-25 a month.  However,  Catholic  NGOs  estimate  that  some  700
      Christian girls are forcibly converted to Islam each year.  The  Asian
      Human Rights Commission stated in its report of December 2010 that 700
      Christian girls and 300 Hindu girls were abducted. In 2011 this figure
      had risen to a  total  of  1800  for  both  groups.  Few  details  are
      available and the source of the figures is unreported. However the  US
      State Department IRF reported just  one  case  of  a  Christian  being
      abducted and forced to convert in 2012 and two in 2013. Some girls are
      recovered, others escape and some  abductors  are  arrested.  In  some
      cases the girls are killed.


238.  It is difficult to assess the frequency  of  abductions  and  rape  of
females     from minorities  without  a  comparison  of  figures  for  those
involving   Muslim women. Additionally, due to the  significant  fluctuation
in the      figures, they cannot be relied upon. We therefore conclude  that
      although there is some risk of  abduction  and  forced  conversion  of
young Christian girls, largely in rural areas and in  Punjab,  it  does  not
amount to a serious risk in itself.

239.  We have also considered the situation for Christian  women  generally.
Those living alone without a male  relative/protector  in  rural  areas  may
well  be  at  risk  of  gender  based  persecution  exacerbated   by   their
position as a member of a minority group.  Youth, illiteracy and     poverty
are   aggravating features. Women of middle age  and       above,  are  less
likely to draw interest.

      Country guidance

240.  Christians in Pakistan are  a  religious  minority  who,  in  general,
suffer      discrimination but this is not sufficient to amount  to  a  real
risk of     persecution.

241.  Unlike the position of Ahmadis, Christians in  general  are  permitted
to    practise their faith, can  attend  church,  participate  in  religious
activities  and have their own schools and hospitals.

242.   Evangelism  by  its  very  nature   involves   some   obligation   to
proselytise.     Someone who seeks to broadcast their faith to strangers  so
as to       encourage them to convert, may find themselves facing  a  charge
of    blasphemy. In that way, evangelical Christians  face  a  greater  risk
than  those Christians who are not publicly  active.  It  will  be  for  the
judicial     fact-finder  to  assess  on  a  case  by  case  basis  whether,
notwithstanding  attendance at an evangelical church,  it  is  important  to
the individual to      behave in evangelical ways that may lead  to  a  real
risk of persecution.

243.  Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus may  all  be
potentially  charged  with  blasphemy.   Those   citizens   who   are   more
marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less  able  to
deal with the consequences of such proceedings.

244.  The risk of becoming a victim of a blasphemy  allegation  will  depend
upon a number of factors and must be assessed  on  a  case  by  case  basis.
Relevant factors will include the place  of  residence,  whether  it  is  an
urban or rural area, and the  individual's  level  of  education,  financial
and employment status  and  level  of  public  religious  activity  such  as
preaching. These factors are not exhaustive.

245.  Non state agents who use blasphemy laws against Christians, are  often
      motivated by spite, personal or business disputes, arguments over land
      and  property.  Certain  political  events  may  also   trigger   such
      accusations. A blasphemy allegation, without more will  not  generally
      be enough to make out a claim for international protection  under  the
      Refugee Convention. It has to  be  actively  followed  either  by  the
      authorities in the form of charges       being  brought  or  by  those
      making the complaint. If it is, or will be, actively pursued, then  an
      applicant may be able to establish a real risk of  harm  in  the  home
      area and an insufficiency of state protection.

246.  Like other women  in  Pakistan,  Christian  women,  in  general,  face
discrimination and may be at a heightened risk but this  falls  short  of  a
generalised real risk. The need for a fact-sensitive analysis is crucial  in
      their case. Factors such as their age, place of residence  and  socio-
economic milieu  are  all  relevant  factors  when  assessing  the  risk  of
abduction, conversions and forced marriages.

247.  Relocation is  normally  a  viable  option  unless  an  individual  is
accused      of  blasphemy  which  is  being  seriously  pursued;  in   that
situation there  is, in general, no internal relocation alternative.

      The appellants

248.  In considering the position of the appellants and  taking  account  of
all   their circumstances in the round, we are not satisfied that they  have
      demonstrated a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  contrary  to
article 3.

249.  The appellants have been found  to  be  lacking  in  credibility  with
regard      to events in Pakistan. The judge's finding that the incident  of
October     2010 and hence all subsequent events had  been  fabricated,  has
not been    challenged. Despite  this,  the  appellants      maintain  their
accounts and     the claim that their parents and other family  members  are
hiding out at    unspecified locations because of the blasphemy  allegations
levelled at      them (the appellants).

250.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was  unhappy  with  the  FIR  and  fatwa
documents which were not produced until the hearing.  He  took  issue   with
the   poor,   uncertified,   incomplete   translations.   He   noted    that
although the  appellants  had  claimed  to  have  been  pursued  by  enraged
members of the Sipah-i-Sahaba  since  21  October  2010,  the  FIR  was  not
registered until some six  months  later,  just  after  they  had  left  the
country.  He found that they  gave  inconsistent  evidence  as  to  who  had
issued the fatwa. He concluded that no weight could be  placed  on     these
documents.

251.  The judge also noted that the only 'evidence' adduced  in  support  of
the claim to have taught  English  at  the  family  school  was  a  copy  of
Dickens' A Christmas Carol. Given the  lack  of  evidence  in  this  respect
and the inconsistent evidence of the appellants,  he  did  not  accept  that
the family had a school  at  which  the  appellants  taught.  We  also  note
that  the  appellants  gave  different  names  for  the  school   with   one
claiming it was St John's and the other that it  was  St  Thomas'  (although
this was later amended by the appellants' representatives).

252.  The appellants also gave contradictory evidence about when  they  came
to realise the Sipah-i-Sahaba was  responsible  for  the  October  visit  to
their home and the  following  incidents.  AK  claimed  they  only  came  to
know after they were in the UK but SK stated that they  had  known     since
21 October 2010. The judge did not accept that this was credible.   We  also
note that there are conflicting accounts as to  where  AK  was  at       the
time of the attack.  It is said that  he  was  at  a  wedding  and  that  he
was visiting a friend. Furthermore, SK also  gave  conflicting  evidence  as
to whether she remained at home following the attack and then went   to  her
aunt's  house  at  a  later  stage  or  whether  she  left   to   go   there
immediately.

253.  The judge  noted  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  of  the
      hospital treatment AK claimed to have received after an attack on  him
      in November 2010. There is, before us, a brief hospital certificate in
      respect of AK dated 2 November 2010. It gives the time of  arrival  as
      '0800  pm'  (sic)  and  sets  out  the  injuries  sustained  as  being
      contusions to the forehead and left shoulder and  a  swelling  on  the
      right hand. There is no reference to the injury to the left ear  which
      the appellant maintains was ripped and had  to  be  stitched.  In  his
      statement he explains this   was omitted because  the  hospital  staff
      members were biased against him. His explanation makes no sense to  us
      as we do not understand why some injuries would be recorded and others
      would not. The certificate also states that he arrived with  a  police
      letter, yet  AK  maintains  the  police  were  not  involved  on  this
      occasion.

254.  We note that in the  evidence  provided  in  respect  of  the  hearing
before       the  First-tier  Tribunal,  are  a  number  of  photographs  of
injuries to a    male individual. There is also a copy  of  a  receipt  from
the Christian    Cemetery in Karachi for a burial fee for Imran, a  copy  of
a note from      the Indus Hospital confirming the death of Imran by  a  gun
shot on 9   June 2011  and  a  copy  of  a  report  from  the  Accident  and
Emergency   Department of Jinnah Postgraduate Medical  Centre  of  the  same
date  confirming that the body  of  Imran  was  received  and  that  he  had
sustained  a  gunshot.  We  are  unclear  as  to  its  relevance  of   these
documents. They were not referred to by the parties.

255.  The judge found that the appellants would not have gone out  had  they
genuinely been hiding out in fear.  He  also  found  it  lacked  credibility
that on each occasion they  went  out  (four  times)  they  happened  to  be
spotted by the very people  who  were  after  them  despite  the  fact  that
they were not in their home area. Nor did he  find  it  credible  that  when
SK was seen and  pursued,  her  attackers  happened  to  have  with  them  a
bottle of acid to threaten her, scissors  to  cut  her  hair  and  a  Muslim
conversion statement. He noted  the  appellants'  claim  that  the  Sipah-i-
Sahaba members were so dangerous and menacing that  even  the  police   were
intimidated by them and in that context found  it  wholly  unlikely     that
they would have been frightened off by the appellants' mother  and    sister
on one occasion and by a group of Christian scouts on another.      We  note
that SK's evidence over where she stayed thereafter  (whether   at  a  local
pastor's house or with a Christian social worker) is     inconsistent.

256.  Both appellants returned to Karachi for  some  months  to  make  their
visa applications. There is  no  suggestion  that  they  came  to  any  harm
during this period. Whilst they claimed not to  be  living  at  home,  there
is no suggestion that the individuals  looking  for  them  had  returned  at
any time to the family home.

257.  The appellants continue to maintain that their parents are  hiding  in
a     'safe house' provided by the church  but  have  provided  inconsistent
evidence as to whether they are in Karachi or in the  Punjab.  Rev.    Masih
was also evasive about their whereabouts but  his  evidence  was        that
they were not  in  hiding.  It  transpired  that  a  'safe  house'  meant  a
residential property  without  any  signage.  His  evidence  was  that  they
were able to  live  comfortably  off  their  government  pensions  which  he
drew out from the ATM for  them  using  their  bank  cards.  Given  that  we
have been told  that  the  extremist  and  intelligence  agencies  have  the
wherewithal to trace anyone they  want,  it  does  seem  rather  far-fetched
to us to claim that the appellants' parents cannot freely  use  a  telephone
but appear to be able to use their bank cards  without  any  risk  of  being
located. Further, AK's son attends  school.  His  details  would  have  been
required for registration but there is no suggestion  that  the  appellant's
wife has been traced through the child.

258.   In  their  statements  both  appellants  maintained  that  they   had
contacted   Rev. William only after they arrived in the UK, that  they  told
him of      their  problems  and  he  offered  them  accommodation.  At  the
hearing the      appellants told us they  had  made  contact  with  him  and
arranged    accommodation prior to  their  arrival.  Rev.  William  did  not
attend the  hearing.

259.  The appellants failed to inform the  respondent  that  they  were  not
attending college. Despite claiming to have been informed of the     dangers
to them within a week or two of their arrival in March 2011,  they  did  not
contact the respondent until May and did not make their  asylum claim  until
June.

260.  Applying the country guidance, set out in paragraphs 240-247,  to  the
appellants' circumstances, we  find  that  they  would  not  be  individuals
who  would  go  out  and  preach  their  religion  to  the   public.   Their
activities here have been  limited  as  far  as  evangelising  is  concerned
with  AK  merely  discussing  his  faith   with   his   flatmates   and   SK
occasionally helping out with 'table work' on  the  high  street.  The  vast
majority  of  their  activities  are  confined  to  their         respective
churches and     congregations. We have not been referred  to  any  evidence
to support  a      claim  of  persecution  against  evangelists  per  se  in
Pakistan and we are     aware  that  there  are  many  thriving  evangelical
churches.

261.  The appellants come from  an  educated  and  well  off  family.  Their
parents were government employees and  both  appellants  have     university
degrees  and  employment  experience.  They  do  not  fall       within  the
illiterate and vulnerable categories of Christians who  are     forced  into
menial labour through a lack of choice.  They do not  come      from  Punjab
and or from a rural background. Before  their  arrival  here      they  were
able to practise their faith openly and freely and were  involved in a  wide
range of religious activities.

262.  SK would not be returning as a lone female without a  male  protector.
She  has  a  father  and  brothers.  She  is  not  of  an  age  or  from  an
environment  or  social  strata  which  would   make   her   vulnerable   to
abduction/forced  marriage  or  conversion.  There  is  no  suggestion  that
she has acted in any way to shame her family so as to put  her  at  risk  of
an honour killing. The appellants have a  home  and  family  to  return  to.
They are educated and will be able to put all  their  knowledge  and  skills
to good use in order to find employment on their return.

Decision

 263.      The First-tier Tribunal judge was found to have made  errors  of
 law. Its  determination is set aside and we re-make the decision.

 264.      The appeals of both appellants are dismissed on all grounds.


      Signed:


      [pic]


      Upper               Tribunal                Judge                Keki?




























Appendix 1:

                           RULE 15(2A) APPLICATION


1.    This is an application made pursuant  to  Rule  15(2a)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules by Mr Walker on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    adduce certain evidence which Mr  Walker  informs  us  emerged  from  a
    Google Search of the internet after the close of proceedings yesterday,
    16 June 2014.

2.    Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Rules provides  that  in  an  asylum
    case or an immigration case the party  wishes  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider evidence that was not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    party must send a notice to the Upper  Tribunal  and  any  other  party
    indicating the nature of the evidence and explaining  why  it  was  not
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  When  that  is  done  the  Upper
    Tribunal in considering whether  to  admit  that  evidence  "must  have
    regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay in  producing  that
    evidence". The material  in  question  concerns  a  newspaper  article,
    namely a Mail. online article from December  2011  relating  to  Pastor
    Isaac William  and members of his family.

3.    The application was  opposed  by  Miss  Jegarajah  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants. Amongst other matters she submitted  that  there  had  been
    unreasonable delay in producing  the  evidence.   It  would  have  been
    possible for the Secretary of State to undertake  the  internet  search
    indicated far earlier  than  yesterday.   She  also  pointed  out  that
    certain aspects of the cross-examination by Mr Walker of the appellants
    on 16 June concerned their involvement with  Pastor  William.   In  the
    light of that the matters arising from the newspaper article could  and
    should have been put into evidence earlier.

4.    We have had regard to those submissions and to Mr  Walker's  response.
    We have also had regard to the consequences that might have followed in
    admitting the  evidence.   That  is  relevant  because  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal  Rules  requires  a  Tribunal
    deal with cases fairly and justly and in doing  so  the  Tribunal  must
    deal in ways that are proportionate to the importance of the case,  the
    complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of
    the parties.  The overriding objective also makes express reference  to
    avoiding delay so far as compatible with proper  consideration  of  the
    issues.

5.    The  Tribunal  considers  that  the  consequences  of  admitting  this
    evidence would be essentially as follows.  First, the appellants  would
    need to be questioned by  their  legal  advisors  and  further  witness
    statements submitted indicating the extent if any of their knowledge of
    the matters to which the newspaper article refers.

6.    Furthermore, Mr Walker told us that it would be his intention  to  ask
    the other witnesses to be called on  behalf  of  the  appellants  about
    matters relating to the newspaper article.  There are two experts to be
    heard today and further evidence is anticipated to be  given  by  video
    link from Pakistan later this week.  If the material was admitted,  all
    of those witnesses would need to have the matter raised  with  them  by
    the appellants' lawyers.   The  result  of  all  that,  Miss  Jegarajah
    submitted would be that there would be no prospect of the appeals being
    able to continue and they would have to be put  off  necessarily  to  a
    later date.

7.    All of that is relevant in the context of  the  overriding  objective.
    In particular because this is earmarked as a country guidance case  and
    as a result much time and effort has been expended in preparing for it,
    both by the appellants and by the Secretary of State.

8.    In all the circumstances it  appears  to  us  that  it  would  not  be
    appropriate to admit this evidence pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A).   In  so
    saying we are acutely conscious of the consequence  to  which  we  have
    just made mention.  We do not consider that so far as  the  appellants'
    cases themselves are concerned, failing to admit  this  evidence  would
    inevitably have such consequences that justice could not be said to  be
    done.

9.    For all those reasons this application is refused.




      Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane













Expert and Other evidence

   Appendix 2:


   AK


   Written evidence


   Statement of 17 May 2011


   1.       The appellant confirmed he was a  practising  Christian  from  a
   Christian family. His family ran St John's, a school in Korangi, Karachi.
   It had been founded in August 2003. His was the only Christian family  on
   the street of 50 houses. His father was a retired government teacher  and
   fully involved in the family business as was his mother, a retired nurse,
   his older brother who was the school principal and his older  sister  who
   was a school administrator.


   2.       He experienced discrimination in school,  college,  playgrounds,
   the neighbourhood, at work and on buses and trains. He was beaten up  and
   verbally abused. He was mocked at school  and  not  allowed  to  use  the
   canteen. At High School he was called names and  hit.  He  had  to  study
   Islamiat - Islamic studies - which was anti-Christian in  its  teachings.
   His complaints against the teachers were ignored.  His problems continued
   at college when he was  provoked,  insulted  and  beaten.  On  completing
   college, he worked as a part time  teacher  at  the  family  school.  The
   school was well known and respected  amongst  the  local  community.   He
   simultaneously attended classes at the Pakistan Institute  of  Management
   Science and Technology for four years. When  delivering  his  final  year
   presentation, a student levelled a term  of  abuse  at  him  and  he  was
   humiliated in front of the teachers and other students.


   3.       When teaching Dickens' A Christmas Carol at St John's in October
   2010, his students quoted a section of the book to others at the  mosques
   and Madrassas. The citation pertained to Jesus Christ being  the  saviour
   of the world and dying on a cross even though he was the only  one  never
   to have committed a sin. That evening a crowd gathered at the appellant's
   house and made threats against him. He was not  present  and  his  father
   called him and warned him not to come home. The appellant therefore  went
   to his grandmother's house in another area of Karachi and  his  wife  and
   son joined him there the following day. Almost two weeks later he went to
   a medical store but was stopped by a group of militants who  accused  him
   of insulting the Prophet Mohammed. He was hit with a stone, a belt and  a
   metal rod  and  he  lost  consciousness.  He  regained  consciousness  in
   hospital where he spent  a  night  and  received  treatment.  His  family
   visited him at the hospital.


   4.       On leaving hospital the appellant, his wife and son went to stay
   with his uncle in another area of Karachi. Some  two  and  a  half  weeks
   later he was returning there having visited a sick aunt in hospital  when
   two militants followed him. He was however able  to  escape.  His  father
   then advised him to leave the city.


   5.       Two days later the appellant, his wife and son travelled by  bus
   to Quetta to stay with his wife's  family.  He  received  news  from  his
   sister that SK had  been  attacked.  His  father  then  decided  to  make
   arrangements for him and SK to leave Pakistan for studies in  the  UK  in
   the hope that the situation would calm down. Some  two  months  later  he
   returned to Karachi for the processing of his visa application. He met up
   with SK but she was angry with him. In March their visas were granted and
   they left the country.


   6.       Two or three weeks after their arrival in the UK,  they  managed
   to make contact with their father by telephone and were told that an  FIR
   had been registered against them the day after their departure and that a
   further two days later the police had raided the house to arrest  him  on
   blasphemy charges. A Hindu neighbour had given him this information as he
   had been out at the time. His father also told him that  the  appellant's
   wife was still in Quetta with his older sister  and  that  he  had  given
   control of his property and the school to a friend.


   Statement dated 22 August 2011


   7.       The appellant confirmed he has three siblings and that he  lived
   with two of them, his parents, his wife and son.  His  elder  sister  was
   married and lived away from them in her own household.


   8.       He stated that his family founded a  private  fee-paying  school
   which was registered in  2003.  All  subjects  were  taught  in  English.
   Although there were other schools in the area, most parents chose to send
   their children to St John's as they provided a good education. He and  SK
   were part of the teaching  staff.  They  had  control  over  70%  of  the
   syllabus taught.


   9.       As a child he  had  been  bullied  by  classmates  and  teachers
   because of his Christianity. One of the main reasons for establishing the
   school was to show that everyone should be treated as an equal.


   10. During one lesson AK was teaching English to the students and  citing
   passages from A Christmas Carol by Dickens.  He  describes  the  book  as
   including passages from various types of  text,  such  as  novels,  short
   stories and informative  texts.  When  a  student  asked  why  Jesus  was
   regarded as the only saviour of the world, he replied this was because he
   had never sinned. This was queried by another student  and  AK  explained
   that there was a significant  difference  between  Jesus  and  the  other
   prophets in that Jesus was created from God whereas  the  other  prophets
   were sons of human beings and therefore fallible. That  evening  when  he
   was out, fundamentalists  and  angry  parents  raided  the  family  house
   looking for him. SK tried to  protect  their  parents  and  was  attacked
   herself. After some neighbours  intervened,  the  perpetrators  left  the
   house. His father called and told him what had happened but he only found
   out the details after coming to the UK.


   11. AK and his wife and son went to hide at his grandmother's house. On 2
   November 2010 his son was ill so he went to the pharmacy. On his way home
   he was encountered by MAS whom he knew was the leader of the  group  that
   attacked his house. He was punched in  the  face,  kicked  on  the  legs,
   whipped, hit with a rod and a stone and sustained severe injuries to  his
   left ear. He regained consciousness at a hospital but only  the  injuries
   on his forehead, shoulder and hand were recorded by the  hospital  staff.
   The injury to his ear was not mentioned  because  the  staff  was  biased
   towards him. The next day he went to stay at his uncle's house.


   12. On 19 November 2010 he went to visit his aunt who was  seriously  ill
   in hospital. On his way back he recognised members of the group  who  had
   attacked him. They were chasing him but he managed to get away from  them
   on his bike. On 22 November 2010 he moved with his wife and son to Quetta
   to stay with his in-laws. His father then made arrangements for  him  and
   SK to go abroad for studies. AK remained in Quetta until the beginning of
   January 2011 and then returned to Karachi so he could apply for his visa.
   He and SK left the country on 26 March 2011


   13. Upon their arrival here, the appellants made contact with  Rev  Isaac
   William whose wife they  knew  in  Pakistan.  After  contacting  him  and
   telling  him  about   their   circumstances,   he   offered   them   free
   accommodation. He introduced them to the Yahweh Christian Fellowship.


   14. Two weeks after their arrival, their parents contacted them and  told
   them that the police had raided the house on 29 March 2011 and  that  MAS
   had lodged FIRs against them and that fatwas had also been announced. His
   father went to see Rev Razzaq from the Christian Community Council to ask
   for help. He suggested that they seek the protection of the  UK  and  not
   returned to Pakistan.


   15. AK stated that their school collapsed and they  did  not  know  where
   their parents  and  siblings  were.  He  experienced  problems  with  the
   interpreter at the interview because she was a  Muslim  and  she  twisted
   some of the facts.




   Interview on 21 June 2011


   16. At his interview, the appellant said that his wife and  son  were  in
   Quetta where they had been since October 2010. His parents  were  in  the
   Punjab where they had been for some two and a half months. They  had  not
   been back to the family house since the raid by the police  on  29  March
   2011.


   17. He said that a student in his class had registered an FIR against him
   for speaking against the prophet Mohammed. This news had  been  given  to
   him by a pastor whom he had contacted for information. He  described  the
   incident in the classroom in October  2010  which  led  to  the  FIR  and
   explained that he had entered into a discussion with his Christian, Hindu
   and Muslim students on the divinity of  Christ  and  the  fallibility  of
   other prophets.


   18. The appellant said that all  Christians  in  Pakistan  had  disturbed
   social lives. He had experienced problems as a child at  school.  He  had
   never had any previous problems with the  authorities.  He  came  from  a
   Christian family. He was a Pentecostal Protestant.


   19. After learning of the incident on 21 October, the appellant  went  to
   stay with his grandmother. No one knew where she lived. He  stayed  there
   for 18 days until the attack on 2 November when he was  hospitalised  and
   then moved to his uncle's.  His uncle was also his  brother's  father-in-
   law. He stayed there for 2-3 weeks. He was then spotted by extremists and
   after he managed to escape them, he went to Quetta and  stayed  with  his
   wife's relatives. He had to return to Karachi for his  visa  to  the  UK.
   However he could not remain in Pakistan as he would be found wherever  he
   went. He could not live in a backward place and there was no  institution
   in Quetta where he would be able to complete his PhD. He wanted  his  son
   to have a good education. His wife and son were safe because no one  knew
   their faces however he would be known as he would have been  seen  around
   the school area.


   20. St John's School had not been attacked  because  the  militants  were
   angry at him and not the school.


   21. The FIR had been obtained by Rev. Razak (spelt as  Razzaq  elsewhere)
   who investigated the matter.


   Undated Statement


   22. This statement was prepared on an unspecified date  for  the  present
   hearing.


   23. The appellant states that he had strongly believed in  his  faith  in
   Pakistan and had felt it was  his  duty  to  explain  his  religion  when
   questioned. He came here  to  escape  the  persecution  he  had  suffered
   because he was a Christian. He had not intended to claim asylum but on 29
   March 2011 he was advised by his family that the family  house  had  been
   raided, FIRs had been registered against him and SK and that a fatwa  was
   also pronounced. They had stayed with Rev. Isaac William in  the  UK  but
   left his house so as not to be a burden on him. The appellant was  housed
   by NASS and dispersed to Stockton on Tees  where  he  found  his  current
   church. It appealed to him because  it  focused  on  Evangelism  and  its
   beliefs were in line with  Born  Again  Christians.  He  attended  Sunday
   services and joined the TAB students group. He helped the church with the
   use of their projector and played cricket for them. He also  participated
   in the Life Group and was taught how to evangelise. He decided he  wanted
   to be baptised and his baptism took place after two weeks of counselling.
   Since his baptism he felt he received a spiritual gift.


   24. In the UK he had been able to  practise  his  faith  and  expand  his
   knowledge. He had been unable to evangelise in Pakistan and so  returning
   would not be an option for him. He had become a strong believer and tried
   to share his beliefs with non believers at college and at the asylum drop
   in community centre. He was no longer afraid to speak about  his  beliefs
   to others whereas in Pakistan he was always in fear and had to  hide  his
   beliefs. Returning would have a negative impact upon him.


   Oral evidence


   25. AK adopted his unsigned witness statement and confirmed the  contents
   and his reliance on them. He described how he had formed friendships with
   other members of his church and spoke of a family who showed concern  for
   him when he was ill. He said that they prayed for him, visited him,  sent
   him Bible text messages and  gave  him  books  to  show  how  the  Spirit
   provided protection. They had advised him to not only pray for others but
   to pray for himself too. He stated that he felt unable  to  do  that.  He
   prayed to God for guidance but had not asked for anything for himself. He
   liked gospel music.


   26. The  appellant  said  that  he  attended  Stockton  on  Tees  Baptist
   Tabernacle. He  went  regularly  for  Sunday  services  and  additionally
   attended Life Group meetings. Sermons were  available  on  discs  if  one
   could not attend. He was asked why he could not worship in  this  way  in
   Pakistan. He replied that there was no access to You Tube in Pakistan and
   the internet was filtered. He heard about four individuals who  had  been
   arrested for having evangelical material.


   27. He stated that he felt very low if he missed a church service. If  he
   felt anxious he would speak to his Pastor and to other church  goers  and
   that always helped.


   28. In cross examination the appellant stated that he thought there  were
   around 400 members of the congregation in his church but  newcomers  were
   frequent. He had undergone a full immersion baptism there.  He spoke of a
   Pentecost event at which two Iranians were  baptised.  They  used  to  be
   Muslims. He did not speak to individuals  from  other  churches  but  his
   pastor did; the aim of the church was to bring other churches together.


   29. The appellant confirmed he had seen three or four mosques in Stockton
   on Tees but was not sure of how many there were. He said that there  were
   ninety different cultural groups in Stockton on Tees. He  did  not  think
   his pastor had a dialogue with imams in the mosques.


   30. With regard to his baptism, the appellant said that he had  not  been
   baptised by full immersion in Pakistan. There, he  had  been  blessed  by
   holy water. He did not consider that as  baptism  because  in  the  Bible
   Jesus had said to take full immersion baptism. He had, however,  regarded
   himself as a Christian  in  Pakistan.  He  had  attended  St  Andrews,  a
   Protestant church, with his family. He was a member of the  church  as  a
   child of his parents rather than as an individual member. He was  advised
   by his parents to avoid all arguments about religion. He had never  heard
   a sermon that gave encouragement to evangelising in public. He was  aware
   of the Great Commission of Evangelical Churches but  even  they  did  not
   suggest one spoke about religion to Muslims.  When asked whether  he  had
   preached to non Christians in the UK, the appellant  said  he  had  faced
   problems  with  Muslim  members  of  his  cricket  team  because  of  his
   Christianity and as a result no longer played with them.  He  had  played
   two matches for the church. He had also played in Pakistan  but  did  not
   like the fact that he had been dropped down in the order of  play.  After
   that, he formed a team with his brother, cousins and friends.


   31. The appellant said  that  he  had  only  visited  other  churches  in
   Pakistan via his school. Visits would be made  to  participate  in  other
   programmes held at churches frequented by the students. That led  to  the
   formation  of  social  relationships.  He  was  unable  to   recall   the
   denominations of the other churches. A family friend was a Roman Catholic
   but he had had arguments with Catholics. His brother had been  christened
   into the Church of Pakistan like he had. His (the appellant's)  wife  was
   also a Christian. He appeared unsure as to which church she had  attended
   but then said that as  their  wedding  bans  had  been  announced  in  St
   Andrews, she and her parents must have attended the  same  church  as  he
   did. She was currently living in Karachi with her father and brother.  He
   was in contact with her but they only spoke about the  Bible  and  psalms
   and he did not ask whether she still attended church.


   32. The appellant said that whilst in Pakistan he had never spoken to any
   pastors from Evangelical churches in the UK. He  had  not  known  of  any
   visiting pastors from the UK. He spoke of the perception that  Christians
   had the power to heal. He said that there had been a visit  by  a  Kenyan
   pastor but he had not attended St Andrews. When referred to his statement
   in which he claimed to have met a pastor from a UK church, the  appellant
   said that he had meant Pastor Isaac William.  He  had  been  a  Pakistani
   national but was now British. He had not attended any of Pastor William's
   sermons and had not met him but he had met his  wife.  His  in-laws  knew
   him. He (the  appellant)  had  attended  meetings  that  the  pastor  had
   arranged. These were talks about Jesus.


   33. The appellant described an incident where a neighbour who had taken a
   Masters degree in Islamic studies became disillusioned with Islam and had
   asked the appellant's family for a Bible. They had been afraid to give it
   to him but eventually did so after reassuring themselves  that  he  would
   not divulge the information to anyone else.


   34. The appellant said that his parents were in Karachi in  the  Bishop's
   house. He spoke to them. However he did not know where they were. He  did
   not ask such questions as telephone calls may be  censored.  His  parents
   had left home after the raid on their  house.  They  owned  the  property
   which was still there.


   35. The appellant confirmed that he had lived with Rev. William  when  he
   came to the UK. He confirmed that the Reverend had known  he  was  coming
   here. His parents had made al the arrangements. He came with  his  sister
   as students. He had not considered whether  the  Reverend  would  support
   them. He said that the main aim was to get here and then  the  fatwa  was
   announced so there was no time to think about education. He was not aware
   of all the details of the travel plans.


   36. The appellant was shown a copy of a letter from Rev. William dated  9
   June 2011 with the  letterhead  of  the  Great  Commission  Outreach  for
   Christ. The appellant was asked why the letter confirmed that he was well
   known to the author. The appellant said the Reverend meant  that  he  had
   heard about him from his in-laws whom he knew well. He and the  appellant
   then met in the UK.  When asked about his claim  that  the  Reverend  had
   helped him to claim asylum, the appellant stated that God had helped him.
   He said that they had decided to come here to study and  had  hoped  that
   the situation would calm down after a while but it grew worse  after  the
   issue of the FIR and the fatwa.  The appellant was asked why the Reverend
   had not attended as a witness. He replied that he had had  some  problems
   with the Reverend's son and daughters who had  considered  him  to  be  a
   burden and he no longer knew the Reverend's whereabouts.


   37. The appellant said that when he  arrived  in  Stockton  on  Tees,  he
   looked for a place to study and then for a church. He compared the way he
   was treated in college here to  the  way  in  which  he  was  treated  in
   Pakistan where, he said, he had been beaten by his  teacher  in  Class  9
   when he was aged 14. He confirmed that  he  had  attended  University  in
   Pakistan but when he suffered verbal abuse he took coaching  lessons.  He
   had a degree in computer programming.


   38. In response to questions from the bench, the appellant said that  the
   family school was now governed by others. He did not know if his  parents
   owned it. He suggested that enquiries be made on its website. He had  not
   looked himself. He said that he had left his  wife  and  son  in  Quetta.
   However they had returned to Karachi as  it  was  better  there  than  in
   Quetta. His son was born in 2007 and attended school. The  appellant  was
   asked about his parents. He confirmed they had been living in Karachi  in
   accommodation provided by the Bishop since they left home. When asked why
   he had claimed at his asylum interview  that  they  were  living  in  the
   Punjab, he was at first puzzled and could not recall having said that. He
   then said that his information was not correct and had been obtained from
   Reverend William who had been trying to calm them down.  He  also  blamed
   his poor knowledge of English at the time of the interview.


   39. With regard to his activities  in  Pakistan,  he  said  that  he  had
   attended church with his family on Sundays and had read the Bible. He was
   asked to explain why a letter from his friend Nigel described him  as  an
   active Evangelical in Pakistan when he now claimed that he was unable  to
   evangelise there. The appellant said that he did not speak out openly  in
   Pakistan. Perhaps his friend had  made  this  statement  because  of  his
   activities here. When asked whether he had been interested in  persuading
   others to follow his faith, the appellant replied that he did not want to
   tell others to do things his way. His interest was in following the  path
   himself.  When asked whether he  had  known  anyone  who  was  forced  to
   convert to Islam, he referred, after some thought, to a cricketer whom he
   had heard had been pressured and to a friend who had converted  but  that
   might have been because of whom he wanted to marry.


   40. The appellant was asked whether he had ever discussed his faith  with
   his housemates in the UK. He replied that he always let others start  the
   conversation. He talked about one  Iraqi  housemate  who  claimed  to  be
   Christian but the appellant did not believe him as he did  not  know  his
   Bible. At first this man was hostile and the appellant suspected  he  was
   putting something in the milk or flour but gradually through helping  him
   and being good to him, he had changed for the better. He had  started  to
   pray and had hope for the future. He also assisted in the church kitchen.
   The appellant confirmed he had not made attempts to convert him  but  had
   shown him how to be a good person.









































Appendix 3:


    SK


    Written evidence


    Screening interview of 10 June 2011


    1. The appellant stated she  was  unemployed  and  that  she  had  left
    Pakistan "to relocate from the suffering and religious persecution from
    the villages". She said she "was being forced to convert to  Islam  and
    then marry". When asked whether she was wanted by any  law  enforcement
    authority in any country, she replied in the negative.


    Statement of 17 June 2011


    2. The statement is prepared in identical terms in some parts  to  that
    given by AK.


    3. The appellant gave details of her parents and siblings; she was  the
    youngest child. She gave details of her education and confirmed she had
    obtained a diploma in IT and a BSc in Optometry.


    4. Her family owned a school founded in August 2003. it was in a Muslim
    community surrounded by mosques and Madrassas organised  and  sponsored
    by extremists. Children in the Madrassas were trained to fight  against
    Christian minorities, schools, churches and  missionary  organisations.
    The situation was not so bad for Christians until September 2001  after
    which persecution against them had increased. Christians had,  however,
    always  faced  discrimination  in   schools,   colleges,   playgrounds,
    neighbourhoods, work, trains and buses.  The appellant  became  a  full
    time teacher at St John's after her graduation and was  well  known  in
    the local community.


    5. She described the incident at the school during her brother's  class
    in October 2010 when he had claimed that all humans and prophets except
    for Jesus had sinned and consequently upset his Muslim  students.  That
    evening when he was out, a group of men and women came  to  the  house.
    They were parents of some of the students and  also  religious  leaders
    from a local mosque. They verbally abused the family  and  demanded  to
    know  AK's  whereabouts.  They  slapped  SK's  parents.  SK  tried   to
    intervene. At that stage one man told her she should convert  to  Islam
    if she wanted to continue living in Pakistan. They were warned to  stop
    teaching Christianity. Neighbours gathered round and said that they had
    known the appellant's parents for a long time and knew that they  would
    dishonour any religion. The group then left. AK was called and told not
    to come home. SK remained at home.


    6. On 7 November SK went out shopping. On her way, she was  stopped  by
    four men from the Sipah-i-Sahaba.  One of them,  MAS,  had  a  pair  of
    scissors and cut a few inches off her hair. He showed her a  bottle  of
    acid and a razor and said that if she refused to marry  him,  he  would
    shave her head and burn her face.  They  hit  her,  made  her  say  she
    believed in God and his last Prophet and blew in her face. One man took
    off the cross she was  wearing.   Her  mother  and  sister-in-law  then
    appeared and the men ran away. She was  taken  to  the  hospital.  That
    evening after she had left the hospital, the  appellant  went  by  taxi
    with her father to her aunt's house a half hour away.


    7. On 24 November 2010 SK went to visit her cousin who lived  near  by.
    On her way five men approached  her  on  three  motor  bikes.  MAS  was
    amongst them and tried to force her onto his bike by pulling  her  hair
    and arms. He told her he was going to marry her, he hit her and sprayed
    something in her face. He showed her a razor and bottle of acid. People
    gathered around. A group of Christian Scouts happened to be passing by,
    stopped and intervened. The men then  "ran  away".  The  appellant  was
    taken to the hospital and her parents came to see her. She stayed there
    overnight and then returned to her  aunt's  house.  She  then  took  an
    overdose of pills but told her aunt and  was  made  to  throw  up.  Her
    parents then made arrangements through a priest to relocate her outside
    Karachi.


    8. On 10 December SK went to live with a Christian social worker called
    Emmanuel Nawab. When he heard some people had visited the  village,  he
    grew afraid that his house would be attacked and made arrangements  for
    her to go to a village in Sialkot. She stayed there from 30 December to
    10 January and then returned to Karachi for her visa. She was  told  by
    her father that she and her brother were being searched  for  and  that
    the situation at the school was bad as children were not attending.


    9. Since her arrival SK has had contact with her parents on a number of
    occasions and  has  been  told  that  the  extremists  are  continually
    searching for then at the houses of their relatives  and  in  churches.
    Her parents left the family house and were in hiding in various places.
    She was told that an FIR complaint was lodged on 27 March 2011  by  MAS
    and that the police raided the family house on 29  March.  On  3  April
    2011, her father went to see Rev.  Razzaq  Innayat  and  asked  him  to
    investigate the matter at the police station. The  Reverend  then  told
    SK's father that she and AK had been accused of blasphemy.  The  school
    had closed.
    10. The attack on the family on 21 October 2010 had  been  reported  to
    the police but the authorities were unhelpful.


    Statement of 22 August 2011


    11. In this statement the appellant maintained  that  education  was  a
    high priority within her family and they wanted to provide children  of
    every faith with the good education. On that basis the  family  founded
    St  John's  grammar  high  school  in  2001,  with  registration  being
    completed in 2003. The whole family was involved in running the  school
    and they lived next to it. She and AK were involved  in  the  teaching,
    she was employed full time and her brother on a part-time basis.


    12. In the evening of the 21 October 2010, a hostile  group  of  people
    consisting of about twenty men and six  women  gathered  outside  their
    home. When her father opened the door, she recognised the  majority  as
    belonging to the local mosque who were members  of  the  Sipah-i-Sahaba
    whilst the others were parents of some of  their  students.  They  were
    looking for AK and searched all the rooms. They slapped her parents and
    when she intervened to shield them, they started to hit her  and  punch
    her. They said that she would have to convert to Islam and  the  leader
    of the group, MAS, would marry her. They accused AK of blasphemy.  Some
    of the neighbours then arrived and calmed the  group  down.  They  then
    left. Her father contacted AK on his mobile phone  and  warned  him  to
    stay away. He went to stay with  their  grandmother.  She  remained  at
    home.


    13. On 7 November 2011 she went out shopping. Having gone just a  short
    way she was attacked by MAS and three of his men. They cut 4 inches off
    her hair and she was given a sheet of  paper  containing  a  conversion
    statement which they wanted her to read. They slapped and punched  her.
    She was shown a bottle of acid. Suddenly her mother and sister  in  law
    came running down the street and the group ran away. She was  taken  to
    the hospital. From there she went to stay with her aunt.


    14. A few weeks later she decided she needed to  go  out  to  get  some
    fresh air and started walking to her cousin's house. But within minutes
    three motorbikes drove towards her. The driver of one of them was  MAS.
    He tried to drag her on his bike by pulling her hair and arms. He  said
    he was going to marry her. He sprayed something in her eyes and  showed
    her a small bottle of acid as well as a sharp razor. She screamed and a
    group of Christian scouts who happened to be passing  by  came  to  her
    rescue. She was taken to hospital and the  next  day  returned  to  her
    aunt's house.


    15. On 10 December 2012 her parents, with the help of  a  local  pastor
    called Justin Bhatti, made arrangements for her to  go  and  live  with
    Emmanuel Nawab, a Christian social worker. She spent most of  her  time
    indoors. On 30 December 2012 she went to stay in another village  where
    she remained until 10th of January 2011. She then returned  to  Karachi
    to make arrangements for her visa and stayed with  Elder  Jawaid  Samad
    Khan until 25th of March 2011. She was reunited with her brother at the
    airport when they left the country.


    16. Two weeks after their arrival here their  parents  told  them  that
    their houses been raided on 29 March and that MAS  had  lodged  an  FIR
    against the two of them.


    17. They had been provided with accommodation  by  Rev.  Isaac  William
    since their arrival here.  They  had  met  his  wife  a  few  times  in
    Pakistan. They recalled he lived in the UK and after their arrival here
    they called him and asked for his help.


    Asylum interview of 21 June 2011


    18. SK confirmed her reliance on the above statement  prepared  by  her
    solicitors. She said that her parents a sister and a  brother  remained
    there and were living in the Punjab. They spoke on  the  telephone  but
    "are usually crying about the  situation"  so  she  did  not  know  the
    details of their whereabouts. She and her brother were living in the UK
    with Rev. Isaac William whom she had known from Pakistan  and  who  was
    with the Great Commission Evangelical  Church.  He  had  been  told  by
    Pastor Bhatti in Pakistan that they would be coming  here.  Her  father
    had funded their trip. She was going to study for a diploma in Business
    and management at a college in Edgware. Her brother intended  to  study
    at the same college. They had no intention of claiming asylum  at  that
    stage but two weeks after their arrival they  were  informed  by  their
    father of the blasphemy accusations against them. The accusations  were
    made by the Sipah-i-Sahaba.


    19. SK said that AK had taught English at the family school, St  Thomas
    Grammar High School. Her father owned the school which  was  registered
    in August 2003 but had been a primary school since  2001.  Her  brother
    had been teaching "Chapter Christmas Carol" on 21 October 2010. She did
    not know if he had been teaching from  a  particular  book.  There  had
    never been any problems previously. That evening  about  twenty  people
    including six women came to their house,  grabbed  her  father  by  the
    collar, slapped her mother, tore  their  Christian  calendar,  broke  a
    photograph of Jesus, broke a cross and pulled her  hair.  The  incident
    lasted about 15-20 minutes. Only she  and  her  parents  were  at  home
    although normally both her brothers, their wives and  sons  also  lived
    there.  An attempt was made to report the incident to  the  police  the
    following morning but they did not register an FIR.


    20. On  7 November 2010, SK went to the shops but on her  way  she  was
    stopped by four boys on bikes. One of them was MAS  who  demanded  that
    she marry him. They cut her hair, hit her, showed her razor blades  and
    acid and threatened to  shave  off  her  eyebrows  and  hair.  A  Hindu
    neighbour saw the incident and called SK's mother and sister-in-law. As
    soon as they arrived, the boys fled.  She was  taken  to  the  hospital
    where she stayed an hour. She then returned home.


    21. SK then said that she had gone from  the  hospital  to  her  aunt's
    house. Her father had sent her there in a taxi.


    22. On 24 November she went to visit her cousin but was stopped by five
    men on motor bikes, including MAS. He had a paper  with  him  which  he
    wanted her to sign. He slapped and punched her and sprayed an  irritant
    in her eyes. She screamed and a passing group of Christians came to her
    aid. The leader argued with the men and they left. He took her  to  the
    hospital where she spent the night. The next day her  father  took  her
    back to her aunt's.


    23. Whilst at her aunt's house, SK took 4 or 5 blood  pressure  tablets
    and felt drowsy. Her aunt found her and gave her  something  to  drink.
    She stayed a month with her aunt. On 9 December her father took her  to
    Sialkot. She stayed there with Emmanuel Nawab and then on  30  December
    she went to stay with Rev. Pervaiz in a village and on 12 January 2011,
    returned to Karachi where she remained with Elder  Jawaid  Samand  Khan
    until her departure on 25 March.


    24. Two weeks after her arrival here, her father told her  an  FIR  had
    been registered. He had a copy.


    25. Since her arrival she  had  been  attending  the  Yahweh  Christian
    Fellowship in Tooting. Her pastor was Rev. Noel and she attended  every
    Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday.


    26. She feared she would be forced to marry and  convert  to  Islam  on
    return. Her mother had told her the family had scattered and  that  the
    school had closed down.


    27. In a letter dated 29 June 2011, amending answers the appellant gave
    at her interview, her representatives  stated  that  the  name  of  the
    family school was St John's and not St Thomas,  that  her  brother  had
    been teaching Charles Dickens' novel A Christmas Carol  to  his  class,
    that the people who came to her house on 21 October were parents of the
    students, people from the local mosque  and  members  of  the  Sipah-i-
    Sahaba, that she had not provided all the details of what had  happened
    that night, that her father had  gone  to  Korangi  police  station  to
    report the incident and that pressure was put on her to sign a marriage
    certificate when she was attacked. It was also said that  MAS  was  not
    the leader of the Sipah-i-Sahaba but of the group  that  attacked  her.
    She had confused the dates she spent with her aunt; she had  been  with
    her from 9 November until 9 December. She  had  not  been  attacked  in
    Sialkot or Buttar Village because she did not go out of the house.


    Undated Statement


    28. This statement, although undated,  was  prepared  for  the  present
    appeal hearing.


    29. SK confirms that she was brought  up  in  a  Christian  family  and
    learnt Christian values and education from a young age. The family were
    members of St Andrew's Church. She recalled  attending  Sunday  School,
    participating in Christian dramas, debates and speeches, taking part in
    a youth group and being a member of a choir. She attended  Bible  class
    with her father and learnt the scriptures,  psalms  and  proverbs.  She
    also visited other churches.


    30. Whilst studying optometry, SK helped out with religious classes for
    the Christian students at the  family  school.  She  also  helped  with
    English classes. She would tell them stories from the Old and  the  New
    Testament and from the Bible and they would perform the  stories  as  a
    group.


    31. SK and AK came to the UK  due  to  the  persecution  they  suffered
    because of their faith. They came here to study in the  hope  that  the
    situation would calm down but on 29 March their father informed them of
    the raid on their house by the police and of the registration of an FIR
    against them on blasphemy charges and the  pronunciation  of  a  fatwa.
    Subsequently, they claimed asylum.


    32. They stayed here with Rev. Isaac William and  attended  the  Yahweh
    Christian Fellowship where they met Pastor Noel.  He  subsequently  met
    their parents in Pakistan when he visited there on a mission.


    33. SK had also been attending Norwood Church and in  April  2011  gave
    testimony in Church about her past sufferings.


    34. After AK left Rev. William's home, she too did not want to stay and
    be a burden on him. She was introduced to Golding's Church in  Loughton
    by a Pakistani Christian missionary and Pastor Jeremy Sandy offered  to
    support her and provide her with  accommodation.  She  became  involved
    with that church,  assisting  Sunday  school  teachers  with  children,
    helping to clean the church, participating with house  group  meetings,
    prayer meetings,  Bible  classes,  theological  courses  and  Christian
    Women's Conferences.  She also took part in  street  evangelism   which
    she enjoyed the most. She would be unable  to  practise  her  faith  in
    Pakistan. She no longer felt fearful  of  being  attacked,  imprisoned,
    forced to convert or to marry. She had discovered a talent  of  working
    with children. She4 would have been unable to develop in  Pakistan  due
    to the fatwa. She could not change her name as then she would be unable
    to use her qualification. She would always be at risk as a lone  woman.
    If she was with her family, they would be at risk. She had strengthened
    her faith since arriving here and wished to share it with others.


    Oral evidence


    35. The second appellant adopted her witness  statement  and  confirmed
    reliance on its contents.  She said as a Christian woman, she would  be
    tortured until she converted to Islam. She said  she  could  pray  here
    freely and peacefully; that was not possible in  Pakistan.  When  asked
    whether she would cover her head in Pakistan, she questioned why, as  a
    Christian, she should have to.


    36. In re-examination she stated that she had never  covered  her  head
    whilst in Pakistan. She had attended St Andrews Church on Sundays.  She
    was in contact with her parents but not often as they were  in  hiding.
    She did not know where they were, not even which city  they  lived  in,
    but the Bishop was taking care of them. She was infrequently  in  touch
    with her older brother as it was not safe. She did not  know  where  he
    was. AK's wife was with her own parents but she  did  not  know  where.
    They did not speak although AK did have contact with her.


    37. The appellant was asked whether she spoke  to  others  outside  her
    church about her faith. She replied that she did not as they  were  not
    born again Christians. She said there was no need  to  speak  to  those
    within the church. She then said she did speak to  people  outside  the
    church as she wanted to share Jesus with them. She did this on  Fridays
    when she went out to the High Street with  the  church  and  informally
    whenever prompted by the Holy Spirit. She confirmed that her pastor was
    involved in many ministries, including  the  prison  service.  He  also
    spoke with individuals of other  faiths.  She  was  not  linked  to  an
    Evangelical church in Pakistan and nor were her parents. The Commission
    for the Outreach of Christ had a link  with  Pakistan;  they  had  gone
    there for a programme. She did not  attend  any  Evangelical  meetings.
    When asked whether she had attended any meetings  held  by  Evangelical
    priests, she replied that Rev. William had held one but it was attended
    by Christians only. She had personally met the Reverend in Pakistan and
    had stayed with him when she came here.  He  had  helped  by  providing
    accommodation. She had stayed with him until October 2011; her  brother
    left the house in August 2011.  The  Reverend  was  in  Tooting,  still
    living in the same house.


    38. The appellant said that her first church in the UK was  the  Yahweh
    Fellowship after which she had been to Norwood. She  could  not  recall
    the name of the church and said she had only been there once.  She  had
    never visited her brother's church. Her current church  was  Golding's.
    It was Evangelical. She had not discussed the religious backgrounds  of
    other church goers. She did not like to preach in church  as  that  was
    the job of her pastor. She thought all those at her church  had  always
    been Christians but they were Born Again. She confirmed there were such
    churches in Pakistan and she had met Born Again Christians there. There
    were some in the St Andrew's congregation. There were churches  of  all
    denominations in Karachi.


    39.  The appellant said she had attended  a  Muslim  school  where  she
    matriculated at 15. She then went to a Muslim college after  which  she
    studied optometry at University and obtained a  qualification.   During
    her education, she had faced the problem of other students not  wanting
    to drink from her glass.


    40. She said that her father had been teaching  at  the  family  school
    prior to her birth. It was a Muslim school. When asked what she  meant,
    she said that all schools were Muslim. Islamic studies were compulsory.
    When asked whether there were Catholic schools, she replied there  were
    but students still had to study Islam.  The Bishop had told her that he
    was taking care of their matters. They spoke very often and he provided
    news about her house and her parents.


    41. The appellant said that she would be delighted to become  a  pastor
    if it was God's will. She would have to study theology.  She  had  only
    undertaken a child care course.  She  had  planned  to  study  Business
    Management here. They had called Rev. William prior  to  their  arrival
    and the plan had been to stay with him until they found work. They  had
    not intended to claim asylum. She was living with a church  family  and
    was supported  by  Golding's  Church.  She  could  not  return  as  the
    militants would torture her until she converted to Islam and married  a
    Muslim man. However if she were able to safely return, then  she  would
    resume worshipping at St Andrew's.


    42. She confirmed that she knew there were Born Again Christians at  St
    Andrew's as she had spoken to them. Additionally, her father was a Born
    Again Christian. However she could not return  because  she  wanted  to
    share her faith  with  Muslims  rather  than  evangelising  within  the
    church. She did not know of any church members who evangelised  outside
    the church; she was sure if they had, they would have been killed.


    43. In reply to our questions, the appellant said that she had been  23
    years old when she came here. She said she believed she would be forced
    to convert and to marry a Christian because she had been  targeted  and
    threatened with that before her departure. When asked whether there had
    ever been any previous such incidents, she replied that once  a  friend
    had asked her why she did not convert and gave her a "hard  time".  Her
    older sister had not experienced any such problems. However,  they  had
    all suffered discrimination.


    44. The appellant said that it  was  unsafe  to  speak  to  her  family
    because they were in hiding and she  was  afraid  the  militants  would
    catch them through the telephone network.  She was asked  why  she  had
    never made any  reference  to  problems  in  practising  her  faith  in
    Pakistan until now; she said she had, in her first statement.


    45. She had only attended the first week of her course here.  She  then
    received news of the raid on their home. Her father had called and told
    them of this on the telephone. He had to do that because of the risk to
    their lives. She was asked about the reference to "attending church" in
    Norwood in her statement. She said she had  been  just  once.  She  had
    received the documents for her asylum application by Fed Ex. Her family
    spoke to Rev. Razzaq and he obtained them for her.



















Appendix 4:

Zimran Samuel

Written evidence

Report dated 24 April 2014

1. Mr Samuel sets out an overview of the legal  framework  within  Pakistan.
This  covers  legislation,  the  Constitution,  the  penal  code,   relevant
international treaties and Shari'a law. He  sets  out  the  seven  questions
that he has been asked to address:
   1. How  widespread  are  false  allegations  of  blasphemy  made  against
   Evangelical Christians
   2.       How does the situation compare with previous years
   3.       If there has been a discernible increase, what are  the  factors
   that have      led to this
   4.        How  widespread  is  the  risk  of  forced  conversion  to  the
   appellants as  Evangelical Christians
   5.       To what extent, if any, are societal  prejudices  or  chauvinism
   reflected      by state agencies or agents
   6.       To what extent do  Christian  women  and  evangelical  Christian
   women     and  girls  face  gender  specific  attacks,  mistreatment   or
   hostility from      society and state agencies or agents
   7.       To  what  extent  can  such  women  avail  themselves  of  State
   protection.

2. Before addressing each question in turn, Mr Samuel observes  that  it  is
not unheard of for a book such as A Christmas Carol by  Charles  Dickens  to
be read in schools in Pakistan. He points out that Pakistan has  a  colonial
history and the missionary influence and that  many  of  Pakistan's  schools
including some of those  which  are  the  most  well-known,  have  Christian
origins and founders and that schools may use literature with references  to
Christianity.

3. Whilst making no comment on whether the  claims  of  the  appellants  are
true or not, Mr Samuel notes that  for  someone  who  has  been  accused  of
blasphemy, always perceived to have been accused, repeat violence is  highly
likely.

4. There are  many  denominations  and  traditions  of  Christianity  within
Pakistan and evangelical Christians are not taught to face  a  greater  risk
generally than other Christian groups such as the Church of England  or  the
Catholic Church. Attacks and accusations tend to be sporadic and more  often
than not are related to the political climate or a property or land  dispute
than to a particular form of worship or  tradition  of  Christianity.  There
are  however  cases  where  there  has  been  an  accusation  because  of  a
particular expression  of  faith.  Given  that  evangelical  Christians  are
typically charismatic in their form of  worship  and  have  an  emphasis  on
preaching, this would, on the face of  it,  make  them  more  vulnerable  to
attacks and accusations from extremists. There  is  however  no  pattern  or
logic to the accusations and there are many  thriving  Evangelical  churches
which have been operating in Pakistan for decades  and  have  never  had  an
accusation of blasphemy against their members one of these  is  the  Calvary
charismatic church in Karachi which was established in the 1980s.

5. There have been times when accusations of  blasphemy  and  the  situation
for Christians has been worse than usual. For example,  during  the  initial
invasion of Iraq by  coalition  forces  in  2003  there  were  many  attacks
against Christian churches because  of  the  perception  of  the  war  as  a
crusade by the West.

6. When the Pakistan People's party was in power,  leading  figures  in  the
government spoke out openly against the misuse of the  blasphemy  law  which
led to those figures being threatened  or  killed.  Examples  are  given  of
Sherry Rehman, Pakistan's ambassador to the US, who  in  2010  attempted  to
amend the blasphemy law  by  lodging  a  Private  members  Bill  seeking  to
abolish the death penalty and replace it with a 10 year prison term but  was
made to withdraw the bill from Parliament upon  directions  from  the  Prime
Minister, and of the Governor of Punjab, Salman Taseer, who in January  2011
was assassinated by his bodyguard, Malik  Qadri,  due  to  his  support  for
reform of the law. Qadri was treated as  a  hero  by  many  members  of  the
public and following his conviction of  murder  and  terrorism,  there  have
been rallies demanding his release and the judge who  pronounced  the  death
sentence has  had  to  flee  the  country.  In  March  2011  the  minorities
minister, Shahbaz Bhatti, the cabinets only  Christian  minister,  was  shot
dead  by  gunmen  in  Islamabad.  His  death  was  strongly  linked  to  his
opposition to the blasphemy law and his campaign for its reform. The Tehrik-
i-Taliban, an  Islamist  military  group,  claimed  responsibility  for  his
killing. In 2012 a young Christian girl called Rimsha Masih was arrested  on
blasphemy charges. After some weeks in prison, she was released and fled  to
Canada with her family.

7. Under the PPP government there were some attempts to  protect  Christians
both through political means and through the court process  where  they  had
been subjected  to  false  accusations.  Following  high-profile  cases  and
assassinations,  Pakistan  has,  in  recent  years,  come  under  widespread
condemnation  from  international  human  rights  groups   for   its   rigid
implementation of the blasphemy laws and the manner in which these laws  are
regularly misused against members of minority groups. On 20  May  2010,  the
European Parliament passed a resolution on  religious  freedom  in  Pakistan
raising concern as to the lack of change to the blasphemy laws  and  stating
that they were misused by extremist  groups  and  those  wishing  to  settle
personal scores and had led to an increase of violence  against  members  of
religious minorities. It urged the government to carry out a review  of  the
laws and their current application as well as of section 295C of  the  penal
code which prescribed a mandatory death penalty for anyone found  guilty  of
blasphemy. Concerns were also raised for the safety  of  lawyers  and  human
rights activists who experienced death threats and harassment.

8. With the recent change  of  government  to  the  Pakistan  Muslim  league
(Nawaz), led by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, the  misuse  of  the  blasphemy
laws has not been a priority.  The  government  is  more  conservative  than
traditional than the PPP. However the  Prime  Minister  has  spoken  of  the
importance of minority rights in Pakistan stating  that  the  term  minority
should not be used as it gave a negative  impression.  Mr  Samuel,  however,
expresses scepticism of  the  extent  to  which  the  Prime  Minister  would
protect minorities or effect substantive change. When he was  first  elected
prime minister in 1991 he refused to appeal  the  decision  of  the  Federal
Shariat court which had ruled that  the  penalty  for  blasphemy  should  be
death rather than imprisonment. He was in government as the  chief  minister
of Punjab when the blasphemy laws in their current form will  put  in  place
under the military rule of General Zia Ul Haq in the 1980s. Also  under  his
premiership in 1997, a Christian village was  burnt  down  and  no  one  was
prosecuted for the crime.

9. Over the last year that Nawaz Sharif has been in power, Mr Samuel  is  of
the view that accusations of blasphemy against  Christians  have  increased.
He gives for examples of cases brought before the courts  in  the  last  few
months; a British man jailed for posing as a  Muslim  in  November  2013,  a
British man sentenced to death for blasphemy in January  2014,  a  Pakistani
Christian man  sentenced  to  death  for  blasphemy  in  March  2014  and  a
Pakistani Christian couple sentenced to death for blasphemy in April 2014.

10. With regard to force conversion,  Mr  Samuel  reports  that  such  cases
predominantly emanate from the provinces  of  the  Punjab  and  Sindh.  They
typically involve Christian and Hindu girls from poor  social  and  economic
backgrounds were targeted because of their lower status in society  and  for
sexual violence rather than because of any particular  expression  of  their
faith. There have been instances where Christians are put under pressure  to
convert  because  of  the  strong  outward  expression  of  their  faith  or
following an accusation of blasphemy. Abducted  girls  are  usually  between
the ages of 12 and 25 and following conversion to Islam are married  to  the
abductor or a third party. The numbers are not accurately known as  not  all
cases are reported. Hindu women belonging to the lower castes are  the  most
honourable and considered  sexually  available.  In  some  areas  of  Sindh,
Muslims are exhorted during Friday prayers to convert Hindu women  to  Islam
by marriage. Parliamentarian Saleem Khokhar publicly  spoke  against  forced
conversions in his province of Sindh and subsequently  received  threats  to
his life.

11. Christians are routinely discriminated against by society and the  state
in matters such  as  ownership  of  land  and  property,  employment,  civil
liberties, their  treatment  before  the  courts  and  their  representation
within politics at a local and federal level.  Prejudice  begins  at  school
where there  is  evidence  that  school  textbooks  teach  that  members  of
religious minorities are enemies of Islam or are inferior. When  looking  at
agencies involved in the administration of justice, in the vast majority  of
cases agencies are either unwilling or unable to offer  adequate  protection
to minorities. The case of the Emanuel Brothers  accused  in  July  2010  of
publishing a blasphemous  pamphlet  critical  of  the  Prophet  Mohammed  is
cited. There were several breaches  of  procedure  in  how  their  case  was
addressed and when public protest escalated into riots, the police  response
was slow. Eventually when leaving the magistrates court in Faisalabad  later
that month the brothers were shot dead.

12. In August 2009 eight Christians were burnt alive and a church  and  many
houses were set alight by a mob in the Punjab after rumours that a  copy  of
the Quran had been desecrated. In a subsequent fact-finding mission  report,
the Independent human rights  commission  of  Pakistan  concluded  that  the
attacks were premeditated and that local officials had  been  aware  of  the
threat but had failed to prevent the violence.

13. In December 2008 two Christians were  arrested  and  charged  under  the
provisions of the penal code  pertaining  to  contamination  of  the  Quran.
Following investigations, the case against them  was  dropped  however  they
were rearrested under a different charge and it is rumoured that the  police
gave in to pressure from extremists to  discover  new  evidence.  Both  were
convicted and sentenced to prison.

14. Mr Samuel points out that where there is a dispute over  land,  religion
can be easily brought into it and can result in an accusation of  blasphemy.
Such accusations were also used as a means of  intimidation  and  harassment
or to exact revenge or settle personal or business disputes.

15. As mentioned earlier, there were cases where Christian women  and  girls
were abducted for sexual gratification  rather  than  for  the  purposes  of
being converted, by men who saw them  as  easy  targets  and  more  sexually
available than Muslim women.  As  they  worked  as  cleaners  and  cooks  in
households, they were particularly  vulnerable  to  abuse.  Question  women,
like women of other minorities, were at risk of threats of  sexual  violence
and hostility. They were often put under pressure to  marry  their  accusers
and convert to Islam.

16. The case of Asia Bibi, a Christian from the Punjab,  who  was  convicted
of blasphemy in Lahore  in  2010,  is  cited.  She  was  accused  of  making
derogatory remarks against Muslims and the Prophet. There is also  a  report
of nine Christian trainee  nurses  who  fell  ill  in  August  2012.  It  is
reported that their tea was poisoned.

17. Mr Samuel reports that there is no systematic or  proper  mechanism  for
the protection of women targeted for conversion  or  abduction.  There  were
few adequate safe houses  or  shelters  for  women  to  take  refuge  whilst
accusations  are  resolved.  Law  enforcement  authorities  were   generally
reluctant to register or investigate allegations of forced  conversions.  In
September 2012  panel  constituted  by  the  National  Assembly  recommended
legislating on forced religious conversions in November  2011  the  National
Assembly  passed  the  prevention  of  anti-women  practices  (criminal  Law
Amendment act) 2011 which  rendered  forced  marriages  a  criminal  offence
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years. The change in  law  seems  to
have made little difference to the culture of discrimination against  women.
In cases involving forced conversions, there is evidence  that  courts  came
under public pressure in the form of courtrooms packed with slogan  chanting
crowds. Girls who are recovered from their captors are  taken  to  court  to
verify that they have converted of their own free will  but  the  courtrooms
are packed full of people and judges and lawyers acting in such  cases  come
under public pressure.

18. Many of those accused of blasphemy  are  often  subjected  to  vigilante
violence by their own communities. A 2010 report by the National  commission
for Justice and peace reports that  many  of  the  people  alleged  to  have
committed offences have been killed extra judicially. Judges presiding  over
blasphemy cases and lawyers defending those  facing  blasphemy  charges  are
also  at  risk.  There  is  a  requirement  that  a  senior  police  officer
investigated blasphemy charge prior to the lodging of  a  complaint  however
this is not uniformly enforced and bail is usually denied.

19. Relocation often means that the threats and  risk  associated  with  the
accusation travel with the accused. State authorities  up  more  often  than
not unwilling or unable to offer adequate protection  and  there  is  little
prospect of matters improving in the foreseeable future.

Oral evidence

20. Mr Samuel confirmed the truth of  his  report.  He  added  that  he  had
recently been given the position of a guest lecturer in  the  Department  of
Law and Religion at the School of Oriental and African Studies.

21. He confirmed that Islamic Studies is  compulsory  in  Pakistani  schools
whether private or state but he did not  know  the  exact  make  up  of  the
syllabus. He was not aware  whether  non  Muslims  could  opt  out  of  such
studies.

22.  Speaking of the political climate between 2013 and  the  present  time,
he said that there had been changes since the elections and the  appointment
of the new government. Without wishing to generalise, he  was  of  the  view
that the current government led by Nawaz Sharif was  more  conservative  and
religious than the last. He referred to incidents where several  people  had
spoken out against the blasphemy laws but they had been  killed  or  had  to
flee. The current Prime Minister had been part of the government  which  had
brought in the blasphemy laws. When he subsequently  became  Prime  Minister
for the first time in 1991, Christians had had a difficult time.  There  had
been an increase in attacks and little had been done to help them.  He  said
that since the incidents cited in  his  report  there  had  been  more  high
profile cases. He referred to an incident at the Supreme Court in  Islamabad
in May 2014 where Rashid Rehman,  a  lawyer  defending  someone  accused  of
blasphemy, was shot dead in his office in Multan. When his legal  colleagues
protested, all sixty eight were arrested for blasphemy. He did not have  any
information on what happened since. Nor did he know whether the accused  had
been a Christian. He was not certain there was a link between the trial  and
his death but his colleagues suspected there was and they had been  arrested
on suspicion of blasphemy. This had been reported in the press.

23. Mr Samuel explained that the priority of  the  government  was  to  deal
with terrorism.

24. With regard to society's treatment of Christians, he said that  children
were taught in school that Christians were inferior. This could  be  by  the
teacher or in text books for Islamic studies. Hindus were  also  treated  as
inferior. A common insult was to call them sweepers.  Generally,  they  were
poor and of a lower caste. He agreed that  there  was  no  caste  system  in
Pakistan and he was referring to Christians who undertook  menial  work.  He
said they were perceived as undertaking domestic or household work. Even  if
they were professional lawyers or teachers, the term of sweeper was used  as
a form of abuse. There was a reluctance on the part  of  the  government  to
intervene. Christians had a difficult prior during  the  war  with  Iraq  as
that was described in terms of a crusade.

25. Mr Samuel was asked whether the increase in fundamentalism had  impacted
upon Christians. He replied that was outside his expertise. He was asked  to
comment on state interference with telephone  and  internet  monitoring.  He
stated that too was outside his expertise however  he  was  aware  that  You
Tube was banned in Pakistan and in 2007 when there  was  an  "Everyone  Draw
Mohammed Day", Facebook had been temporarily suspended.

26. Mr Samuel was asked whether it was possible for  Evangelical  Christians
to express their faith in Pakistan. He replied that it was. He  stated  that
Pakistan had  many  churches  of  different  denominations  and  a  colonial
history. Churches existed from that period and were thriving.  Church  goers
could express themselves within their churches especially within the  Church
of England which was also the Church of Pakistan. Evangelicals who liked  to
express themselves in a more vibrant way were not stopped from doing so  but
generally that took place within the church.  There  had  been  rallies  but
they were rare and needed security.  If  by  Evangelical  action  one  meant
praying, singing and teaching, that was  thriving  and  there  had  been  no
clampdown. However if one meant trying to convert a  Muslim,  that  was  not
done. Evangelists were free to express themselves within churches,  such  as
the Calvary Charismatic Church, but not out on  the  streets.  Preaching  in
public in that way would be unsafe; it would quickly lead to  the  formation
of a mob or the gathering of a crowd and would be  seen  as  an  affront  to
Islam. Mr Samuel stated that the  Calvary  Church  was  in  Karachi  but  it
mirrored what he had seen in Lahore and Islamabad. Some were run by  wealthy
Christians or foreign Evangelists. They were  given  private  buildings  and
new members were joining all the time. They could sing and  pray  as  loudly
as they wished. The Calvary Church had been started by a  Korean  pastor  in
the 1980s. More traditional churches  also  existed.  There  was  a  massive
variation. There had been rallies organised by Evangelist  churches  in  the
US.

27. Mr Samuel was asked about less bold attempts  to  share  the  faith.  He
replied that he had been  to  Pakistan  several  times  and  had  spoken  to
individuals of  several  denominations.  He  stated  they  were  allowed  to
express themselves to some extent. Although it could lead  to  uncomfortable
situations, such discussions did take place.

28. Mr Samuel was asked to comment  on  the  discrimination  the  appellants
said they had been subjected to. He said  he  could  not  comment  on  their
personal experiences but he could say  that  people  learned  to  live  with
discrimination from school age. They did not protest as they were afraid  of
being accused of blasphemy.

29. Mr Samuel was asked to expand on the level of difficulty that  would  be
faced in  Christians  wishing  to  express  their  faith.  He  replied  that
Pakistan was an extremely large and  highly  populated  country.  He  stated
that Islamabad  was  a  tolerant  city  with  Christians  working  in  large
organisations, international organisations and in politics  at  the  federal
level. If Christians  wanted  to  speak  out,  then  Islamabad  was  a  more
tolerant place to  do  so  and  to  live  and  work.  In  rural  areas  many
Christians depended upon Muslims for their work  so  they  would  not  raise
complaints. In Karachi, the political climate was variable. It would not  be
so easy to express themselves as in Islamabad. The  Christians  and  Ahmadis
he had spoken to in Islamabad and Lahore allowed him to use their  names  in
his reports  but  those  elsewhere  did  not  agree.  Those  that  relocated
following blasphemy accusations would find that the threats  travelled  with
them. This was where the accusations had gone into the public  domain,  i.e.
in the media or the news. If a picture appeared  in  the  news  then  groups
could pass on information as to where they believed  the  individual(s)  had
moved to. This usually applied to more high profile people but  where  those
with a lower profile had fled their homes, they would not be  able  to  move
their families and so those  relatives  may  face  problems.  In  some  high
profile  cases,  the  security  forces  themselves  carried  out   killings.
Relocation would be possible if an accused could move their  entire  family.
They might have to change their name.

30. Mr Samuel stated that  there  were  seats  reserved  for  minorities  at
central  level.  Christians  had  their  own  small  political  parties  but
normally tried to form alliances with larger parties. Christians  were  also
represented at the local level and seats  were  reserved  for  them  in  the
Provincial Assembly. The Member of the Provincial Assembly for  Baluchistan,
a Christian, was however recently killed.  There  had  been  a  Ministry  of
National Harmony set up by the previous government to encourage inter  faith
dialogue  but  that  had  been  dissolved   by   the   current   government.
Nevertheless, there was  dialogue  in  some  areas.  He  was  not  aware  of
Christian television channels.

31. With regard to outward symbols of Christianity, Mr  Samuel  stated  that
crosses could be worn. This would cause no problem in  Islamabad.  It  might
cause some discomfort in Karachi depending on who and where one was.

32. Mr Samuel stated that the situation for Ahmadis was far worse  than  for
Christians. Christians could openly call  themselves  Christians.  Very  few
Ahmadis would speak to him and they would not  disclose  their  names.  They
were not permitted to call themselves Muslims. They  had  no  infrastructure
such as Christians had, in the form of leaders, hospitals and  schools.  The
Jews were also worse off due to ill feeling about Israel.

33. It was true to say that  generally  middle  class,  educated  Christians
experienced fewer problems that their poorer counterparts  but  no  one  was
completely safe not even if they were  well  connected.  Generally  speaking
however, they could escape the problems that other  Christians  might  have.
With regard to single Christian women,  family  support  would  not  support
them if they were accused of blasphemy. It all depended on who  the  accuser
was. He gave an example of a widowed Christian who was  put  under  pressure
to convert to Islam after the death of her husband. She was  a  teacher  and
had family support.

34. Christian literature was available. The Bible could be obtained in  Urdu
and in English. There was also literature available with  Christian  themes.
Some well known schools where children from wealthy families  were  educated
had Christian origins. There was more systematic discrimination in the  more
conservative areas like Peshawar; not so in Lahore and other cities. It  was
difficult to  generalise  about  Pakistan  because  it  was  such  a  varied
country.

35. With regard to the wearing of the veil, Mr Samuel said that many  Muslim
women did not wear the veil. However if one visited a religious place,  then
it was the norm to cover one's head as indeed Christians did in  church.  He
had not seen many women who wore the full veil. There was  more  flexibility
than say, in Afghanistan.

36. Mr Samuel gave examples of discrimination  he  had  come  across.  These
ranged from difficulties in obtaining work or promotion to having to sit  on
the floor rather than on seats in some schools.






































Appendix 5:

Asma Jahangir

Written evidence

Legal Opinion

1. Ms Jahangir sets out the questions that she had been asked to address  in
her legal opinion. These are:
   1. How  widespread  are  false  allegations  of  blasphemy  made  against
   evangelical Christians
   2.       How does this situation compare with previous years
   3.       If there has been a discernible increase what  are  the  factors
   that have      led to this
   4.       how widespread is the risk of forced conversion  to  Evangelical
   Christians
   5.       To what extent, if at all,  is  there  discrimination  faced  by
   Christians and      in which areas of civic life
   6.       To what extent, if any, are societal  prejudices  or  chauvinism
   reflected      by state agencies or agents
   7.       To what extent do  Christian  women  and  Evangelical  Christian
   women     and  girls  face  gender  specific  attacks,  mistreatment   or
   hostility from      society and state agents
   8.       To  what  extent  can  such  women  avail  themselves  of  State
   protection.

2. The legal opinion is described as being  based  on  information  gathered
from credible sources, news  reports  and  legal  facts.  It  addresses  the
actual conditions on the ground for Christians and  the  repercussions  they
face when accused of blasphemy.

3. The account given by the appellants is said to be one  that  follows  the
pattern presented to NGOs and reported in the press. It starts with a  small
rumour or misinterpreted words which are then  reported  to  local  militant
extremist groups who gang together and pass information on to  an  efficient
and effective countrywide network. The police are either sympathetic to,  or
fearful of, these groups.

3. Reports from all sources confirm that religious intolerance and  violence
perpetrated  by  militant  groups  is  on  the  rise.  The   police,   local
administration and  even  elected  representatives  can  be  intimidated  by
religious terrorism.

4. Rimsha, a girl falsely accused of blasphemy, had  to  leave  the  country
even though she had been acquitted by the courts.

5. A Governor of Punjab was killed by his  bodyguard  because  he  expressed
sympathy with a Christian woman, Asia Bibi, who was convicted of  blasphemy.
Those who dare to call  for  reforms  in  the  law  are  threatened.  Former
ambassador  to  the  USA,  Sherry  Rehman,  was  accused  of  blasphemy  for
introducing a Private Members Bill for reform in  the  law.  The  Minorities
Minister was killed for his criticism of the law.

6. The Christian community like other religious minorities in  Pakistan  has
shrunk. It represented 1.69% of the total population in 1998 as  opposed  to
1.59% in 2011. According to the figures given by the  electoral  commission,
there were 2 1/2 million Christian voters in 2005 and 2 million in 2008.  In
2002 an increased number of Christians left the country.  Large  numbers  of
Hindus have migrated to India in the last few years.

7. Violence against minorities has escalated and militant groups  perpetuate
violence with impunity. The response of the government is weak.

8. There is discrimination by the state and society  against  all  religious
minorities including Christians. Divorce for Hindu and Christian couples  is
virtually impossible. Muslim women are not  permitted  to  marry  non-Muslim
men and tensions occur where non-Muslim men  are  suspected  of  associating
with Muslim women. There are reports of abductions of  Christian  women  but
unlike Hindu women, cases of forced conversions are  very  rare.  There  are
reports  of  rape  amongst  Christian  women  and  poorer  women  are   more
vulnerable.  There  is  an  impression  that  Christian   women   are   less
conservative in their approach to sex and therefore seen  as  easy  targets.
There are no figures for rape based  on  the  religious  background  of  the
victim. Christian groups, however, report that  Christian  girls  have  been
raped and targeted because of their faith.

9.  Christians  face  widespread  discrimination  in   social   interaction.
Pakistan has a large number of bonded labourers mostly  from  the  religious
minorities. In Sindh they are predominantly Hindu and  in  Punjab  they  are
Christians.

10.  Christians  face  social  discrimination  and  bias  in  education  and
employment and are often forced into menial jobs. They are  denied  jobs  in
the private and public sectors because of their belief. Many take on  Muslim
names to conceal their religious identity. There were attempts by  Christian
groups to persuade the Prime Minister to  remove  discriminatory  statements
against Christians and other non-Muslims from school textbooks.

11. There is no statutory law in Pakistan against apostasy  however  leaving
Islam has been interpreted as a blasphemous act. Conversions  out  of  Islam
are risky and accusations of blasphemy are  easily  levelled  under  section
295-C of the penal code. There is  no  formal  registration  for  converting
into Islam. Conversions are carried out at mosques and the process is  often
abused. There have been some high profile cases where  minority  communities
have alleged that female members of their families were  forcibly  converted
and married off. This happens more frequently amongst Hindus as  Muslim  men
can marry Muslim, Jewish and Christian  women  but  not  Hindus.  There  are
reports that young Hindu  girls  have  been  forcibly  converted  to  Islam.
Examples are cited. The Human Rights  Commission  of  Pakistan  reported  in
2003 that Ahmadis Hindus, Christians and Sikhs  converted  to  Islam.  There
was a similar report in 2002. Sometimes the  conversions  took  place  under
social pressure and in other  cases  they  were  merely  cosmetic  aimed  at
warding off harassment or to acquire employment. There  is  a  report  of  a
Christian worker in March 2006 being threatened with death  if  he  did  not
convert.

12. The propagation of any  religion  other  than  Islam  is  dangerous  and
illegal; section 295-C could be applied to anyone  expressing  any  form  of
reservation about Islam. Examples of attacks and intimidation in 2006,  2007
and 2008 are cited.

13.  There  were  reports  in  2010  which  suggest  that  non-Muslims   and
particularly Christians were  targeted  because  of  the  war  in  Iraq.  An
example of a young maid servant is cited.

14. In September 2013 a militant group claimed responsibility for a  suicide
bombing in the church in Peshawar. This was said to have  been  carried  out
to avenge the killings of comrades in drone attacks.

15. In 2012 six churches in Karachi were  attacked  and  in  2009  Christian
homes were destroyed and seven people  were  killed  following  an  argument
between a Christian and Muslim.  In  2006  several  churches  and  Christian
homes were destroyed after reports that  a  local  Christian  had  committed
blasphemy. In March 2002 there was an attack  on  a  church  in  Islamabad's
diplomatic enclave when three foreign nationals and a Pakistani  were  among
those killed.  In  August  2002  Christian  school  in  Murree  attended  by
children of  missionaries  and/or  diplomats  was  attacked  and  six  staff
members were killed. It was then decided to close the school for a year  and
reassess the situation. Five other attacks from 2002  are  cited.  In  March
2013 Christian neighbourhood in Lahore was attacked following an  accusation
of blasphemy made against a Christian worker. These examples  are  cited  to
show regular attacks on the Christian population.

16. In 2010 64 people were charged under section 295C. Between 1986 and  the
end of 2010 34  people  accused  of  blasphemy  had  been  extra  judicially
killed. Half of these were non-Muslims.

17. Official statistics show that thousands  of  First  Information  Reports
(FIRs) were registered against people for blasphemy over the years. A  large
number of people of all faiths are accused.

18. Judges who acquit individuals accused of blasphemy can also  come  under
threat.

19. The report concludes with several examples, in no  chronological  order,
of individuals accused of blasphemy who have been killed. Some were  Muslims
who converted to Christianity.

Oral evidence by video link from Lahore.

20. Ms Jahangir confirmed the accuracy of her  written  legal  opinion.  She
had no amendments to make to it. She  confirmed  that  she  was  the  former
president of the Supreme Court Bar Association and  currently  the  director
of the AGHS Legal Aid Cell in Lahore. She was also a  member  of  the  Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan. She interacted with members of the  Christian
community,  worked  with  Christian  NGOs  and  interacted  with   Christian
labourers. She had undertaken some blasphemy  cases  mostly  in  Lahore  but
also in Islamabad.  If  the  cases  were  heard  at  the  Supreme  Court  in
Islamabad, the defendants could come from all over the country.

21. Ms Jahangir stated that about 7000 people a year came to the  office  in
Lahore for assistance. Their religions were not documented.  A  fraction  of
them would be Christians but she could not provide numbers. She  might  have
a dozen Christian  clients  a  year.  She  stated  that  the  situation  had
deteriorated in the  last  few  years,  not  just  for  Christians  but  for
everyone. Religious minorities were seen as infidels.

22. It was put to her that Mr Samuel had suggested that  the  situation  for
Christians was better in Islamabad than in other parts of the  country.  She
replied that she could not make such  a  sweeping  statement.  The  case  of
Rimsha, the Christian girl accused of blasphemy, had been in  Islamabad  and
the Governor of the Punjab had been killed in Islamabad. However,  she  knew
of no cases of forced conversion taking place in Baluchistan.

23. Ms Jahangir confirmed that the cases that she had  referred  to  in  her
report were all documented. Where data was taken  from  the  press,  it  had
been verified. Although there was an  absence  of  references  to  cases  in
2013, that did not mean that there had been no  such  incidents.  There  had
been  some  attacks  on  churches  and  the  government  had  announced   an
investigation into that.

24. With regard to her Christian clients, they  did  not  have  to  go  into
hiding and many lived perfectly well in their  neighbourhoods.  However,  if
subjected to opportunist attacks, no one would come to their aid. There  was
no rationale behind the targeting  of  Christians  by  extremists.  However,
educated,  middle-class  Christians  were  not  as  vulnerable   as   poorer
Christians who lived in ghettos although this did not mean  that  they  were
all safe. Some of her Christian colleagues had been victims of violence.

25. She stated that it was  not  usual  for  Christians  to  preach  by  the
roadside about Jesus where they could become the subject  of  the  wrath  of
extremists or non-tolerant Muslims.

26. Anyone could be accused under the blasphemy laws because  they  were  so
loosely worded. People who converted to Christianity  could  be  accused  of
blasphemy. Section 295C which previously carried the  penalty  of  death  or
life imprisonment now prescribed only the death penalty.

27. Ms Jahangir was asked whether Christian clients faced added risks  as  a
result of coming to seek help. She  replied  that  they  could  become  more
vulnerable as information was easily passed on. It was also unsafe  to  give
legal opinions as she had done.

28. If a Christian woman such as  SK  was  outspoken  about  her  faith  and
wanted to engage people in discussions  about  Christianity,  she  might  be
treated well by some but generally she would be asking for trouble.

29. With regard to relocation, it would depend on the  circumstances  as  to
whether the whole family had to move. It was not easy  to  relocate  as  the
intelligence services could  trace  people  and  many  had  links  with  the
extremist groups. Theoretically, relocation was  possible  but  it  depended
upon the individual circumstances and on the receiving community.

30. Ms Jahangir was asked whether single women could go  about  their  daily
business without wearing headscarves. She replied that she did  not  wear  a
headscarf and that was not an issue. Women did not have to wear a  headscarf
at all not even in the villages.

31. Islamic studies were compulsory for all Muslims  in  schools.  Christian
students could take moral science but as they received lower marks  in  that
subject many took up Islamiat (Islamic  studies)  to  improve  their  marks.
This amounted to indirect discrimination.

32. There were a large number  of  English  medium  schools  that  were  not
Christian and also English schools run by Christians  where  anyone  of  any
faith could study. They were also private schools run by Muslim clerics  for
Muslim students; these were the madrassas.  A well-known grammar  school  in
Lahore had been teaching comparative religions and  had  been  reported  but
because of their connections they got away without any problems.

Appendix 6:

Pastor Jeremy Sandy

Written evidence

Undated Statement

1. Pastor Sandy confirmed that SK was a member of Golding's  Church,  having
been introduced by Ernest Kamran, a Pakistani  missionary,  some  two  years
ago. He saw her at church on Sundays and she also helped with  cleaning  and
child care. For some months, she had been helping to hand out  leaflets  and
free books on the street. He believed that Christianity  was  a  fundamental
part of her life and that she would continue with  her  faith  wherever  she
lived. However, it would be easier here as she was not  in  danger.  If  she
returned to Pakistan she would have to "go underground" and  would  find  it
hard to continue as a believer and worshipper.

Oral evidence

2. Pastor Sandy confirmed the truth and accuracy  of  the  contents  of  his
statement. He said he had known SK for three years. He  had  been  a  pastor
for 15 years. Prior to that he had been in the security industry.

3. He said that SK had been  timid  when  she  joined  the  church  but  had
progressed  and  developed  as  a  Christian.  She  attended   services   on
Wednesdays and Sundays. She helped out with jobs that others were  not  keen
on, such as cleaning. She had shown a  good  grasp  of  the  Bible  and  the
Gospel and had a good understanding of Christian doctrine. As her  knowledge
grew, so had her confidence  and  ability  to  speak  and  communicate  with
others. She was able to welcome visitors and was confident  speaking  within
and outside the church. When they had first met and  he  had  taken  her  to
arrange accommodation, she had been fearful of living alone. There were  not
many Asian people in Loughton.

4. Pastor Sandy was asked about the importance  of  collective  worship.  He
explained that Golding's was an Evangelical church. However  Evangelism  was
not confirmed to Sunday mornings; it encompassed  one's  whole  life.  There
was encouragement to pray at home and to engage with the local community  so
as to enhance worship by one's actions, deeds and  lifestyle.  Work  outside
the church was very important. It was important to be community  minded  and
embrace all cultures. Evangelism meant  living  life  in  such  a  way  that
others were blessed as well as being able  to  communicate  teachings  about
Jesus. Pastor Sandy was not of the view that SK had been  well  equipped  to
evangelise previously as she had been timid and traumatised.

5.  The  congregation  at  Golding's  was  made  up  of  a  diverse  mix  of
Pentecostals, Methodists and Baptists amongst others. Recently a  Hindu  had
attended. There had been one conversion 5-6 years ago; an elderly man of 70-
80 from Pakistan.

6. The church had evangelistic  literature.  Sometimes  they  would  take  a
table out to the High Street and invite passers by to have  a  look  and  to
enter into discussion, not necessarily about religion but in the  hope  that
it would lead back to faith.

7. The church operated under the umbrella of the Fellowship  of  Independent
Evangelical churches. Five hundred of  those  churches  were  in  Australia.
They were required to follow guidelines from the  Charity  Commission.  FIEC
was prescriptive about how the Bible should be  interpreted  but  not  about
who was approached for evangelising purposes.

8. SK had  been  brought  to  the  church  by  Ernest  Kamran,  a  Pakistani
missionary (who was present in court on Day 1 of the hearing).  He  went  to
Pakistan to evangelise. Golding's was also involved with ;  it  was  helping
to build a school in a village outside Lahore  and  they  had  contact  with
church leaders and pastors there. He did not have any information  about  St
Andrew's Church nor had  he  heard  of  the  Great  Commission  Outreach  of
Christ.

9. Pastor Sandy clarified that missionaries  who  went  to  Pakistan  helped
Christians there with their knowledge of the Bible  rather  than  trying  to
convert non Christians. Those Christians were generally of  low  income  and
had difficulty in  managing  to  travel  to  the  cities  for  guidance  and
knowledge so the missionaries went there to help them. The  missionary  work
had been ongoing for some four or five years. There was one  incident  where
they had been on a bus and a gunman robbed  all  the  passengers.  No  other
problems had been encountered. They had to obtain  visas  to  go  and  these
were always granted. They disclosed the  purpose  of  their  visits  to  the
authorities. Pastor Sandy had not been to Pakistan. He confirmed there  were
established Catholic churches in Pakistan.

10. Pastor Sandy  confirmed  that  SK  had  worked  at  handing  out  church
leaflets. He had not however been present at the time but there were  people
in charge of the tables and only those  considered  able  to  properly  help
were permitted to do so. SK helped out with the table on  a  regular  basis.
The Church did not expect members of  the  congregation  to  undertake  this
type of activity;  its  main  aim  was  to  encourage  personal  independent
Evangelism  where  members  shared  their  faith  as  part  of   their   own
lifestyles.  People  were  not  berated  for  not  wanting  to  engage  with
strangers. They were encouraged to live a good life.

Appendix 7:

Pastor David Taylor-Black

Written evidence

Statement dated 17 June 2014

1. Pastor Taylor-Black confirmed he was the Assistant Pastor at Stockton  on
Tees Baptist Tabernacle and an accredited minister of the Baptist  Union  of
Great Britain.

2. He had known AK since he started attending church  two  years  ago.  They
met at church at least once a week and  had  become  good  friends.  He  was
aware of the problems AK had encountered in Pakistan.

Oral evidence

3. Pastor Taylor-Black confirmed the  contents  of  his  statement  and  his
position as a Baptist pastor at Stockton  on  Tees  Baptist  Tabernacle.  He
also confirmed the accuracy of Pastor Waugh's statement. He  stated  he  had
been an accountant but was then introduced to Jesus in his mid twenties.  He
obtained a degree in theology and had been at Stockton  on  Tees  Tabernacle
for seven years. He undertook work in the church and in  the  local  mission
in the town.  The church also had missions in  Kenya  and  Uganda  and  sent
people there to serve.

4. Pastor Taylor-Black said he had known AK for two and  a  half  years.  He
saw him weekly; he was a regular worshipper and part of the Life  Group.  He
also served in the church's technical department. There were  about  400-500
members in the congregation and there were three Sunday services. They  made
use of microphones, the internet and  audio  equipment.  AK  volunteered  to
assist with this equipment. He wanted to do more but was unable to  work  in
the coffee house due to a lack of permission to work. He  was  given  tracts
to put through letterboxes in the locality. He helped to publicise a  recent
Pentecost event at the church. He enjoyed cricket and  had  played  in  some
church matches.

5.  Pastor Taylor-Black explained that faith was not about  getting  a  seat
in Heaven but in supporting the local community. One had to  give  practical
help to the community; the gospel had to be spread not just by words but  by
deeds. When asked to give examples of how the  appellant  carried  out  that
service, Pastor Taylor-Black said he had not walked along side  him  but  he
had heard that he had tried  to  discuss  Jesus  with  his  housemates.  The
appellant had been on a journey; at first there  had  been  a  fear  of  the
unknown but now he had greater  trust  in  Jesus  and  his  faith  had  been
strengthened.
6. Pastor Taylor-Black explained that Christians  were  less  likely  to  be
ridiculed by others where they were willing  to  give  practical  help.  One
could not always just open up discussions  of  faith.  There  had  to  be  a
demonstration of genuine care and concern  for  the  well  being  of  others
prior to a discussion about Jesus.

7. The church had a good relationship with churches of  other  denominations
in the area. Stockton welcomed asylum seekers of which there were many  from
Iran. When Pastor Taylor-Black first arrived in the area, it was  98%  white
middle class, but that was changing. There  had  been  sixteen  baptisms  of
Iranians in the last three years.

8. Baptisms were carried out after a validation process by a  pastor.  Those
who professed a relationship with Jesus met up with a  pastor  who  assessed
if that claim was true. Pastor Taylor-Black had  interviewed  one  candidate
and two or three had been interviewed by others. These could be  people  who
were already Christians but had accepted Jesus or those coming from  another
faith. The requirement was that someone should have changed their  life.  At
the Pentecost event held recently, several public  baptisms  were  performed
and the church had to prevent photographs being taken of one  baptism  of  a
former Muslim so as to prevent the information from  getting  to  the  man's
family. They had not come across any they had to  turn  away  although  they
had heard of another church that had.  AK had been on a baptismal course  so
he knew what he was agreeing to.

9. The church had charitable  status  and  was  an  independent  institution
although it was associated with the Baptist Union. The Union  assisted  with
resources and current affairs but each church was autonomous. There  was  no
inter faith dialogue.  However there  was  a  soup  kitchen  attached  to  a
church that was situated near a mosque and many Iranians came to the  church
through this route.

10. AK had told Pastor Taylor-Black of his fears in Pakistan. He  could  not
recall the denomination of the church AK had attended in Pakistan.

11. Stockton on Tees Baptist  Church  did  evangelise  and  the  gospel  was
preached at the recent Pentecost event.  The missions in  Kenya  and  Uganda
were there to serve  the  Christian  community  whether  they  be  Anglican,
Methodist or anything else. They built  schools  and  hospitals  and  taught
them about the love of Christ.  The Christian faith could be described as  a
church without walls. They were there to serve the people  around  them  and
would not shut their doors to anyone. Catholics tended  to  keep  themselves
to themselves, perhaps due to theological differences.

Appendix 8:

Bishop Dr Ijaz Inayat Masih

Written evidence

Statement dated 6 March 2014

1. Rev. Masih confirmed he was  a  Bishop  within  the  Church  of  Pakistan
residing at Bishop House, Holy Trinity Cathedral in  Karachi.  He  spoke  of
World Vision in Progress, an  NGO  working  with  those  charged  under  the
blasphemy  law  of  section  295-C  and  other   Christians   who   required
assistance. They were assisted by Rescue Christians.

2. In February 1997 he was imprisoned for one month for baptising  a  Muslim
in Lahore. He claimed not to have received a fair trial  and  to  have  been
held in bad conditions in prison.

3. Reference was made to the case of Salamat Masih in  1997  when  a  Lahore
High Court Judge was killed for  releasing  the  "victims".   Recently,  the
District Court in Islamabad was  attacked  and  eleven  people  including  a
judge were killed.

4. In August 2012 Rev. Masih was interviewed by Channel 4  in  the  UK  with
regard to the incident of a teenage girl called Rimsha  who  was  framed  by
the clergy over a land dispute.

5. He was  on  record  for  speaking  out  against  the  abuse  suffered  by
Christians and had been threatened many times by  extremists  which  limited
his movement within the city.

6. He knew the appellants' parents who were members of one of his  parishes.
When the October 2010 incident occurred, he was contacted by them. He  spoke
to Elders in the community but was unable to calm things down.  The  parents
left their home around March 2011 and were living off their  pensions  in  a
safe house provided by the church.  They were  afraid  that  they  would  be
targeted  because  their  children  had  been  accused  of  defaming  Islam.
Currently there were some 20  Christian  families  living  in  safe  houses,
mainly in the Punjab. Many had left the country and  were  "in  transit"  in
Thailand and elsewhere.

7. He was of the view  that  the  appellants'  parents  could  not  relocate
because they would  be  recognised.  The  church  was  providing  them  with
protection.

8. AK was spotted when out on the road in the Defence View area  of  Karachi
however had time to escape because the main road was higher  than  the  side
lanes.

9. Christians were generally treated badly and were looked down  upon.  Like
Ahmadis, Hindus, Shias and other minorities, Christians were persecuted  and
a number of forced  marriages  were  taking  place.   Television  programmes
glorified the killing of Christians and the situation was worse amongst  the
uneducated.  Many Christians had moved to Sri Lanka and Thailand.

Statement dated 19 June 2014

10. Rev. Masih confirmed that he was sharing  the  role  of  the  Bishop  of
Karachi with Sadiq Daniel.

11. He was elected as Bishop of Karachi in 1997 but a rival faction  blocked
his consecration ceremony and litigation was  ongoing  through  the  courts.
In 2002, Rev. Sadiq Daniel declared himself the Bishop of Karachi  but  this
was not done in accordance with constitutional procedure.

Oral evidence by video link from Karachi, Pakistan.

12. Rev. Masih confirmed  he  resided  at  the  Holy  Trinity  Cathedral  in
Karachi and that his two statements were true  and  accurate.  He  currently
preached to a  congregation  at  St  Michael's  Church  in  Manzoor  Colony,
Karachi as well  as  in  Baluchistan.  The  two  formed  one  diocese  which
consisted of many churches, thirty parishes and thousands of members.

13. The appellants' parents contacted him when  they  had  problems  and  he
handed them over to trustworthy people who  provided  logistic  help.  Legal
aid could also be made available to those that required it.

14. Rev. Masih said that a number  of  lawyers  had  to  flee  Pakistan  for
representing Christians in blasphemy cases. There had been  an  increase  in
the number of blasphemy accusations in the last  year.  The  atmosphere  was
charged and people accused those they did not like of blasphemy as  an  easy
way of getting rid of them. Christians were labelled as infidels.

15. He started assisting the appellants' parents  in  the  last  quarter  of
2010. Their home was attacked in March 2011 but he had  helped  them  before
that by seeking to calm things down. They were not in hiding but were  in  a
safe house. They used to be government servants and had enough to  live  off
from their pensions.

16. With regard to the  safety  of  the  appellants  as  active  Evangelical
Christians, he said anyone could be at risk; it did not matter whether  they
were Ahmadis, Christians or Shias or whether they were Evangelical or not.

17. He was asked for his comments on Mr Samuel's  observation  of  Islamabad
as a relatively safe place. He replied it  was  comparatively  safer  but  a
Member of Parliament had recently been shot there so he would not call it  a
safe place. He suggested that Mr Samuel did not know about the situation  in
Pakistan. When asked if the appellants' parents would  need  to  live  in  a
safe house if they moved to Islamabad, he said that the situation would  not
change for them as they would be recognised wherever they went and if  their
pictures were on the net, they could easily be found. He explained  that  by
a safe house, he meant one that could not be traced by extremists. He  later
explained this was a house with no name plate.

18. It was put to the Bishop  that  Mr  Samuel  had  suggested  that  poorer
Christians were more vulnerable. He replied they were equally targeted.  The
MP for Baluchistan had been killed by his own bodyguard.  He said  that  his
church assisted men, women and families.

19. When asked to comment on the situation  for  Christian  women,  he  said
that there  were  many  reports  of  how  Christian  and  Hindu  women  were
abducted, made to convert to Islam and forced into marriage.  Education  and
class made no difference at all.

20. It was pointed out that he was very outspoken and he was  asked  whether
he feared for his own safety. He replied that he  did  not.  He  could  have
sought asylum somewhere but was committed to remaining with his own  people.


21. The Bishop confirmed that  he  knew  the  appellants'  brother.  He  was
living apart from his parents at the present time. He  could  only  disclose
his whereabouts on Skype. He said that nothing had happened  to  him  or  to
his parents; the incident had involved AK and as a result the  whole  family
had suffered. The brother in Pakistan met up with his parents from  time  to
time and they also attended church. The appellants were  able  to  speak  to
their parents on the telephone but the lines were not registered to them  so
there was no risk of identification.

22. It was confirmed that AK's wife  and  son  remained  in  Pakistan.  They
lived with the wife's family in Karachi. For a few months they had lived  in
Quetta but then returned home  when  "things  were  easier".  They  used  to
attend St Andrew's but now went to another church in another parish.

23. The Bishop said that they worked through societies  that  could  not  be
identified such as the two identified by Mr Walker  -  The  Pakistan  United
Church Society  and  the  Great  Commission  of  Evangelical  Churches  and,
additionally, World Vision in  Progress,  Rescue  Christians  and  Christian
Solidarity. World Vision took care of 80% of blasphemy  cases.   There  were
thousands of asylum seekers in Thailand, Sri Lanka and Iran.

24. The appellant's parents' school was still operational but  someone  else
was looking after it and the parents received their share  of  the  profits.
It was a hidden partnership.

25. With regard to his own period of a month in prison in 1997,  the  Bishop
said that his family bribed the complainants to  withdraw  their  statement.
He moved from Lahore to Karachi and it took a year to resolve the matter.

26. With regard to communication by Skype, he said they used someone  else's
ID to communicate.

27. When asked how the appellants'  parents  would  be  recognised  if  they
relocated, he said that they had worked and had a lot  of  interaction  with
people throughout their lives and so would be  recognisable.  Those  accused
of blasphemy were not safe anywhere. He realised they had not  been  accused
but maintained that people had been burnt alive in their own homes.  He  was
asked how they obtained their pensions if they were  in  a  safe  house.  He
said that the pensions were paid into their accounts and he was able  to  go
to the ATM with their cards and withdraw cash for them.





















Appendix 9:

Pastor Waugh

Undated Statement

1. Although undated, this statement was prepared by Pastor  Waugh  for  this
appeal hearing.

2. Pastor Waugh confirms he is the  senior  minister  of  Stockton  on  Tees
Baptist Tabernacle and an accredited minister of the Baptist Union of  Great
Britain. He confirms he has known AK for a little over two years. They  have
been members of the same small group for 18 months and meet at  one  of  the
church member's homes most Wednesday evenings where they pray together.

3. The Pastor confirms that AK attends the church every  Sunday  and  serves
as one of their audio-visual team  members,  operating  the  computer  which
projects the words of songs during worship. Recently he helped with  outdoor
outreach events at Christmas, singing and was ready  to  speak  with  people
about the basics of the Christian faith. The  Pastor  confirms  that  he  is
aware that AK has conversations on religious matters with the men he  shares
his house with most of whom are from other  faiths;  these  discussions  are
designed to encourage them to accept Jesus. Pastor Waugh confirms  that  the
Christian faith is  very  important  to  AK  and  that  he  is  a  committed
Christian. He expresses the belief that AK  will  remain  devoted  to  Jesus
Christ wherever he lives including Pakistan. Since the Christian  faith  was
a missionary faith, the Pastor considers that AK would consider  it  a  need
and a duty to carry on sensitively  encouraging  others  to  have  faith  in
Jesus. He concludes that AK would only be able to  continue  his  activities
as a free person for a short time  before  falling  foul  of  the  blasphemy
laws.















Appendix 10:

Reverend Stuart Rodney Windsor

Report dated 5 March 2014

1.  Rev.  Windsor  writes  as  a  representative  of  Christian   Solidarity
Worldwide (CSW). He sets out his qualifications,  expertise  and  experience
as an expert witness in asylum hearings. He confirms his  involvement  in  a
number of high-level blasphemy and apostasy cases.

2. He details his friendship with Group Captain  (retired)  Cecil  Chaudhry,
now deceased, who received a  posthumous  President's  award  for  Pride  of
Performance. He was a Christian and a  famous  Pakistan  Air  Force  fighter
pilot who,  20  years  ago,  was  denied  promotion  by  President  Zia.  He
resigned, became the principal of St Antony's College in Lahore and  devoted
his spare time to fighting against human  rights  abuses;  focusing  on  the
blasphemy laws. He was a founder of the minority parties,  made  many  trips
abroad and gave  expert  witness  statements  at  a  number  of  asylum  and
immigration hearings. He campaigned for Christians and others who  had  been
unjustly charged under sections 295-A, B and C of  the  penal  code  or  had
been accused of apostasy. Rev. Windsor was involved with him  in  this  work
and continues to do this.

3. He points out that although there  is  no  law  against  conversion  from
Islam in Pakistan, the perception is those who leave Islam  and  convert  to
Christianity have blasphemed. In such an event the normal procedure  is  for
a local Islamic cleric to be informed. He then sanctions  a  fatwa  and  the
family will be honour bound to carry out  the  killing  of  their  relative.
Alternatively the convert knows that he must leave for his  own  safety  and
generally has no option but to seek refuge elsewhere.

4. Rev. Windsor is of the opinion  that  extremists  and  clerics  have  the
capacity to trace people within the country. Once a blasphemy case comes  to
court, it becomes well-known and the blasphemer has no chance of a fair  and
free life in Pakistan and will always face the possibility of being  killed.
All Pakistani citizens carry identity cards which they have  to  produce  to
rent housing. The police carry their records on computers and  they  can  be
easily traced via their ID cards.

5. Rev. Windsor confirms that he has been asked to comment on the  following
questions:
   1. Blasphemy in Pakistan and the treatment  of  blasphemers  by  society,
   the community and the authorities
   2.       The possibility of internal relocation
   3.       Sufficiency of State protection
   4.       Specific examples illustrating the above issues.

6. Rev. Windsor confirms that  he  has  met  AK  in  Stockton  on  Tees  and
describes him as a devout and committed Christian  involved  in  the  church
ministry. He describes the case of AK and his sister as a  typical  case  of
discrimination, harassment and physical abuse which arises out  of  the  way
that Christians are viewed in Pakistan. He confirms that he has spoken  with
SK and confirms that she too is a devout  Christian  who  regularly  attends
Golding's church.

7. He states that the blasphemy laws have been used over the last  20  years
by Muslims to settle personal scores with  Christians.  The  Pakistan  Human
Rights  Commission  reports  about  cases  annually  but  there   are   also
unreported cases.

8. He refers to an extremist group, the  Jaish-e-Mohammed,  which,  although
mainly interested in territorial claims over Kashmir, is suspected of  wider
involvement in terrorist and violent actions and may have been  involved  in
the 2002 anti-Christian attacks in Islamabad, Murree  and  Taxila  in  which
two Americans were killed.

9. He  reports  that  Christian  Solidarity  Worldwide  has  seen  from  its
involvement in blasphemy cases that Muslim extremists and  the  intelligence
services have the technical know-how to be able to trace and  locate  anyone
on  their  wanted  lists.  They  have  sophisticated  telecommunication  and
computing networks.

10. There is a reference to Dr NA being unsafe anywhere  in  Pakistan.  This
reference is unexplained.

11. Rev. Windsor then discusses the situation for those Muslims who  convert
to Christianity.

12.  He  sets  out  some  specific  cases  where  internal  relocation   was
insufficient to protect the individuals  from  those  who  were  persecuting
them. These are: a Christian journalist and human rights  activist  who  was
given leave to remain in the UK in 2010, a Muslim businessman  who  owned  a
cafe and bakery in Peshawar, who expressed an interest in  Christianity  and
considered himself to have become a Christian and who was denounced  by  his
former wife in 2009 during the course of a divorce and  child  custody  case
which led to an asylum claim in the UK, a case  in  2010  of  a  Muslim  man
accused of apostasy who was granted asylum in the UK, a Muslim  man  from  a
wealthy and educated family who converted to Christianity  and  was  granted
asylum in 2010, a Muslim student who came to  the  UK  having  converted  to
Christianity in  2001  and  against  whom  charges  were  brought  following
accusations made by his father, a case of a Muslim who  became  a  Christian
in 1998 who was granted asylum because of threats made by his family.

13. Rev. Windsor confirms that  in  18  years  of  undertaking  advocacy  on
behalf of mainly Christian minorities, he  has  never  encountered  adequate
protection for Christians.  He  gives  examples  of  difficulties  faced  by
Christians in 1995, 1997, 2008, 2010, and 2011. Some of these, for  example,
the murder of the Governor  of  the  Punjab,  the  killing  of  the  Federal
Minister of Minorities and the killing of two Christian brothers  outside  a
court are referred to in other reports.

14. In summary the Reverend states that AK and SK have been  accused  via  a
First Information Report of committing crimes under the blasphemy  laws  and
a fatwa was issued against them. Relocation to another part of  the  country
would not be possible because of the ability  of  the  extremists  to  trace
them anywhere in the country. They would have to use identity cards to  rent
accommodation, rent or buy cars, mobile phones and use  bank  accounts.  The
police and the intelligence services share information  about  citizens  and
are able to locate mobile phone users. Once a  blasphemy  case  became  well
known locally it would be known throughout the country and  the  blasphemers
would have no chance of a safe life in Pakistan.




















Appendix 11:

The respondent's submissions

1. In  written  submissions,  Mr  Walker  summarised  the  evidence  of  the
appellants and the witnesses. He set out the respondent's position as  being
that Christians and other minorities may suffer discrimination from a  small
population of extremist  Muslims  but  that  the  majority  of  Muslims  are
moderate  and  tolerate  minority  religions,  given  the  long  established
Christian presence in Pakistan. The state offers protection when it can  and
Christians attain positions within all spheres of life and can pursue  their
grievances through  the  courts.  There  is  a  viable  internal  relocation
alternative for a Christian who has to move; the case of  Bishop  Inayat  is
cited as an example. Christian women are not in  general  at  real  risk  of
persecution; although, along with other women of  minority  religions,  they
can face difficulties with regard to abductions and forced conversions.  The
appellants are not at any greater risk now than they  were  when  they  left
Pakistan,  given  their  links  to  proselytising  churches   before   their
departure.

2. In his oral submissions, Mr Walker relied on his submissions.  He  placed
reliance upon the Austrian Fact Finding Mission report and  referred  us  to
sections to support his claim that the police did provide  some  protection,
that most Muslims were moderate, that  there  was  interfaith  communication
and that the Christian community was very active and vocal. He  pointed  out
that Bishop Inayat had been  able  to  move  safely  to  Karachi  after  his
problems in Lahore and had not been forced to go  into  hiding.  Accusations
of blasphemy made against him for converting a Muslim had not  followed  him
to Karachi. Relocation was therefore possible in  large  cities.   The  AFFM
and the COI reports provided a comprehensive overview of the situation.















Appendix 12:

Submissions for the appellants

1. Ms Jegarajah pointed out that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  found  that
those facing blasphemy accusations would  be  at  risk  and  would  find  it
difficult to obtain protection. She submitted that  for  those  individuals,
there was no internal relocation option.

2. Whilst she accepted that not all Christians were at risk, the  issue  was
not a question of numbers but one of variability and this had to  form  part
of  the  risk  assessment.  Ms  Jegarajah  argued  that  the   patterns   of
accusations were variable and attacks were sporadic and it was difficult  to
protect oneself from the arbitrariness of accusations.  She  also  submitted
that non  state  agents  did  not  draw  a  distinction  between  those  who
proselytised and those who  did  not.  It  would,  therefore,  be  wrong  to
distinguish between these groups when giving country guidance.

3. Ms Jegarajah submitted that there  was  institutionalised  discrimination
via the state by way of  the  blasphemy  laws.  She  pointed  out  that  the
Constitution was premised on Islamic values and that this went  towards  the
issue of state protection.

4. With reference to  the  position  of  women,  Ms  Jegarajah  argued  that
Christian women formed a particular social group  and  referred  us  to  the
judgement in Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20. She submitted that it  had  been
found by the House of Lords that women were unprotected  by  the  state  and
she submitted that Christian women faced even more acute problems.

5. Ms Jegarajah relied on the evidence that the appellant's parents were  in
hiding. Whilst appreciating that this was a matter rejected  by  the  First-
tier, she pointed out that the Bishop had given  evidence  in  this  respect
which post dated the appeal hearing  before  the  First-tier.  She  accepted
that the Upper Tribunal would be circumspect in relation  to  evidence  that
had been rejected, but submitted that the Bishop had  given  evidence  which
was relevant to the  risk  faced  by  the  appellants.  He  had  also  given
evidence on the safe house system.

6. Ms Jegarajah submitted that it was difficult to cite figures because  not
all cases were reported. Christians had to behave sensibly and did  not  act
in ways that would get them into trouble. They had to modify  the  way  they
lived their lives and they should not have to do that as per HJ Iran  [2010]
UKSC 31. Christians lived with systematic discrimination  all  their  lives.
Although that did not, in itself, meet  the  threshold  of  persecution,  it
could not be separated from the risk.

7. The experts had given measured evidence and what they said was  supported
by documentary evidence. Mr Samuel had provided  an  extensive  overview  of
the  law.  He  had  referred  to  evangelical  Christians  as   being   very
charismatic. She pointed to sections of  his  report  on  the  deteriorating
situation. She argued that as far as women were concerned,  those  who  were
middle class or professional had the means to  obtain  protection  but  that
did not mean that they were not targets. Christian women were seen  as  more
available. They were also at risk of forced marriage.  With  regard  to  the
inconsistency between Mr Samuel's oral  evidence  on  the  arrest  of  sixty
eight lawyers and the BBC News article, she submitted that he had  not  been
very certain about that part of his evidence.

8. The activities of the appellants in the UK were not disputed.  Both  were
very different people and approached their faith in different ways.

9. We were also referred to Ms Jahangir's report  and  to  the  sections  on
abductions and forced marriages, attacks on churches, blasphemy  accusations
and relocation.

10. Ms Jegarajah referred to the UNHCR guidelines  and,  in  particular,  to
sections on Christians, the current climate,  women,  and  internal  flight.
She referred to the report by CSW which, she  submitted,  was  moderate  and
well drafted. It set out  details  of  the  historical  development  of  the
blasphemy laws and their abuse and  indicated  that  accusations  were  very
arbitrary. The Writenet report was commissioned by the UNHCR  and,  although
it was written in 2009, was useful for evaluating risk. It  is  referred  to
ad hoc and spontaneous violence.

11. Ms Pinder also made submissions. She had  prepared  a  schedule  of  the
oral evidence and took us through this. She  also  replied  to  Mr  Walker's
submissions on the specifics of the evidence given  by  the  appellants  and
their witnesses. She pointed out that the appellants did evangelise  as  was
shown by their actions and that one needed to be cautious with these  terms.
Both of them liked to talk to other people about their faith.  She  took  us
through a schedule of relevant case law and in  particular  referred  to  AJ
(Risk - Christian Convert)  Pakistan  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00040,  SM  and  JM
(Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082, MJ and ZM  (Ahmadis,
risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, Z and T v the United Kingdom  27034/05
[2006] ECHR 1177and various cases from Canada, Australia and New Zealand  to
support the submission that individualised assessments were required.



Appendix 13:

Case Law

AJ (Risk - Christian Convert) Pakistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00040

MJ and ZM (Ahmadis, risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033

SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082

MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT
00389 (IAC)

MS (Coptic Christians) CG 2013 UKUT 00611 (IAC)

Queen and Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Bashir Lal [2000] EWHC Admin
420

A and Anor, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2008] EHHC 1459 (Admin)

Z and T v the United Kingdom 27034/05 [2006] ECHR 1177

X v Canada (Immigration and Refugee Board) 2001 CanLII 26928

Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1207291 [2012] RRTA 870

Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1108986 [2012] RRTA 31

Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1000186 [2010] RRTA 194

Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1103822 [2011] RRTA 899

New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal AG (Pakistan) [2012] NZIPT
800245

New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal AR (Pakistan) [2013] NZIPT
800307

Overview of cases

AJ (Risk - Christian Convert) Pakistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00040

This case concerned a Muslim who claimed to have converted  to  Christianity
shortly before his arrival here and to have faced persecution as  a  result.
His wife and children remained Muslims and continued to live with  him.  The
Tribunal rejected his claim of conversion and all the  alleged  problems  he
had faced in Pakistan. It was, however, found that even  if  his  claim  had
been true, he had failed to establish a real risk of persecution  (paragraph
31). Reference was made to an estimated 4 million  Christians  in  Pakistan,
found in all main urban areas, but mainly concentrated in Punjab  (paragraph
32). The court cited evidence from the Country Assessment on Pakistan  which
observed that the situation of Christians was less  dramatic  than  that  of
Ahmadis. It noted that although there was no  law  against  conversion  from
Islam to Christianity, those that  converted  may  encounter  problems  from
some elements of society who did not accept  the  practice  (paragraph  33).
There  was  also  reference  to  evidence  that  suggested   that   although
Christians generally may face difficulties from local Mullahs and  blasphemy
charges, the authorities were willing and usually able to protect them  from
harassment, violence and intimidation (paragraph ibid). There  were  however
reports where Christians had  encountered  problems  for  reasons  over  and
above merely going about the business of religious worship.  In  particular,
those who sought to evangelise were believed to be at risk  of  encountering
serious  difficulties  with  the  community  (paragraph  35).  The  Tribunal
assessed the instances of attacks against  the  background  of  there  being
some 4 million Christians in Pakistan and concluded that the  evidence  fell
far short of showing that  a  convert  faced  a  real  risk  of  persecutory
treatment (paragraph 36). It was found he could relocate  to  a  major  city
with a significant Christian population (paragraph 37).

MJ and ZM (Ahmadis, risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033

This is referred to for the observation that there  was  significantly  more
anecdotal evidence of  difficulties  for  Christians  and  Hindus  than  for
Ahmadis (head note 3 and paragraph 84).

SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082

The  relevance  of  this  determination  is  what  it  has  to   say   about
proselytising and evangelising. The Tribunal noted that  the  Iranians  were
unlikely to draw any distinction and found the more accurate description  of
the distinction  was  that  between  the  ordinary  convert  and  those  who
undertook 'active evangelising' (paragraph 139).

MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]  UKUT
00389 (IAC)

This is referred to as Ms Jahangir gave evidence to the Tribunal in  respect
of religious minorities, albeit specifically Ahmadis.

MS (Coptic Christians) CG 2013 UKUT 00611 (IAC)

This is contained in the respondent's bundle and reports  that  despite  the
inadequacy of state protection of Coptic Christians in Egypt, they  are  not
at a general risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article  3  of
the ECHR although there are some areas where they might be.

Queen and Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Bashir Lal [2000] EWHC  Admin
420

This was a judicial review application made by a "Born again  Christian"  of
the Pentecostal faith who had carried out evangelical work. The  court  held
that the Special Adjudicator's conclusion that Christians  as  a  body  were
not  persecuted  in  Pakistan  was  not  assailable.  His  findings  on  the
particular risks faced by the applicant were however criticised as  was  the
fact that he had not focused on the relevant issues such as  the  nature  of
protection that would be available, the changes  that  had  taken  place  in
Pakistan during her lengthy absence and whether her previous  profile  would
cause her problems.  His decision was quashed.

A and Anor, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2008] EHHC 1459 (Admin)

This judicial review application was made by two sisters who claimed  asylum
after having arrived here as visitors. They challenged the decision  of  the
Secretary of State to  refuse  to  accept  their  representations  as  fresh
claims for asylum.

The  court  found  that  the  material  demonstrated  that  Christians   and
Christian congregations continued to be at  risk  of  threats  and  violence
from extremists in Pakistan but did  not  demonstrate  that  the  applicants
were personally at risk because of  their  respective  backgrounds  or  that
they were at risk by or on behalf  of  the  state,  or  that  there  was  an
insufficiency of protection. The  court  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of
State was not arguably wrong to reject the representation as fresh claims.

Z and T v the United Kingdom 27034/05 [2006] ECHR 1177

The court found that the applicants  had  failed  to  make  out  a  case  of
persecution on religious grounds or to substantiate that they were  at  risk
of a violation of Articles 2 or 3, noting that the applicants had  not  been
subject to any physical attack or prevented from adhering  to  their  faith.
The general situation was considered but the court took the  view  that  the
evidence had failed to show that the authorities were incapable  of  taking,
or were unwilling to take, appropriate action  in  respect  of  violence  or
threats of violence directed against Christian targets.




X v Canada (Immigration and Refugee Board) 2001 CanLII 26928

Although the claimant made a refugee  claim  based  only  on  her  Christian
religion, she made mention, both orally and in her  narrative,  of  being  a
woman alone in Pakistan.  Therefore, the panel looked at both those  aspects
of her claim. It found that there were  millions  of  Christians  living  in
Pakistan.  Not all were persecuted, nor did all fear persecution,  and  each
claimant must be approached on a  case-by-case  basis.   However,  it  found
that for those  who  have  come  afoul  of  Muslim  intolerance,  there  was
documentary evidence to support a well-founded fear of persecution.

The claimant lost a member of her family to  murder  and  her  children  had
suffered  harassment.   She  was  a  widow  without  male  protection.   Her
expressed fear of persecution based on her Christian religion and as a  lone
woman was found to be objectively well founded.

Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1207291 [2012] RRTA 870

This case concerned a convert to Christianity.  The Tribunal considered  the
country information and found that that whilst Pakistani Christians may  not
face a real chance of serious harm  in  the  course  of  their  day  to  day
worship, activities such as public expressions of their  faith  by  engaging
in outreach to other Christians, would attract a greater  level  of  adverse
attention from members of conservative Muslim  groups.  The  Tribunal  found
that any Christian who  faced  a  significant  risk  of  violence  in  those
circumstances also faced the risk that the Pakistani security forces may  be
unwilling or unable to provide them with adequate protection.  However,  the
risk of violence and availability of protection depended very  much  on  the
circumstances  of  the  individual  member  of  the  religious  minority  in
Pakistan.

In considering the documentary evidence the Tribunal  noted  that  a  'mega'
Catholic church had opened in Karachi in 2012 in an area which was  home  to
over 500 Christian families and  contained  dozens  of  other  churches.  It
noted there was a Bible College and also referred to  an  evangelical  event
in Karachi in 2012 organised  by  an  American  minister  which  had  public
support of high level government officials and was attended by over  200,000
people.

The Tribunal had concerns over the applicant's credibility  but  found  that
although he had not been a genuine convert previously, he now was and  found
that his conversion would place him at an increased risk of persecution.  It
also found he would seek to take part in proselytising, whether as  part  of
a group or individually.




Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1108986 [2012] RRTA 31

This case concerned an applicant found to be credible in her claim that  she
had been accused of  converting  Muslims  to  Christianity  in  Punjab.  The
Tribunal accepted her claim that she attracted the adverse attention of  the
authorities in Pakistan, and the religious leaders in  the  community  where
she lived, because of her religious activities,  that  she  was  accused  of
proselytising by the  authorities  in  Pakistan  and  she  was  consequently
detained. The Tribunal noted that the  state  has  been  implicated  in  the
targeting of Christians and it had failed to provide  meaningful  protection
to members of the Christian community who were targeted  for  proselytising.
It found in her favour.


Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1000186 [2010] RRTA 194

This applicant was found credible in his claim that he had been targeted  by
radical Muslims who harassed, intimidated, threatened,  and  kidnapped  him;
destroyed his business and effectively prevented him from earning a  living;
and told him that he and his family had to convert to Islam if  they  wanted
to remain in Pakistan. It accepted the claim that the police were  unwilling
or unable to assist him and that police officers who  were  associated  with
the cleric contributed to the targeting he suffered.

The Tribunal was not satisfied that  the  information  supported  the  claim
that all Christians in Pakistan were at risk of harm and was satisfied  that
most Christians in Pakistan were able to practice their religion freely  and
safely without apparent interest from  the  Muslim  majority.  Nevertheless,
the Tribunal formed the view that the applicant faced an increased  risk  of
harm by radical  Muslims  because  he  had  already  attracted  the  adverse
interest of extremists. His home area was not disclosed.


Refugee Review Tribunal of Australia 1103822 [2011] RRTA 899

Despite some reservations, the Tribunal was prepared to give  the  applicant
the benefit of the doubt and accept his  claim  that  he  was  detained  and
seriously mistreated and threatened with death if he returned.


New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal AG (Pakistan) [2012] NZIPT
800245

The Tribunal found that as a Christian pastor, the  applicant's  father  and
family members had been involved in the lives  of  the  congregation  beyond
ministering work. It accepted that the applicant saw it as his role to  give
others information about religion, that he had  preached  to  a  Muslim  man
which had led to adverse interest in him and  had  written  an  article  and
given talks in which he had been critical about  Islam.  It  found  that  he
would be at risk of the blasphemy laws being applied against him.

New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal AR (Pakistan) [2013] NZIPT
800307

The Tribunal accepted the credibility of this Muslim  mother  and  daughters
who were suspected of converting to Christianity because  of  their  support
for the Christian community and had been victims of  physical  attacks  from
Muslim community members and the police. The mother was illiterate  and  had
never worked. She was estranged from her husband and had no  male  relatives
and lived in a rural area. They court  found  that  converts  and  perceived
converts faced high levels of discrimination and were  at  risk  of  violent
attacks.






























Appendix 14:

Agreed index of materials (in chronological order)


|ITEM   |SOURCE DATE |DOCUMENT                                      |
|1.     |May 2009    |Writenet Report - Pakistan: The Situation for |
|       |            |Religious Minorities                          |
|2.     |23 November |The Express Tribune: Court acquits employer of|
|       |2010        |child maid's murder                           |
|3.     |June 2011   |Christian Solidarity Worldwide - Pakistan:    |
|       |            |Religious freedom in the shadow of extremism  |
|4.     |14 May 2012 |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the|
|       |            |International Protection Needs of Members of  |
|       |            |Religious Minorities from Pakistan            |
|5.     |15 May 2012 |Aid to the Church in Need (UK), Christians and|
|       |            |the Struggle for Religious Freedom with       |
|       |            |Persecuted and Forgotten? 2012 Update:        |
|       |            |Pakistan                                      |
|6.     |10 October  |Dawn: Teenage Christian boy booked for        |
|       |2012        |blasphemy                                     |
|7.     |January 2013|Pakistan: Information on marriage             |
|       |            |registration, including mixed marriages -     |
|       |            |Refworld                                      |
|8.     |January 2013|Australia: Immigration Review Tribunal,       |
|       |            |Pakistan Militant Groups                      |
|9.     |10 January  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada:      |
|       |2013        |Pakistan: Blasphemy laws, including           |
|       |            |legislation, implementation, related violence,|
|       |            |reform, and state response (2008-2012)        |
|       |            |[PAK104260.E], (available at ecoi.net)        |
|10.    |14 January  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,      |
|       |2013        |Pakistan: Situation of Christians in Pakistan,|
|       |            |including social and government attitudes,    |
|       |            |treatment and rights (2010-2012)              |
|11.    |March 2013  |Human Rights Commission of Pakistan:  Annual  |
|       |            |report - State of Human Rights in 2012, March |
|       |            |2013                                          |
|12.    |09 March    |RT (news network): 'Blasphemy' revenge: Over  |
|       |2013        |100 Pakistani Christians homes set ablaze,    |
|13.    |10 March    |BBC: Pakistan arrests scores over Lahore      |
|       |2013        |anti-Christian riot                           |
|14.    |10 March    |France 24: Pakistan's Christians protest      |
|       |2013        |against 'blasphemy' riots                     |
|15.    |14 March    |Human Rights Commission of Pakistan: Joseph   |
|       |2013        |colony incident HRCP holds police,            |
|       |            |administration responsible                    |
|16.    |16 March    |Assist News Service (ANS): Pakistani          |
|       |2013        |Christians told, 'Protest again and you will  |
|       |            |die'                                          |
|17.    |17 March    |Pakistan Christian Post: Pakistan Christian   |
|       |2013        |Congress have reservations on data of         |
|       |            |Christian voters                              |
|18.    |April 2013  |US Commission on International Religious      |
|       |            |Freedom (USCIRF) Annual Report                |
|19.    |April 2013  |Gatestone Institute: Muslim Persecution of    |
|       |            |Christians Escalating in Pakistan             |
|20.    |04 April    |Dawn: Attack on Christian property: Police    |
|       |2013        |avoided engaging charged mob, SC told         |
|21.    |04 April    |Christian Today: Attack on Christian area in  |
|       |2013        |Pakistan                                      |
|22.    |04 April    |AFP: Pakistan court acquits Christian on death|
|       |2013        |row                                           |
|23.    |08 April    |The Express Tribune: Christian vote appears   |
|       |2013        |drifting towards PPP                          |
|24.    |30 April    |Pew Research Centre: The World's Muslims:     |
|       |2013        |Religion, politics and society (Chapter 6:    |
|       |            |Interfaith relations - Relationships with     |
|       |            |people of other faiths)                       |
|25.    |May 2013    |US Department of State, International         |
|       |            |Religious Freedom Report 2012 - Pakistan      |
|26.    |23 May 2013 |Amnesty International, Annual Report 2013:    |
|       |            |Pakistan                                      |
|27.    |June 2013   |Austrian Federal Asylum Agency, Report on Fact|
|       |            |Finding Mission - Pakistan                    |
|28.    |19 June 2013|Asian Human Rights Commission, Pakistan:      |
|       |            |Christian women were attacked and paraded     |
|       |            |naked by a mob with the support of the ruling |
|       |            |party                                         |
|29.    |15 July 2013|Morning Star News (USA), Christian in Pakistan|
|       |            |Sent to Prison for 'Blasphemy,' in Spite of   |
|       |            |Accuser's Retraction                          |
|30.    |15 July 2013|Gatestone Institute (USA), Pakistan:          |
|       |            |Violations against Christians Soar            |
|31.    |23 July 2013|Barnabas Aid (UK), Christians targeted in     |
|       |            |rising violence against religious minorities  |
|       |            |in Pakistan                                   |
|32.    |09 August   |UK Home Office, Country of Origin Information |
|       |2013        |Service, Pakistan Country of Origin           |
|       |            |Information (COI) Report August 2013          |
|       |            |and                                           |
|       |            |Operational Guidance Note                     |
|33.    |12 August   |Daily Times: Christians, Hindus observe       |
|       |2013        |Minorities' Day                               |
|34.    |17 August   |BBC News, Pakistan drops charges in Rimsha    |
|       |2013        |'blasphemy' cleric case                       |
|35.    |02 September|Christian Today: 40 Pakistani Christian       |
|       |2013        |families face hunger after Gojra elopement    |
|       |            |dispute                                       |
|36.    |04 September|The Hindu: Christian families in Pakistan     |
|       |2013        |forced out of homes over marriage             |
|37.    |23 September|Minority Rights Group International (UK), MRG |
|       |2013        |condemns attack on Christians in Pakistan and |
|       |            |calls for increased protection of minorities  |
|       |            |in the country                                |
|38.    |23 September|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Pakistan's   |
|       |2013        |Christian Minority Faces Life On Increasingly |
|       |            |Dangerous Margins                             |
|39.    |24 September|World Watch Monitor (USA), Pakistan's         |
|       |2013        |Christian leaders demand security after       |
|       |            |bombings                                      |
|40.    |24 September|Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Pakistan     |
|       |2013        |religious leaders declare attack on Christians|
|       |            |'un-Islamic'                                  |
|41.    |23 October  |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), 'Dirty'|
|       |2013        |Christians Now Afraid to Clean, 23/10/2013    |
|42.    |16 December |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Christians in|
|       |2013        |Pakistan                                      |
|43.    |23 December |World Watch Monitor (USA), Christmas          |
|       |2013        |excitement marred by insecurity for Pakistani |
|       |            |Christians after deadly year of attacks       |
|44.    |31 December |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Human Rights |
|       |2013        |and Democracy 2012, Countries of Concern      |
|       |            |updates: Pakistan                             |
|45.    |21 January  |Human Rights Watch, World Report 2014:        |
|       |2014        |Pakistan                                      |
|46.    |24 January  |BBC: Blasphemy case: Briton in Pakistan       |
|       |2014        |sentenced to death                            |
|47.    |11 February |US House of Representatives Committee on      |
|       |2014        |Foreign Affairs, Subcommittee Hearing and     |
|       |            |Briefing: The Worldwide Persecution of        |
|       |            |Christians (Testimony of Elliott Abrams, US   |
|       |            |Commission on International Religious Freedom |
|       |            |- Pakistan)                                   |
|48.    |24 February |Country report of Asma Jahangir               |
|       |2014        |                                              |
|49.    |05 March    |Expert report from Reverend Stuart Rodney     |
|       |2014        |Windsor                                       |
|50.   |28 March    |BBC: Sawan Masih: Pakistani Christian gets     |
|      |2014        |death penalty for blasphemy                    |
|51.   |05 April    |BBC: Pakistani couple get death sentences for  |
|      |2014        |blasphemy                                      |
|52.   |24 April    |Pakistan Report: "Blasphemy accusations against|
|      |2014        |Christians and Forced Conversions" by Zimran   |
|      |            |Samuel                                         |
|53.   |08 April    |Statement of Bishop Dr Ijaz Inayat Masih       |
|      |2014        |                                               |
|54.   |Undated     |Statement of Pastor Andrew Waugh               |
|55.   |13 May 2014 |BBC: Pakistan police charge 68 Pakistani       |
|      |            |lawyers with blasphemy                         |
|56.   |12/19/24 May|Letters in support of AK                       |
|      |2014        |                                               |
|57.   |29-30 May   |Letters in support of SK                       |
|      |2014        |                                               |
|58.   |16 June 2014|Statement of Pastor Jeremy Sandy               |
|59.   |17 June 2014|Statement of Assistant Pastor David            |
|      |            |Taylor-Black                                   |
|60.   |19 June 2014|Additional Statement of Bishop Dr Ijaz Inayat  |
|      |            |Masih                                          |
|61.   |Undated     |Centre for Legal Aid Assistance and Settlement |
|      |            |(CLAAS) - index only                           |
|62.   |Undated     |HRCP: The Rimsha Case: Is Anyone Listening?    |
|63.   |Undated     |International Christian Concern. Pakistan      |
|64.   |Undated     |Pakistan: Religious conversion, including      |
|      |            |treatment of converts and forced conversions   |
|      |            |(2009-2012)                                    |



-----------------------
[1] The claim that the family had a school was rejected by the First-tier
Tribunal Judge and its rejection is an unchallenged finding.
[2] It was first provided in his 1989 classic study Evangelicalism in
Modern Britain: A History from the 1730s to the 1980s.
[3] The 1998 census results put the population at 132 million with 1.59%
Christians and 1.60% Hindu.
[4] These figures are provided by the  national  database  and  registration
authority statistics for 2012 and some reports  provide  slightly  different
percentages. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan in its 2013 report  and
the CIA World  Factbook  confirm  that  Hindus  are  the  largest  religious
minority. There is no identification of  the  make-up  the  remaining  small
percentage. Information cited in the UNHCR Eligibility  Guidelines  and  the
COI report. The Pakistan Interfaith League reports that there are  nine  non
Muslim religions in the  country.  The  CIA  World  Factbook  estimates  the
population at 193  million  with  96%  being  Muslim.  Mr  Samuel  puts  the
population at 177 million with 96% being Muslim and 1% Christian.  According
to Operation World, Christians make up 2.45% of the population.
[5] See Map.
[6] Information supplied in the COI report 2013.
[7] CSW report.
[8] UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for assessing the International Protection
Needs of Members of Religious Minorities from Pakistan, 14 May 2012.
[9] For the third time.
[10] Figures from the FCO.
[11] Reported by Radio Free Europe; September 2013 article.
[12] In fact, between eight and ten percent of the population in Lahore are
said to be Christians, making it the largest concentration of Christians in
Pakistan.
[13] A report from the USCIRF for 2006 had however put the Protestants
first at over half of the total Christian population.
[14] Pakistan has 117 city districts which are third order administrative
areas; i.e. following national and regional divisions but above sub-
districts (or tehsils).
[15] USCIRF figures.
[16] 'People of the Book' (Arabic:  'Ahl  al-Kit?b')  is  a  term  used  to
designate  non-Muslim  adherents   to   faiths   which   have   a   revealed
scripture. The three types of adherents to faiths that the  Quran  mentions
as people of the book are the Jews, Sabians and Christians.
[17] During the British rule, four blasphemy laws were introduced in  India,
three of them (Indian Penal Code 295, 296, and 298) in 1860 and  the  fourth
one (IPC295A) in 1927. The 1860 laws only dealt with physical offences  like
defiling of worship places, disturbance to a  religious  assembly,  and  the
utterance  of  words.  There  was  no  law  that  specifically  addressed  a
blasphemous offence in the form of written words as this was  not  a  common
occurrence until the mid 1920s.
[18] Article 3 relates to the equal right of men and women to the  enjoyment
of all civil and political rights in the Covenant. Article  25  gives  every
citizen the right: a) To  take  part  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs,
directly or through freely chosen representatives; (b) To  vote  and  to  be
elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be by universal and  equal
suffrage  and  shall  be  held  by  secret  ballot,  guaranteeing  the  free
expression of the will of the electors;  (c)  To  have  access,  on  general
terms of equality, to public service in his country.
[19] According to CSW, HRCP, Ms Jahangir, Mr Samuel, newspaper articles and
other sources.
[20] Summarised at paragraphs 96-170.
[21] Assuming they are women 'of the Book'.
[22] And 247 between 1987 and August 2012. Eight cases were registered
during President Zia's term 1977-1988.
[23] Policing Belief: The Impact of Blasphemy Laws on Human Rights cited in
the COI report.
[24] As opposed to 27 against Muslims.
[25] See paragraphs 79-85 and 212 for figures.
[26] In fact it was merged with another department.
[27] Referred to as Ethics by other sources.
[28] A closer look at the UNHCR report reveals that the attacks on
religious processions involve Shi'as. There is no reference to any attack
on a Christian procession.
[29] We note that Amnesty International cites the much higher figure of
8300 death row prisoners in its 2013 report but this is contradicted by the
USCIRF and HRW.
[30] These figures tally with the USCIRF and contradict the much larger
figure of 8300 cited by Amnesty International.
[31] See paragraphs 40-44 and 48 of this determination.
[32] See paragraphs 42 and 48.
[33] This is not supported by other evidence  which  indicates  that  whilst
not generally granted, it is possible.  Indeed,  the  case  of  the  British
Pakistani accused of blasphemy in 2014 and described in our  list  of  cases
is an example of the grant of bail.
[34] It is unclear whether they had been arrested during 2013 or
previously.
[35] Dated 13 May 2014
[36] Cited in the USCIRF report.
[37] Worldwatch monitor, 2012.
[38] Although this part of the account was rejected by the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.

