

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 31st March 2014 and 17th August 2015       |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                   TG (1)
                                   GD (2)
                                   GJ (3)
                                   PM (4)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bazini (Counsel) on behalf of  the  first,  second
and third     Appellants on 31st March 2014. No attendance  on  17th  August
2015.
     Miss Bayati (Counsel) on behalf of the fourth    Appellant on 31st
     March 2014 and Mr Warnapala, Solicitor, on 17th August 2015.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer).
Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:

     i) Some members of the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in  Afghanistan
        continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.

    ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do  not
        face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle
        them to a grant of international protection on the basis  of  their
        ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said  that
        the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh  and
        Hindu communities in general reaches the threshold of persecution.

   iii) A consideration of whether an individual member  of  the  Sikh  and
        Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon  return  to
        Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All the relevant circumstances must
        be  considered  but  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   the
        following:
        a. women are particularly vulnerable in the absence of  appropriate
           protection from a male member of the family;
        b. likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access  basic
           accommodation bearing in mind
    - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a  member  of  the  Sikh  and
      Hindu communities
    - such individuals may face difficulties (including threats,  extortion,
      seizure of land and acts of violence) in retaining property and  /  or
      pursuing their remaining traditional pursuit, that of a  shopkeeper  /
      trader
    - the traditional source of support for such individuals,  the  Gurdwara
      is much less able to provide adequate support;
        c. the level of religious devotion and the practical  accessibility
           to a suitable place of religious worship in light  of  declining
           numbers and the evidence that some have been subjected  to  harm
           and threats to harm whilst accessing the Gurdwara;
        d. access  to  appropriate  education  for  children  in  light  of
           discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children and the  shortage
           of adequate education facilities for them.

    iv) Although it appears there is a willingness at governmental level to
        provide protection, it is not established on the evidence that at a
        local level the police are willing, even if able,  to  provide  the
        necessary    level    of    protection    required    in    Refugee
        Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
        Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
        harassment amounting to persecution.

     v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the  Sikh  or  Hindu
        communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive  assessment.  The
        relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
        above.  Given their particular circumstances and declining  number,
        the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
        and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
        access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
        reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

    vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases of K  (Risk
        - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and SL and Others
        (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT 00137.

TABLE                              OF                               CONTENTS
Paragraphs

Appellants' immigration history                                        2-4

Issues                 for                 country                  guidance
5-6

Country evidence                                                       7-8

Introduction        to        expert        and        their         reports
     9-13

Background to Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan
    .                            Population                             size
      15-20
    .  The  historical  position  of  Sikhs  and   Hindus   in   Afghanistan
             21-22
    .               Country                guidance                decisions
         23-26

The current situation - developments since 2005
    .                 Dr                  Ballard's                  reports
         27-32
    .        Dr        Giustozzi's        reports        and        evidence
         33-42
    . UNHCR                                                            43
    .                             Other                              reports
         44-49
    .    Evidence    relied    upon    by    the    Secretary    of    State
             50-60

Submissions
61-62

Legal                                                              framework
63-70

Discussion
    .  Country  expert  evidence  and  letter  from  the   British   Embassy
      71-77
    . General approach                                                   78-
      80
    .               State               sponsored                persecution
      81
    .        Serious         harm         -         non-state         actors
      82-84
    .              Harassment               and               discrimination
      85-89
    .                Sufficiency                of                protection
      90
    . Women                                                              91-
      93
    .                                                               Children
      94-95
    .                             Land                              seizures
        96-101
    . Cremation                                                         102-
      105
    . Temple                                                            106-
      108
    . Employment opportunities                                          109-
      111
    .    Position    of    the    Afghan     Government     on     returnees
      112-114
    .                          Internal                           relocation
      115-118

Conclusions
119

Application     of     country     guidance     to     these      Appellants
120-136

Decision                                                              137

Appendices                                                     Pgs 55-60













































                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Afghanistan. These appeals have been
    identified for potential country guidance on the  risk  on  return  for
    followers of the Sikh and Hindu religions in Afghanistan.

Appellants' immigration history

 2. The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  the  26th  January
    2003.  He was granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  31  December
    2005 when he attained 18 years of age. On 30th November 2005 he applied
    for further leave to remain, which was refused on 10th  May  2007.  His
    appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Milligan-Baldwin in a determination dated 8th October 2007. On 20th May
    2008 he applied for voluntary departure and on approval left the United
    Kingdom on 11th June 2008.  The first appellant  claims  to  have  left
    Afghanistan again in July  2011  and  to  have  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom with his wife and daughter (the  second  and  third  appellants
    respectively) on 4th December 2011, without leave. He claimed asylum on
    arrival, which was refused on 4th April 2012. His  appeal  against  the
    refusal was dismissed on 13th June 2012, although on 7th  January  2013
    the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and directed that the matter should be heard afresh.

 3. The fourth appellant entered the United Kingdom in the back of a  lorry
    in December 2006 and claimed asylum at Croydon  on  the  18th  December
    2006.  This was refused on 16th January 2007 by the Secretary of State.
      His  appeal  was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge  Foudy  who,   in   a
    determination dated 13th March 2007, found him to be a credible witness
    who had a well-founded fear of persecution in  Jalalabad  by  non-state
    actors on account of  his  Sikh  religion.  The  appeal  was,  however,
    dismissed as the Judge concluded that relocation to Kabul was  possible
    as there is  a  Sikh  community  in  that  city  into  which  he  could
    integrate.

 4. Further representations were received from  the  fourth  appellant  and
    rejected by the Secretary of State on 26th  March  2010  who  concluded
    that he can relocate to Kabul and that the health problems that he  and
    his wife suffer were not so severe so as to  engage  Articles  2  or  3
    ECHR. The claim under Article 8 ECHR was also rejected in  relation  to
    the fourth appellant, his wife, and their daughter on the basis of  her
    academic studies.

Issues for country guidance

 5. These appeals were listed as a potential country guidance case in order
    to determine a number of agreed issues which  we  construe  to  be  (a)
    whether the current situation in Kabul is such that there would  be  at
    risk of persecution for followers of the Sikh  and  Hindu  religion  if
    removed per se and, if not, (2) whether relocation for those appellants
    who have been found to have suffered persecution in  their  home  areas
    will be unduly harsh and, if not, (c)  whether  their  Article  8  ECHR
    rights would be violated  if  removed.  As  the  Article  8  issue  was
    conceded before us there has been no need to consider this  element  of
    the appeals further.

    To enable us to address these issues it has been necessary to  consider
    the situation generally for Afghan Sikhs and Hindus in Kabul.

 6. This determination, to which we have both contributed, takes account of
    all the oral and documentary material before us, including the  written
    and oral arguments of both parties.

Country evidence

 7. We had the benefit of a significant amount of  both  oral  and  written
    country evidence.  The appellants' respective representatives helpfully
    worked together to provide a single  comprehensive  bundle  of  country
    evidence for the hearing on 14th March 2014. Legal Justice  Solicitors,
    instructed by TG in March 2015, filed a  further  bundle  on  28th  May
    2015, which has been copied to all parties who  were  then  invited  to
    provide any further information they wished the Tribunal to consider in
    relation to  the  country  situation.  Warnapala  &  Company  filed  an
    additional bundle on the 26th June 2015. There  was  no  attendance  on
    behalf of TG at the hearing  on  17th  August  2015  as  Legal  Justice
    Solicitors confirmed they had no additional submissions  to  make  that
    required their attendance, which was in accordance with a direction  of
    the Tribunal. Mr Warnapala did attend but added little to  the  written
    evidence although confirmed he had no issue or point  of  dispute  with
    the content of the bundle filed  by  Legal  Justice  Solicitors.     Mr
    Tarlow maintained the Secretary of State's' position  and  provided  no
    additional evidence for the Tribunal to consider.

 8.  The  evidence  before  us  is  considered  within  the  body  of   the
    determination and details of the sources are  set  out  more  fully  in
    Appendices A, B and C. This provides a full list of all material before
    the Upper Tribunal, together with links to relevant websites  on  which
    that evidence may be found, where relevant.

Introduction to expert and their reports

 9. Country expert reports have been received from Dr Roger Ballard and  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi. Dr Giustozzi also gave oral evidence.

10. Dr Ballard was awarded a PhD in Sociology by the University of Delhi in
    1970.  He held teaching posts at a number  of  UK  universities  before
    taking early retirement in 2002  in  order  to  service  an  increasing
    number of instructions to act as a Consultant Anthropologist.  In  2002
    he was appointed  Director  of  the  Centre  for  Applied  South  Asian
    Studies,  University  of  Manchester.  His   specialist   interest   is
    emigration from the Punjab, and hence in Sikh and Hindu  settlers  from
    the  Jullundur  Doab  in  India,  and  in  Mirpuri  Muslims  from   the
    Potohar/Azad Kashmir region of northern Pakistan including the changing
    dynamics of family and kinship, in popular religious practice,  and  in
    differential  patterns  of  upward  social,  educational  and  economic
    mobility within all of these groups, both in the UK, and in their  home
    base in the subcontinent.

11. Dr Ballard has provided two reports. "The History and Current  Position
    of Afghanistan's Hindu and Sikh Population" dated  18th  May  2011  and
    "Afghan Sikhs, Risk on return to Kabul" dated 20th May 2011.

12. Dr Giustozzi is a visiting research fellow  at  the  London  School  of
    Economics and Political  Science  (LSE),  International  Relations  and
    International History (IDEAS) and visiting professor at the War Studies
    Department (KCL). He holds a PhD in International  Relations  from  the
    LSE which he received in 1997.

13. Dr Giustozzi provided one report dated 1st February 2014 and gave  oral
    evidence.

Background to Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan

14.  The  presence  of  followers  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  religions  in
    Afghanistan is not a modern phenomenon. The history  of  the  Sikh  and
    Hindu presence from an anthropological perspective is discussed in some
    detail in the report of Roger Ballard. It is suggested  in  the  report
    that some anthropologists believe them  not  to  have  originated  from
    India, as some had assumed, but to be part of a distinct  component  of
    the autochthonous population of  Afghanistan  although  others  suggest
    followers of these religious groups were brought in by the  British  in
    the 19th century.

Population size

15. The Sikh and Hindu population is believed to have numbered as much as a
    quarter of a million spread  throughout  Afghanistan,  according  to  a
    detailed account of the conditions of the Sikhs in Afghanistan  written
    by a Sikh visitor to Kabul in the early  1940s.   They,  together  with
    members of the Hindu faith,  controlled  a  great  deal  of  the  long-
    distance trade within Afghanistan as well as across its  borders.  They
    also held posts in the administration.

16. The UNHCR document dated July 2011 entitled "Afghan Hindus  and  Sikhs:
    Their Situation and  Recommendations  for  the  Assessment  of  Claims"
    contains the following information regarding the historical  background
    derived  from  the  Integrated  Regional  Information  Network:   IRIN,
    Afghanistan: focus on Hindus and Sikhs in Kandahar, report:

        'The first presence of  Hindus  and  Sikhs  in  the  Central  Asian
        country is said to be roughly 200 years ago.

        Of the estimated 50,000 Hindus and Sikhs living in  Afghanistan  10
        years ago, most have left.  Only about 1000  Sikhs  remain  in  the
        country  today,  half  of  them  concentrated  in  Jalalabad,   the
        provincial  and  commercial  capital  of  the   eastern   Nangarhar
        Province.

        Sikhs left Afghanistan en masse, along with  thousands  of  Hindus,
        after Hindu extremists destroyed the Babri Mosque  in  Ayodhya,  in
        India, in December 1992, in fear of threats  from  radical  Muslims
        following large scale looting of Hindu and Sikhs temples  all  over
        Afghanistan.

        Their properties  were  looted,  they  were  tortured  and  treated
        inhumanely, particularly in Kabul,  with  women  reportedly  raped.
        Under the Taliban, 'Indians' were marginalised and were not allowed
        to have any major stake in local economies as they  had  previously
        done.

        The Hindus and Sikhs,  with  their  typical  business  acumen,  had
        established factories in Kabul and  operated  a  healthy  exporting
        business, trading in Afghan goods such as dried fruit, textiles and
        precious stones.    With  the  coming  to  power  of  the  Taliban,
        however, they had to resort to operating small shops selling  fruit
        and textiles.

        Their social status prior to the 1990s had also enabled them to  be
        part of the military and civil services, and some even took up high
        positions in banking. With the fall of the  Taliban,  the  'Indian'
        community in the battered country is hoping to prosper  once  again
        and to rehabilitate the local economies.

        For generations, Hindus, Sikhs  and  Jews  lived  in  harmony  with
        Muslim Afghans.  Their rights were  respected,  and  they  regarded
        themselves to be Afghans as much as Hazaras,  Pashtuns,  Tajiks  or
        Uzbeks born and raised in the country did.'

17. The actual number of Sikhs and Hindus in  Afghanistan  is  not  at  all
    clear.  A number of differing opinions appear in the evidence and  even
    Dr Giustozzi, a leading country expert, was unable to be clear  on  the
    precise figure. In his report he states:

        '4. No precise estimate for the  number  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
        Afghanistan exists, due to the failure of the government  to  carry
        out a census of the population. UNHCR  sources  estimated  that  in
        Kabul in 2005 185 Sikh families were left, with  160  in  Jalalabad
        and 100 in Kunduz, these being the main communities. Sikh community
        sources estimated the number of families living in Kabul in 2010 to
        be down to 130, mostly living in the Karte Parwan area.  Even  some
        of those left say that they remained only  because  they  were  too
        poor to flee. According  to  the  Department  of  State,  the  Sikh
        community in Afghanistan estimated its size in 2009 at 531 families
        or 3000 individuals, compared to from up to 200,000 before the war.
        Another estimate, provided by the Deputy  of  the  Hindu  and  Sikh
        Council of Afghanistan,  was  5000  Sikhs  and  2000  Hindus.  More
        recently the head of the community, Awtar Singh, estimated the size
        at 372-395 families nationwide,  which  would  indicate  a  further
        decline. In any case it is obvious that the  Sikh/Hindu  population
        has been declining very much, by  over  90%,  a  fact  that  should
        itself  be  an  indication  that  the  conditions  of   living   in
        Afghanistan for the members of this community  are  now  far  worse
        than those of the rest of the population, which  instead  has  been
        returning to Afghanistan: 5 million Afghan refugees  have  returned
        from mainly Pakistan and Iran between 2002-9. Considering the small
        size of the community, the sample of episodes  of  violence,  abuse
        and harassment compiled in this  report,  which  is  certainly  not
        exhaustive, indicates a high level of pressure  on  the  Sikh/Hindu
        community. The episodes which  occurred  after  2005  amount  to  a
        substantial level of violence and harassment when projected into  a
        population of 3000.'

18. The Appellants invited the  Tribunal  to  accept  that  the  number  of
    members  of  these  minority  religious  groups  in   Afghanistan   was
    approximately 3,000 although it was accepted that the figure  may  well
    be less than 3,000.  Dr Giustozzi refers to the Deputy of the Hindu and
    Sikh Council of  Afghanistan  estimating  that  there  are  only  fifty
    properties left in Kabul owned by Sikhs and Hindus as at  January  2014
    as well as  some  estimates  of  there  only  being  1,000  individuals
    remaining.

19. We are unable to make a clear finding with regard to the  exact  figure
    of Sikhs and Hindus currently  remaining  in  Afghanistan  as  we  have
    insufficient evidence to enable us to do so.  In any event, a figure of
    around 3,000 and the fact there  has  been  a  steady  and  significant
    reduction  in  numbers  is  not  disputed  by  the  Respondent  in  her
    Operational Guidance Notes for  Afghanistan  issued  in  June  2013  at
    paragraph 3.15.3-4.  The same paragraph refers to a report published by
    the Centre for Applied South Asian Studies  "The  History  and  Current
    Position of  Afghanistan's  Hindu  and  Sikh  population:  2011"  which
    contains the following comment:

        'The only reliable observation that can be made about  the  current
        [2011] characteristics of Afghanistan's Sikh and Hindu minority  is
        that it is now only a small fraction of its former size,  and  that
        as numbers shrink, its remaining  members  are  finding  themselves
        ever more vulnerable to aggressive exploitation, against which they
        have no meaningful defence. Hence the exodus can only  be  expected
        to continue'.

20. The same report acknowledges there have been some returnees from  India
    but these have not made a significant difference  to  numbers  as  many
    have not stayed according to Dr Giustozzi.  For  the  purposes  of  the
    appeals a working hypothesis of 3,000 was accepted by all parties.

The historical position of Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan

21. It would be misleading to give the impression that  the  situation  for
    Afghan Sikhs and Hindus has always been as it is today as otherwise  it
    would not have been possible for members of these religious  groups  to
    achieve the status within the country they had in the past. Dr  Ballard
    in his report dated 18th May 2011 charts the rise and  fall  of  Afghan
    Sikhs and Hindus during the period of the Soviet-backed regime  when  a
    significant proportion of Afghan  Sikhs  and  Hindus  became  qualified
    pharmacists and held other professional posts within the regime,  which
    was strongly secular in character, and in no way encouraging  hostility
    towards non Muslim minorities. Dr Ballard attributes the start  of  the
    current difficulties for Afghan Sikhs and Hindus as being the  collapse
    of the Soviet presence and the arrival of the Taliban:

        'But the Russian forces wilted in the face of ferocious assaults by
        the mujahedeen. When they  eventually  withdrew  with  their  tails
        between their legs in 1989, chaos reigned, and the Hindus and Sikhs
        of Afghanistan found themselves in severe difficulty.  In the first
        instance they found themselves facing economic chaos as the various
        Mujahadeen splinters engaged in an internecine civil war,  and  yet
        greater difficulties still  when  the  militantly  Islamic  Taliban
        swept to power in 1994.   The  tolerance  of  diversity  which  had
        hitherto been such a characteristic of Afghan Islam  rapidly  began
        to evaporate in the face of the hard line jihadi and fundamentalist
        attitudes promoted by the Taliban.

        Hence even though the arrival of the Taliban was welcomed by  large
        sections of the Afghan population because they replaced a smash and
        grab period of warlordism with a strictly imposed order - albeit of
        an exceptionally rough and ready kind - their arrival was in no way
        welcome by members of Afghanistan's Sikh and Hindu minority.  Given
        their  training  in  madrasseh  wholly  committed  to  Wahhabi  and
        Deobandi interpretations of the Islamic tradition, the Taliban  not
        only enthusiastically imposed bloody punishments on all those  whom
        they considered to have overstepped their narrow  and  literalistic
        interpretations of Quranic injunctions, but also took the view that
        infidels and idolaters have no place in the Islamic paradise  which
        they had constructed.  As a result members of the  Hindu  and  Sikh
        minority were required to wear  yellow  stars  on  their  clothing,
        Muslims at large were strongly  encouraged  to  avoid  using  their
        shops, and ever more vigorous efforts were made to 'persuade'  them
        to see the error  of  their  ways  and  to  become  Muslims.   Such
        persuasion soon involved much more than verbal threats.  Sikhs  and
        Hindus soon found  themselves  being  required  to  make  financial
        contributions to the jihad, and if they failed to pay up,  to  find
        themselves faced with even larger ransom demands if they wanted  to
        see their kidnapped sons and daughters returned home  alive  rather
        than as corpses.

        However it would be quite wrong to assume that all  Afghan  Muslims
        were in sympathy with those tactics, which ran wholly  contrary  to
        their   long-standing   commitment   to   plurality-tolerant   Sufi
        interpretations of Islam.  In many respects  the  Taliban  ideology
        was one which had been imported by a neo-fundamentalist group which
        had its roots in Pakistan. In the face of these assaults  Sikh  and
        Hindu families frequently found themselves provided with a  modicum
        of support  and  shelter  by  their  Muslim  neighbours,  and  most
        especially those with whom  they  had  sustained  relationships  or
        reciprocity over many generations.'

22. It is important to understand the correct context of  the  requirements
    to wear yellow patches/stars; this does not appear  to  have  been  for
    purposes similar to those behind  the  requirements  of  Jews  in  Nazi
    Germany to wear yellow stars but rather ostensibly so they would not be
    arrested by the Religious Police  for  breaking  Taliban  laws  on  the
    length of beards and other  issues,  according  to  a  Times  of  India
    article dated 22nd November 2006 which is based upon a  Reuters  report
    as referred to in the report of Dr Ballard [Appendix A. Item 22].

Country guidance decisions

23. The situation of members of these religious groups in  Afghanistan  has
    been the subject of a number of decisions.  The country  guidance  case
    of SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and  Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG  [2005]
    UKAIT 00137 found that there was no evidence to support the claim  that
    Afghan Sikh and Hindu minorities  were  persecuted  or  ill-treated  in
    breach of their protected human rights under Article 3 by the state  or
    that the degree of societal discrimination against them was such as  to
    give rise to any such persecution treatment as a class.  Although  some
    discrimination occurred against the Sikh and Hindu community on grounds
    of their ethnic and religious affiliations, such discrimination did not
    give rise to a general need for protection.  A claimant's status as  an
    Afghan Sikh or Hindu was nonetheless a factor to be taken into  account
    in assessing individual claims on a case by case basis.

24. In K (Risk - Sikh -  Women)  Afghanistan  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00057  the
    Tribunal held that there was no real risk that, if  the  Claimant  -  a
    single Sikh woman from Kabul with children - was returned to Kabul with
    her dependants, she would face treatment which was sufficiently  severe
    as to amount to persecution or a breach of her rights under  Article  3
    on account of being a Sikh female  who  would  be  returning  to  Kabul
    without male support.

25. In a more recent decision, however, of  DSG  &  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:
    departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC) the Tribunal found
    that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  that  case
    justified his departure from the country guidance in SL & Others.   The
    Upper Tribunal panel had noted that in SL the Tribunal  had  relied  on
    figures from an UNHCR  estimate  of  the  number  of  Sikhs  and  Hindu
    families in Afghanistan which in that report were stated to  be  3,500.
    This led the Tribunal to conclude that the Sikh and  Hindu  communities
    were in  total  in  the  region  of  some  20,000  persons  of  whom  a
    substantial proportion were in Kabul. The figures before the Panel were
    substantially less and this led them to conclude that this would make a
    considerable difference in considering the incidents of the attacks  on
    Sikhs and Hindus in  terms  of  the  small  number  of  the  population
    encountering quite large numbers of  attacks  and  that  therefore  the
    attacks would not be considered to be merely  random  but  targeted  at
    this much smaller community.

26.  In  DSG  the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  feel  it   had   sufficiently
    comprehensive material before  it  to  decide  whether  SL  was  to  be
    replaced although its  findings  clearly  affected  how  judges  should
    approach that guidance in light of new evidence.  These cases have been
    identified as ones  in  which  there  would  be  adequate  material  to
    consider, inter alia, the continued validity of SL.

The current situation - developments since 2005

Dr Ballard's reports

27. The current period of Afghanistan's long and somewhat tortuous  history
    began with the overthrow of the Taliban regime  in  spring  2002  which
    many hoped would lead to a restoration  of  the  status  quo  that  was
    somewhat representative of the situation that existed  in  the  country
    prior to the Soviet occupation in 1979.   As  a  result  a  significant
    number of those who had  sought  refuge  overseas,  including  Muslims,
    Sikhs and Hindus, returned to Afghanistan. It was  during  this  period
    that President Karzai came to power [Appendix A. Item 22].

28. Dr Ballard further notes in the same report, that whilst the weight  of
    systematic oppression that was suffered by Sikhs and Hindus during  the
    Taliban  era  was  lifted,  such  that  they   were   even   guaranteed
    representation in the newly constituted National Assembly, there remain
    many underlining difficulties.  The 2006 US State Department  Religious
    Freedoms Report, section 19.26, notes that non-Muslim  minorities  such
    as Sikhs, Hindus and Christians continued to face social discrimination
    and harassment and, in some cases, violence. The authors of the  report
    acknowledged that the treatment was not systemic although it is  stated
    that the government did little to improve conditions during that  year.
    The same report records information received from  the  Sikh  community
    that in the autumn of 2005 there was a report of the disappearance of a
    Sikh travelling from Kabul to  Jalalabad,  that  some  Sikh  and  Hindu
    children were unable to attend government  schools  due  to  harassment
    from  teachers  and  students  with  the  government  failing  to  take
    sufficient steps to protect the children and reintegrate them into  the
    classroom environment, and a  failure  by  the  government  to  provide
    funding or assistance for Sikh schools. The Sikh community  chooses  to
    send its children to its own  schools  due  to  reports  of  abuse  and
    harassment in government run schools.

29. In section 6.5 of the report [Appendix A. Item 22] Dr Ballard refers to
    further difficulties experienced by  Sikhs  including  locals  claiming
    they are not from Afghanistan and telling  them  to  return  to  India,
    throwing stones at the adults and children and in  2007  a  protest  by
    Afghan Sikhs following difficulties experienced  in  the  cremation  of
    their dead to which we shall refer in more detail below.

30. Dr Ballard also sets out a summary of an interview  undertaken  by  the
    BBC World Service with Dr Anarkali Kaur, a leading member of  the  Sikh
    community in Kabul in which Dr Kaur stated  that  in  relation  to  the
    current position of the Sikh and Hindu community in Kabul:

         . Although the community was  living  in  Afghanistan  before  the
           arrival of Islam, they are now widely viewed as  outsiders,  and
           as immigrants from India.

         . Before the arrival of the Taliban, the community enjoyed a  good
           life in Afghanistan.

         .  War  has  destroyed  many  aspects  of  everybody's  lives   in
           Afghanistan, but the Sikhs and  Hindus  have  been  particularly
           vulnerable as a  result  of  their  being  viewed  as  an  alien
           minority.

         .  Despite  an  influx  of  Sikh  and  Hindu  refugees  from   the
           countryside, the size of the community in Kabul has continued to
           shrink as its members have sought refuge elsewhere.

         . Current problems include: lack of personal security,  especially
           in the form of threats from unknown gunmen; lack  of  access  to
           educational facilities; a widespread belief that all  Sikhs  and
           Hindus are rich (even if  most  of  their  businesses  have  now
           closed down), rendering members of the community  vulnerable  to
           kidnap in search of ransom payments.

31. Dr Ballard notes as significant that at no point in the interview  does
    Dr Kaur suggest that the authorities in Kabul provide  members  of  the
    community with any significant degree of protection against  the  forms
    of harassment which she identified.

32. Dr Ballard's second report [Appendix A. Item 21] was  prepared  at  the
    specific request of Waranpala Solicitors for the purposes of the fourth
    appellant's appeal.   In  section  5.2  he  expresses  his  opinion  in
    relation to the situation in Kabul in the following terms:

        '5.2 Kabul and Jalalabad: different worlds

        While Kabul is by far the largest city in Afghanistan, Jalalabad is
        by no means out  in  the  sticks:  rather  it  lies  halfway  along
        Afghanistan's most significant trade route, the road between  Kabul
        and Peshawar.  Moreover precisely  because  of  its  location,  the
        province in the midst of which it lies has been a key  battleground
        for the various wars  in  which  mujahedeen  guerrillas  have  been
        active ever since the Soviet invasion more than thirty  years  ago,
        and who still tied down a large contingent of ISAF forces  to  this
        day.

        However it would be idle in the extreme to assume  that  Kabul  has
        been  untouched  by  these  developments.   Quite   the   contrary:
        throughout this  period  taking  control  of  Kabul  has  been  the
        ultimate objective of all these insurgents, and if they  have  only
        intermittently achieved that objective it is largely the result  of
        violent bickering among themselves on the  one      hand,  and  the
        presence  of  military  forces  of  external  origin  -  originally
        Russian, and now largely American - on the other hand,  in  support
        of their own favoured regime in Kabul.   Hence  whilst  patches  of
        Kabul - those within which members of what most Afghans  regard  as
        the occupying power  have  taken  up  residence  -  are  relatively
        stable, the same cannot be said for the remainder of  the  country,
        or indeed the city.  Given      the weakness of the Afghan state  -
        a historical no less than a contemporary phenomenon  -  members  of
        every Afghan community routinely look towards their fellow  members
        of their qaum (crudely their tribe) for succour  and  support,  not
        least  as  a  source  of  protection  in  the  face  of   predatory
        initiatives by members of other rival qaum.

        In the midst of all this, members of Afghanistan's Sikh  and  Hindu
        population have behaved in just the same way;  and  to  the  extent
        that they virtually monopolised a narrow but essential niche in the
        socio-economically order which did  not  bring  them  into  serious
        [competition] with  any  other  qaum,  they  largely  looked  after
        themselves. However not only have four decades of insurgency  swept
        away at all past  compromises  to  one  side,  but  the  fact  that
        mujahedeen (of all manner of stripes) have played a leading role in
        the whole process has left members of the Sikh and Hindu quam  ever
        more exposed.  In Afghanistan at least, they were  never  warriors;
        and now, in the eyes of the mujahedeen, as well as  those  affected
        by their ideology, members of this community are  now  regarded  as
        kaffirs, unbelievers who have no legitimate  place  in  the  Afghan
        social code.

        From  this  perspective  the  processes  which  have  rendered  the
        position of Sikh communities  in  the  more  peripheral  towns  and
        cities in Afghanistan's periphery are no different  from  those  at
        work in Kabul: Afghanistan is one country. Nevertheless  that  does
        not mean that there is absolutely  nothing  distinctive  about  the
        situation  in  Kabul.   Precisely  because  Kabul  has  long   been
        Afghanistan's commercial as well as its political capital,  it  has
        long played host to the largest Hindu and  Sikh  community  in  the
        country. And for just the same reason as the position of  Sikhs  in
        outlying towns and cities, as  well  as  outlying  parts  of  Kabul
        itself, became increasingly untenable, the community began to close
        ranks around, and seek shelter in, the Gurdwara in Kate  Parwan  [a
        district of Kabul located to the northwest  of  the  city  centre],
        which has long been the ultimate  hub  of  the  Sikh  community  in
        Afghanistan as a whole.

        However just because such  a  defensive  concentration  of  numbers
        facilitated the  articulation  of  the  greater  degree  of  mutual
        support, there was still a sure sense that  the  community  was  as
        vulnerable as ever, not least because its members still had to find
        a means of living and working in the midst of a wider social  order
        whose members were becoming  increasingly  hostile  to  their  very
        presence in their midst. Moreover even though they  were  gathering
        together in this way in the heart  of  the  old  city,  the  Karzai
        regime has had, and still has, many much  more  challenging  issues
        that confront the  difficulties  encountered  by  members  of  this
        peripheral and still shrinking qaum.

        From this perspective on the situation in  which  members  of  this
        community find themselves in Kabul emerges as little different from
        that of those who once lived in Jalalabad. To be  sure  it  is  one
        which has lasted   longer than those which were once to be found in
        almost all of Afghanistan's more peripheral cities and  towns,  but
        in the longer run it seems destined to be faced with the same fate:
        Afghanistan may be their  land  of  ancestral  origin,  but  recent
        developments have rendered further residence in  their  country  of
        birth untenable.'



Dr Giustozzi's reports and evidence

33.  Also  on  behalf  of  the  fourth   appellant   Warnapala   Solicitors
    commissioned a  report  from  Dr  Giustozzi  dated  1st  February  2014
    [Appendix A. Item 1] Dr Giustozzi also gave oral evidence before us and
    was cross-examined by Mr Tarlow.

34. Dr Giustozzi notes in his report that during  2012  overall  levels  of
    violence had declined in Afghanistan due to the withdrawal  of  foreign
    troops although Afghan-on-Afghan violence has actually increased.  Such
    violence has been distributed geographically with  civilian  casualties
    inflicted by the insurgents being on the  rise,  except  in  2012  when
    there was a decline.  It is said that the level of violence implies  an
    environment very conducive to abuses of every type, particularly at the
    expense of a small minority like the Sikhs and Hindus who are not armed
    and cannot defend themselves.

35. In light of the estimated size of  the  Hindu  and  Sikh  community  in
    Afghanistan it is Dr Giustozzi's  opinion  that  reported  attacks  and
    harassment amount to a very serious threat which explains why the large
    majority of Afghan  Hindus  and  Sikhs  have  opted  to  abandon  their
    property in Afghanistan and flee the country. It is further  stated  in
    his report:

         'Virtually all Sikh families in Afghanistan had businesses  in  the
         country and would have  had  little  motivation  to  leave  in  the
         absence  of  a  serious  threat.  Because  the  insurgency  largely
         operates in rural areas, while Sikhs all live in towns and  cities,
         they have not been threatened by  the  Taliban  specifically  after
         2001; however as detailed  in  the  report  there  are  other  very
         significant sources of threat.  Relocation options  for  Sikhs  are
         limited to the few remaining Sikh communities. Nobody apart from  a
         Sikh trade or craftsmen would employ any  of  them  and  even  that
         would be difficult as Sikhs would prioritise  their  own  relatives
         for hiring.'

36. Dr Giustozzi refers to non-state sources of violence and  threats.   He
    describes Hindus and  Sikhs  being  targeted  for  kidnapping,  ransom,
    looting and protection rackets as a result of  a  perception  of  being
    relatively wealthy.  It is noted that  neither  the  Hindus  nor  Sikhs
    enjoy protection from any of  Afghanistan's  various  factions  because
    they  are  too  small  numerically  to  matter  politically  and  could
    therefore be targeted with impunity.  Seizure of  property  by  militia
    commanders, whilst a widespread practice, had a disproportionate effect
    upon the Sikh and Hindu communities  and  women  could  be  raped  with
    little fear of retaliation from their fellow  community  members  which
    would not have been the case with other communities;  the  majority  of
    which were all well armed.  In relation to  the  current  situation  Dr
    Giustozzi writes:

        '9. The defencelessness of Sikhs and Hindus remains true even today
        as they do not enjoy protection from any of  Afghanistan's  various
        factions.   They  are  also  too  small   numerically   to   matter
        politically. Therefore, they can be targeted with impunity.   Cases
        of kidnapping of Sikhs have still been occasionally reported  after
        2001. After 2001 the militias have mostly been incorporated in  the
        police, while criminal gangs  are  also  known  to  have  setup  an
        extortion  ring  which  targets  businesses.  According   to   Sikh
        community leader Atwar Singh, in Kabul alone 250  houses  belonging
        to Sikhs have been illegally occupied when the militia  moved  into
        the city at the end of 2001 and it has not been possible to reclaim
        them, due to the  lack  of  co-operation  of  the  police  and  the
        judiciary.  At present there are only an  estimated  50  Sikh/Hindu
        properties left in Kabul. Expropriation has  almost  stopped  after
        2001 because all the most  valuable  properties  had  already  been
        taken away from Sikhs. The main controversy from 2001  onwards  has
        been surrounding the seized properties and  efforts  by  Sikhs  and
        Hindus to recover them.  The leader of  the  Kabul  Sikh  community
        wrote to President Karzai several times to ask for  the  return  of
        seized properties. Although Karzai instructed the Ministry  of  the
        Interior to deal with the issue, as of 2007  little  has  moved  on
        this front.  Almost all these militia all  were  linked  to  groups
        like Jamiat-i-Islami, which is strong in the Ministry of  Interior.
        Many shops have also been seized.'

        10. There are plenty of criminal gangs in Afghanistan and the  most
        active and famous among them operate in and around Kabul  and  have
        often  been  targeting  Sikhs.  The  network  of   former   militia
        commanders in control of Parwan is  known  as  the  'Parwan  Mafia'
        which rotates around characters such  as  the  former  Minister  of
        Interior, Zarar Moqbel Ahmad, Abdul Basir Salangi (Chief of  Police
        of Kabul in 2003), Ayub Salangi (former Chief of  Police  of  Kabul
        and currently Deputy Minister of Interior), Amanullah Guzar (former
        Chief of Police of Kabul), Haji Almas (Member  of  Parliament)  and
        Maulana Sayyidkhel (former Chief of Police of  Parwan  and  Kunduz,
        now dead). Through a cousin  of  Zarar,  Khuja  Nabi,  the  network
        maintains contact with two of the most important criminal gangs  in
        Kabul, those led by Rais Khodaidad and Habib Estalifi, a fact which
        allows the network to carry out targeted  assassination  and  other
        operations against rivals and enemies. In Nangarhar province one of
        the main sources of criminal violence have  been  the  militias  of
        Hazarat Ali. Attacks took place wherever Sikh or Hindu  communities
        existed in Afghanistan,  including  Kabul,  where  a  commander  of
        Jamiat-i-Islami, Rahim, was even sentenced to death for his  crimes
        against Sikhs and others, but managed to evade execution due to his
        connections. Rahim is the only known case of somebody  having  been
        prosecuted for an attack on Sikhs.

        11. All the Sikh/Hindu temples (they are usually shared by the  two
        religions) in Kabul were ransacked and destroyed, although some  of
        them were rehabilitated later (see para. 30).  Afghans often  mixed
        Sikh and Hindus together as they are all seen as 'Indians' (Hindu).
         According to the deputy of the Hindu and Sikh Council, there  have
        been after 2000 tens of cases  of  returning  Sikhs  who  tried  to
        reclaim their property, but failed to get  any  collaboration  from
        the authorities and received  instead  death  threats.   Eventually
        most of them were forced to flee the country again, also because of
        the lack of resources of livelihood.   Up  to  October  2004,  only
        about  a  hundred  Sikh  families  had  returned  to   Afghanistan,
        according to sources gathered by the Indian press. There  has  been
        after 2004 a continuing but unquantifiable flow of returning Sikhs,
        mostly members of families who left Afghanistan in the  late  1990s
        and are returning because they failed  to  settle  successfully  in
        their countries of immigration (India, Europe and  Russia).   These
        returnees are coming back to try and recover the  properties  which
        were  expropriated in the 1990s, but without success and are  often
        forced to leave  again  because  they  do  not  have  a  source  of
        likelihood.

        12. Episodes of attacks  and  harassment  of  Sikhs  are  sometimes
        reported in the press, as detailed below. With regards to the  case
        of SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005]
        UKIAT 00137, in my  view  at  that  time  the  seriousness  of  the
        condition of Sikhs in Afghanistan was  greatly  underestimated,  so
        that even if there is no evidence that it has worsened since  2005,
        it remains pretty grim.  There are  very  few  valuable  properties
        left in the hands of Sikh families, so property seizures are  today
        inevitably rare. Even if we  take  the  episodes  of  violence  and
        harassment  mentioned  in  this  report  and  assuming  that   this
        represents the whole picture (which is highly unlikely  given  that
        Afghanistan is in the middle of a violent conflict of thousands  of
        deaths occurring yearly, distracting the media from  Sikh  issues),
        the picture which emerges is one of  intensive  harassment  and  de
        facto discrimination. Estimates of its size today correspond to  no
        more than the size of a single village.  If the known  episodes  of
        harassment  and  violence  (which  presumably  represents  only   a
        proportion of the actual incidents  having  occurred  as  explained
        above) are compared to  the  size  of  the  population,  we  should
        consider that there  is  a  rampant  hostility  and  discrimination
        against Sikhs in Afghanistan.'

37. In relation to the availability of protection Dr Giustozzi notes  that,
    due to the  perceived  weak  position  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  and  the
    condition of the  Afghan  law  enforcement  system,  they  become  easy
    targets for abuse. They cannot defend  themselves  physically  as  most
    Muslims in Afghanistan would for, if they did, the mechanism of  Muslim
    solidarity would  kick  in  which  would  be  entirely  to  the  Sikh's
    disadvantage.  Dr Giustozzi notes that many liberal Muslims agree  that
    Sikhs and Hindus have been discriminated against.

38. The  Sikh  and  Hindu  community  are  represented  in  the  Senate  by
    Anarkhali, a Hindu woman appointed by President  Karzai  as  a  Senator
    although a proposal to have a Parliamentary seat reserved for Sikhs and
    Hindus was rejected by the Afghan parliament in December  2013  on  the
    basis it was contrary to the Afghan  constitution.  It  is  clear  that
    President Karzai is willing to support the Sikh and Hindu cause such as
    supporting the idea of having a reserved seat in Parliament and  it  is
    noted that Sikhs and Hindus have some influence among  liberal  Afghans
    as well as over the President.

39. In relation to the availability of protection,  the  report  notes  the
    police are known for being abusive and ineffective as well  as  corrupt
    and, specifically in relation to the difficulties experienced by  Sikhs
    and Hindus, Dr Giustozzi writes:

        '19. As mentioned  above,  as  far  as  it  has  been  possible  to
        establish no crime committed against Sikhs by  Muslim  Afghans  has
        been punished; Sikhs can report attacks to the police,  but  it  is
        very rare for the police to follow them up. For example,  the  Sikh
        community complains about police indifference to a  wave  of  crime
        attacks on Sikhs in Karte Parwan.   The  case  of  Rahim  mentioned
        above is the only known exception, but the sentence against him was
        never implemented.  As indicated above, however, no Sikh who  tried
        to recover his property from the authorities has  been  successful.
        Despite the end of  official  persecution,  therefore,  within  the
        state apparatus hostility to Sikhs and Hindus  remains  widespread.
        However, there are direct orders from the President of  Afghanistan
        to protect Sikh funerals and  the  police  have  been  implementing
        these orders. As a result of this the Sikh  community  praises  the
        police for having escorted Sikh funerals in the face of  protesting
        crowds.

        20. Carrying long hair and turban in the  Sikh  fashion  of  course
        greatly facilitates identifying Sikhs and therefore exposes them to
        the hostility of elements of the population, such as Muslim zealots
        as discussed above. Because it is difficult to recognise Sikhs when
        they do not carry these distinctive features, it is not possible to
        estimate how many Sikhs do not dress according to  their  religious
        code.'

40. Dr Giustozzi refers to incidents of violence since SL  was  decided  in
    2005 and provides examples at paragraphs 23 to 25 of his  report  which
    can be summarised as follows:

          i. Pressure being brought to bear  against  members  of  the  Sikh
             community to sell their property at a favourable price in Kabul
             since 2005.   This  included  in  2006  a  former  Minister  of
             Defence, Fahim, targeting a Sikh neighbour and even approaching
             the  head  of  the  Sikh  community  for  assistance   in   his
             expropriation effort but this was nine years ago.

         ii. Threats against those active in seeking the  return  of  seized
             properties which is not particularised  in  terms  of  date  or
             detail.

        iii. In 2006, eight years ago,  a  young  Sikh  from  Jalalabad  who
             returned to the city  to  recover  his  family's  property  but
             disappeared before being able to contact his relatives there.

         iv. A Hindu rights activist,  Anarkali  Honaryar,  who  is  also  a
             delegate to the Constitutional Loya Jirga in 2003  and  who  is
             now a Senator, complaining that the properties of  Hindus  have
             not been returned and that Hindus still received death  threats
             from gunmen. Eleven years ago.

          v. In March 2004 the Hindu and Sikh community of Khost  complained
             to the local governor that "powerful Muslims" were forcing them
             to give up property, which is ten years ago.

         vi. April 2005, a Sikh temple in Khost was attacked and  robbed  by
             twenty one armed men, a city where  there  has  always  been  a
             heavy security presence due to insurgency in neighbouring areas
             without  any  intervention  from  the  police  or   other   law
             enforcement agencies which is said to be highly significant  of
             the neglect of Sikhs by the authorities, which was  nine  years
             ago. Of 243 Hindu families who once lived  in  Khost  only  one
             remains today.

        vii. During recent elections, Hindu and Sikh  candidates  have  been
             harassed in Kabul and their  election  posters  torn  down  and
             replaced with aggressive anti-infidel slogans. It is  noted  in
             the report that many Sikhs have indicated they miss the Taliban
             regime  which  was  more  effective  in  protecting  them   and
             preventing harassment and theft.

       viii.  Attempts  to  start  business  activities  being  thwarted  by
             threats. There have been at  least  two  bomb  attacks  against
             Hindu and Sikh shops selling Indian films and  music  which  is
             judged unacceptable  to  Islam  by  Muslim  extremists  and  in
             Lashkargah (Helmand) Sikh shops have been demolished  on  order
             of the governor and no land has been  allocated  to  build  new
             ones. Although the evidence is not of recent events.

         ix. Ongoing harassment of adult Sikh and  Hindus,  particularly  at
             the bazaar, who have fruit thrown at them and other gestures of
             hostility.

          x. Believers attending ceremonies at the Temple are  targeted  for
             abuse. Netting is said to cover second  story  windows  of  the
             Dharamsal Temple in Kabul after they  were  repeatedly  smashed
             with bricks and rocks and passers-by often shout "infidel"  and
             other insults. Worshippers rarely leave the service  after  its
             conclusion in the evening as knife wielding robbers are said to
             lurk near the temple waiting for adherence to these night  time
             services, meaning congregation members prefer to  sleep  within
             the temple compound and leave the following day, which is  said
             to be ongoing.

         xi. Sikh religious tradition and cremation is  a  strong  point  of
             contention  between  Sikhs  and  Muslims.   Plans  to  build  a
             crematorium were blocked by Muslim  zealots  according  to  the
             deputy mayor of Kabul. The conflict arises between the Sikh and
             Hindu tradition of cremation of the dead from the fact that  in
             Islam not only is cremation not accepted but  Afghan  tradition
             demands that corpses are buried without being tampered with. In
             September  2007  Muslim  zealots  attacked  a  Sikh   cremation
             ceremony in Kabul, beating up several of the  participants  and
             forcing the ritual to stop. The  Sikhs  later  demonstrated  in
             front of UNAMA's office requesting help who arranged  a  police
             escort to protect the funeral convoy back to the place  of  the
             ceremony and hold Muslim attackers at bay.  It is reported that
             Sikhs who have themselves tried to carry  out  cremations  have
             been beaten up, stoned, or otherwise blocked from doing so, and
             described  as  statue  worshipping  infidels  whose  ceremonies
             "smell". Islam considers cremation a sacrilege. Such opposition
             continues to date and although President Karzai and  the  Mayor
             of Kabul have tried to find viable locations for the Sikhs,  in
             each and every case the local Muslim population has opposed the
             ceremonies and attacked them leading  the  police  to  have  to
             intervene to protect the Sikhs or  the  funerals  taking  place
             under a hail of stones.'    We note this occurred  seven  years
             ago and is not evidence of the current position.

41. Elsewhere Dr Giustozzi comments upon the livelihood issues by reference
    to the tradition of Sikhs and Hindus as traders although he notes  that
    in the absence of capital to start a business, returnees to Kabul  will
    struggle to earn a livelihood. Many who have lost their businesses  are
    unemployed and are disadvantaged in the labour market as  many  Muslims
    will give preferential employment to other  Muslims.  The  majority  of
    Sikhs and Hindus still residing in Afghanistan  are  there  with  their
    families because they could not afford to get the  family  out  of  the
    country to a safer location. In paragraph 32 Dr Giustozzi writes:

        '32. There is no assistance returning refugees back  to  Kabul  and
        most of them are reported to be living in miserable  conditions  in
        the temple, at the expense of the  community  (temples  operate  as
        charities, with limited  funds  provided  by  the  faithful).   The
        community is too small and poor to  provide  more  than  occasional
        support to homeless Sikhs; those receiving support are expected  to
        become able to cater for themselves after a  few  months  and  each
        functioning temple can only provide shelter to a handful  of  needy
        members of the community at any given time. Even those who  qualify
        for UNHCR help will only be given temporary hospitality in  a  tent
        at the outskirts of Kabul and then left  to  fend  for  themselves.
        Community leaders are advising refugees in India not to  return  to
        Afghanistan. According to an Amnesty  International  Report,  three
        Sikhs who had been returned to Afghanistan had to  seek  refuge  in
        the temple after being racially abused in the street. There are  12
        functioning temples around Afghanistan (out of 64 before the  war),
        of which four are in Kabul and several towns have none;  the  Kabul
        community is the largest and  better  able  to  provide  some  help
        through the temple than other communities. In Nawabad for  examples
        some 120 families were reported in 2006 to  be  living  within  the
        ruins of the old temple, in very precarious conditions.

    We again note the date of these events which are eleven years old.

42. In relation to employment opportunities Dr Giustozzi writes:

        '35. There are  no  Sikh  employed  by  the  Afghan  government  at
        present. Because they are usually only educated to  primary  school
        level if at all, they are rarely in a position to apply for jobs in
        the bureaucracy anyway. There is no official discrimination against
        them, but hiring in the state apparatus in Afghanistan is driven by
        patronage and clientelism and  lacking  connections  to  power  for
        politicians is probably the  main  obstacle  for  Sikhs.  Typically
        Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan are  self-employed,  running  their
        own family businesses. [The fourth appellant] would  have  to  seek
        employment from another Hindu  or  Sikh  business,  but  there  are
        relatively few of them left and the owners will  always  prioritise
        their own relatives when hiring.  It  is  unlikely  that  a  Muslim
        business will hire a Sikh in any case. When that happens, they  are
        usually employed servants  and  paid  very  low  rates.  A  current
        estimate is that 20% of the  economically  active  Hindu  and  Sikh
        population owns and operates its own shop  (mostly  grocery  shops)
        and the remaining 80% holds menial jobs. Sikh women do not normally
        work in public places but rather at  home,  except  in  emergencies
        such as no other family member being  able  to  attend  the  family
        shop.  Very few Sikh women work outside  their  homes  and  usually
        these are the few who got educated.   There  is  no  discrimination
        against Sikhs in the health service, but should a Sikh need medical
        assistance, the services provided by the government are limited and
        not actually free; he would for example have to pay these medicines
        in most cases. For this reason many Sikhs are today unemployed. The
        government does not provide any unemployment benefit or  assistance
        of other kind to the unemployed and under employed. For this reason
        relocation to a different town is very difficult; the  Sikhs  would
        need to acquire property there in order to start trading.   Renting
        property is a risky option, as they would have most likely to  rent
        from Muslims, who in turn could come under  pressure  by  religious
        zealots, who could object to having Sikhs living among them.'

UNHCR

  43. We note at  pages  45-46  of  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for
      Assessing the International Protection Needs  of  Asylum-Seekers  from
      Afghanistan Report - 6 August  2013, the following:

         "The Sikh and  Hindu  communities,  although  allowed  to  practice
their religion publicly,        reportedly continue to face  discrimination,
including when seeking government jobs.          They are also  reported  to
suffer    intimidation    and    harassment    during    major     religious
celebrations. Both communities report not being able to cremate their  dead
in            accordance with their customs, due to  interference  by  those
who live near the               cremation  sites.  Sikhs  and  Hindus  have
reportedly been victims of illegal occupation         and seizure of  their
land,  and  have  also  reportedly  been  unable   to   regain   access   to
property lost during the mujahideen era. The right to education  for  Hindu
and Sikh           children  is  reported  to  be  severely      compromised
because   of   abuse,    harassment    and           bullying    by    other
students. Although reliable data about the  size  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
communities in Afghanistan are not available, large  numbers  of  Sikhs  and
Hindus are        believed to have left  Afghanistan  as  a  result  of  the
severe difficulties they faced. The           small  numbers  of  Sikhs  and
Hindus who remain in Afghanistan have reportedly been
         left even more vulnerable to abuse."

Other reports

44. A number of additional news and other reports that have  been  provided
    in the appellants' bundles relating to the general  country  conditions
    in Afghanistan which we have taken into account when considering  these
    issues although this is not a case which is  intended  to  provide  any
    guidance in relation to the general security situation  in  Afghanistan
    per se in relation to which specific country guidance exists. For  this
    reason documents in the bundle provided  by  Legal  Justice  Solicitors
    relating to the general security situation following the withdrawal  of
    the  international  forces  and  ongoing   violence   have   not   been
    specifically commented upon unless  they  are  deemed  to  have  direct
    relevance to the risk on return for the particular social groups  under
    consideration.

45. The material includes a news report dated 30th January 2012 of  a  Sikh
    man returned to Afghanistan on  a  chartered  flight  from  the  United
    Kingdom being detained by the authorities who claimed that he is not an
    Afghan. His date of return was 6th  July  2010  yet  the  date  of  the
    article is 30th January 2012. The article [Appendix A. Item 17]  refers
    to the general situation of  religious  intolerance,  difficulties  for
    religious minorities, difficulties and hardships experienced  by  Sikhs
    and Hindus as referred to in the country expert  reports  to  which  we
    have referred above. The event occurred, however, four  years  ago  and
    there is no evidence to show the returnee remains detained.

46. We also note an article relating to Sikhs and Hindus dated 17 May  2008
    [Appendix A. Item  36]  that  claimed  persecution  in  Afghanistan,  a
    reference to the fact that members of both  faiths  were  told  by  the
    Taliban that they  had  to  undertake  their  religious  ceremonies  in
    private. They were not prevented  from  continuing  to  practice  their
    faith and that Hinduism is  said  to  have  been  widely  practised  in
    Afghanistan before the introduction of Islam  in  the  seventh  century
    when a mass conversion led to the slaughter of thousands of Hindus.

47. A news article from the Rawa News  dated  11th  July  2013  contains  a
    number of quotes from  those  interviewed  by  a  journalist  including
    Anarkall Kaur Honaryar, a Sikh member of the Upper House of Parliament,
    which acknowledges that Sikhs and Hindus face some problems  which  she
    attributes to ignorance in the wider community. In relation to the land
    allocated issue, Honaryar is recorded as having  stated  that  she  was
    behind an initiative to build a  purpose-built  settlement  in  eastern
    Kabul complete with schools, a crematorium and other facilities for the
    Sikhs and Hindus in  the  city  although  the  response  had  not  been
    enthusiastic. "Now that we've launched the town, no one is prepared  to
    go there" she said. "The municipality  calls  me  every  day  and  says
    construction work needs to get started there".

48. We have commented above on the age  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  in
    relation to the assertions of ongoing persecution of Sikhs  and  Hindus
    in Afghanistan.  In this regard we note the continuing lack of evidence
    in the recent bundle provided for the August 2015 hearing  of  specific
    incidents of targeted persecution suffered by  such  individuals  as  a
    result of their religious identity.

49. Presidential  elections  have  also  taken  place  in  Afghanistan  and
    President Karzai has been replaced by President Ashfar Ghani as part of
    a power sharing arrangement between President Ghani  and  his  opponent
    Abdullah Abdullah who is the  Afghan  Governments  Chief  Executive.  A
    cabinet has been appointed which is said not to include  the  names  of
    the major warlords. The current President  is  described  as  having  a
    technocratic outlook in  contrast  to  his  predecessor  who  was  only
    interested in  power  relations  [Appendix  C.  Item  6].  Insufficient
    evidence has been provided to illustrate a change of government  policy
    towards the subject group or deterioration in or loss of  the  benefits
    and support they were able to acquire under the previous president.

Evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State

OGN

50. The Secretary of State sought to  rely  upon  the  sources  of  country
    material from the OGN June 2013, and specifically section 3.15 relating
    to Hindus and Sikhs which states:

        '3.15 Hindus and Sikhs


        3.15.1 Hindus and Sikhs may seek asylum on the  grounds  that  they
        face societal discrimination and harassment and  that  they  cannot
        rely on the protection of the Afghan authorities.


        3.15.2 Religious Overview: see 3.13.2


        3.15.3 Demography: The US State  Department  in  its  International
        Religious Freedom 2012 Report for Afghanistan published 20 May 2013
        states that -Reliable data on religious demography is difficult  to
        obtain because an official nationwide census has not been conducted
        in decades. Leaders  of  minority  religious  communities  estimate
        there are 350 Sikh  families  and  30  Hindu  families.   The  USSD
        Religious Freedom report for 2011, published July  2012,  stated  -
        According  to  self-estimates  by  these  communities,  there   are
        approximately 2,000 Sikhs and 100 Hindu  believers.  The  Institute
        for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) reported in  July  2011  that  -
        Given  its  proximity  to  India,  Afghanistan   historically   had
        substantial Hindu and Sikh minorities, estimated at  20,000  before
        the factional civil war in 1992-96, followed by Taleban rule  under
        which  they  were  subject  to  discrimination  rules.  With   most
        community members long gone, the total number of Hindus  and  Sikhs
        in Afghanistan is  now  estimated  at  around  3,000.   In  the  US
        International Religious Freedom Report for July to  December  2010,
        published 13/09/2011 and in the 2010 report, published 17  November
        2010 the number of Sikhs is quoted at 3,000 and Hindus at 100.  The
        US 2009 International Religious Freedom report  quotes  figures  of
        4,900 Sikhs and 1,100 Hindus.


        3.15.4 The Centre for Applied  South  Asian  Studies  (Casas)  2011
        report -History and Current Position  of  Afghanistan's  Hindu  and
        Sikh population quotes a UNHCR paper of June 2005 as estimating 600
        Sikh and Hindu families (about 3,700 persons) living in Afghanistan
        with small but steady numbers returning, particularly  from  India.
        The  majority  lived  in  Kabul  (185  families),  Jalalabad   (160
        families) and Kunduz (100 families) with others in Ghazni, Kandahar
        and Khost. Previously there had been as many as 200,000  Sikhs  and
        Hindus living in Afghanistan. In considering the data the author of
        the report states - the only reliable observation that can be  made
        about the current [2011] characteristics of Afghanistan's Sikh  and
        Hindi minority is that it is now  only  a  small  fraction  of  its
        former size, and that as numbers shrink, it's remaining members are
        finding themselves ever more vulnerable to aggressive exploitation,
        against which they have no meaningful defence. Hence  their  exodus
        can only be expected to continue.


        3.15.5 Treatment: Freedom of religion and the  corollary  right  to
        manifest one's religion in private or public are guaranteed by  the
        Afghan  Constitution.  The  Constitution   contains,   however,   a
        repugnancy provision stating that no law can be contrary  to  Islam
        and defers to Shari'a law for  matters  not  explicitly  stipulated
        therein. According to some reports, members of the Hindu  and  Sikh
        communities continue to face  societal  discrimination,  harassment
        and, in some cases, violence at  the  hands  of  members  of  other
        religious groups.  Freedom House in  its  2013  Afghanistan  report
        noted - Religious freedom  has  improved  since  the  fall  of  the
        Taliban government in late 2001, but is still hampered by  violence
        and harassment aimed at religious minorities and reformist Muslims,
        Hindus, Sikhs, and Shiite Muslims -  particularly  those  from  the
        Hazara ethnic group  -  have  also  faced  official  obstacles  and
        discrimination by the Sunni Muslim  majority  -  Sikhs  and  Hindus
        continued to  face  discrimination,  reporting  unequal  access  to
        government jobs and harassment in their schools, as well as  verbal
        and physical abuse in public places. In  August  a  Sikh  community
        leader publicly requested assistance to relocate Sikhs outside  the
        country.


        3.15.6 Sikh and Hindu communities  also  experience  problems  with
        land confiscation by local authorities and commanders, as  well  as
        obtaining  land  for  cremation.  Although  Hindus  and  Sikhs  had
        recourse to dispute resolution mechanisms such as the Special  Land
        and Property Court, in practice the communities felt unprotected.


        3.15.7 At least two Sikhs served in government positions, including
        one as a senior economic advisor to President Karzai and one  as  a
        presidentially appointed member of the upper house  of  parliament.
        Sikh leaders complained that they lacked political  representation,
        noting that most Afghans fail to  distinguish  between  Hindus  and
        Sikhs  despite  significant  religious   differences.   They   also
        continued  to  complain  about  a  lack  of  guaranteed  seats   in
        parliament. There are schools for Sikh children in Ghazni, Helmand,
        and  Kabul.  There  are  no  Sikh  schools  in  Jalalabad,  despite
        estimates that nearly one-quarter  of  the  Sikh  population  lives
        there. The government provides limited funding  for  Sikh  schools,
        including for  teachers  for  the  basic  curriculum.  A  few  Sikh
        children attend private international schools. Hindus do  not  have
        separate  schools,  but  sometimes  send  their  children  to  Sikh
        schools.


        3.15.8 The US Commission on International Religious Freedom  Annual
        Report 2012 notes - In January,  media  reported  on  the  case  of
        Baljit Singh, a 23 year-old Sikh. Detained in 2010  on  charges  of
        falsely  claiming  Afghan  citizenship  after  the  United  Kingdom
        deported him, Singh was in detention for over 19 months until being
        released on February 1. Singh alleged that  during  his  detention,
        fellow prisoners and prison guards beat him on multiple  occasions,
        insulted him, and forced him  to  remove  his  turban.  Singh  also
        alleged that he was deceived into  converting  to  Islam  while  in
        prison; officials recorded and later broadcast  his  conversion  on
        Tolo television.  Officials  from  the  attorney  general's  office
        disputed the claims of mistreatment and told media that  non-Muslim
        prisoners routinely converted to Islam in  the  belief  they  would
        receive more  lenient  treatment.  Singh  was  granted  asylum  and
        returned to the United Kingdom in July.  The Guardian newspaper  of
        3 July 2012 reported - Singh said he was  being  harassed  for  his
        religion and pressured to convert. He was verbally  and  physically
        abused in prison. One inmate threw boiling water  over  him,  Singh
        said, pulling out a picture of his bandaged face shortly after  the
        assault. He was also ordered to sleep in a  corner  of  an  outdoor
        courtyard, next to the toilet, he said. Men had to step over him on
        their way to relieve themselves, and as they did  so,  some  kicked
        the turban that marked him out as a Sikh. Singh said the conversion
        angered the country's already beleaguered Sikh community, which has
        dwindled from thousands of families to just a few hundred  over  30
        years of war and persecution.


         See also: Actors of protection (section 2.2 above)
         Internal relocation (section 2.3 above)


         Caselaw (section 2.4 above)
        3.15.9 Conclusion. Data on religious demography is not reliable  as
        the Afghan Government does not collect such information. Given  the
        disparity of data in public sources, all  that  can  be  said  with
        certainty is that the Sikh /  Hindu  community  has   significantly
        reduced from its peak in the  pre  Taliban  era.  In  view  of  the
        importance in Afghanistan of  the  extended  family  and  community
        structure, caseworkers need to consider  whether  adequate  support
        for their  needs  is  likely  to  be  available  to  an  individual
        returnee.


        3.15.10 Whilst there is no evidence that Sikhs  or  Hindus  are  at
        real risk of persecution at the hands  of  the  Afghan  authorities
        solely because of their ethnicity, nor are there  indicators  of  a
        Government able to provide effective protection to  the  Sikh/Hindu
        community. Sikhs and Hindus can be subject to  societal  harassment
        and discrimination.  Where  an  applicant  claims  that  they  have
        suffered harassment and discrimination in the  past,  then  careful
        consideration should be given as to whether their  situation  meets
        the threshold for granting protection.


        3.15.11 If a Sikh or Hindu man or married woman does establish that
        they  would  on  return  face  a  localised   risk   amounting   to
        persecution, it might be possible for them to avoid such  treatment
        by internal relocation to an area where well-established and  close
        knit Sikh and Hindu communities remain. Where  internal  relocation
        would avoid persecution and would be reasonable, a grant of  asylum
        will not be appropriate. However see note 3.15.9 above.


        3.15.12 Single Sikh and Hindu women and female heads  of  household
        without a male support network cannot  reasonably  relocate  within
        Afghanistan. Therefore, if  they  would  face  ill-treatment  which
        amounts to persecution they should be granted asylum  unless  there
        are clear case-specific reasons not to do so.'


British Embassy letter

51. The second document relied upon by the Secretary of State is  a  letter
    from the British Embassy  in  Kabul  dated  29th  December  2013  which
    summarises information said to have been provided by an Afghan  Senator
    in the Afghanistan National Parliament on 10th November 2013 based upon
    that unnamed individual's personal knowledge.  This can  be  summarised
    as follows:

         . Sikhs and Hindus living in Afghanistan are originally from  this
           country and are not migrants from India as generally  perceived.
           The number of Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan reached  a  number
           of 100K before the Russian intervention and civil  war.   During
           the lengthy 35 year war, a large  number  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus
           migrated to different countries, particularly India. Before  the
           war, Sikhs and Hindus made a prominent contribution  to  society
           and held key positions, such as  Dr  Barmokhandas  who  was  the
           pioneer of forensic medicine in  Afghanistan.   Before  the  war
           era, they were engaged  in  businesses  such  as  gold  selling,
           herbal medicine homoeopathy and cloth selling.

         . Currently the number of Sikh and  Hindus  in  Afghanistan  could
           reach approximately 7000 out of whom 5000 are permanently living
           in Afghanistan and 2000 are Sikhs living in  Afghanistan  to  do
           business with their families living elsewhere.  Sikhs and Hindus
           are not as wealthy as they used to be before the  war  and  they
           live based on a daily wage or engage in  small-scale  businesses
           such as herbal medicine,  homoeopathy  and  cloth  selling.  The
           tradition of gold selling is no  longer  seen  among  Sikhs  and
           Hindus which is due to their lower economic social status.

         . There are very few educated Sikhs or Hindus and they cannot send
           their children to schools as bullying is high against Sikh/Hindu
           children.  However two schools have been built by the Government
           of Afghanistan specifically for Sikh and Hindu children in Kabul
           and  Nangarhar  provinces,  where  they   can   get   elementary
           education.        They       have       worshipping       places
           (Gurdwaras/Dharamshalas).   There   are   no   restrictions   on
           worshipping or their religious  ceremonies.  They  have  a  good
           relationship with Muslims and they attend interfaith ceremonies.

         .  Throughout  Afghanistan,  Sikhs  and  Hindus  live   in   small
           communities  in  Kabul,  Kandahar,  Helmand,  Khost,  Nangarhar,
           Ghazni, Kunduz,  Parwan,  Heart  and  Mazar-e-Sharif  provinces.
           Currently there are 64 worshipping  places  across  the  country
           with nine in Kabul and the remainder in the provinces  mentioned
           above, with each community having their own  worshipping  place.
           There are no Sikh/Hindu media publications in Afghanistan.

         . Sikhs and Hindus have problems regarding their  cremation  venue
           (Shamshan) in Kabul and Ghazni provinces.  Although  the  Ghazni
           issue has been resolved, problems persist in Kabul.  A cremation
           venue has been allotted to Hindus and Sikhs  (at  Qalacha  area)
           who have been using it for the past 120 years. However,  due  to
           the expansion of residential units and urbanisation, residential
           buildings have been built around the Shamshan, no longer letting
           Hindus and Sikhs use that particular venue as the smell  of  the
           burnt  bodies  contaminates  the  environment.   As  a   result,
           residents around the Shamshan stone their dead bodies and  don't
           let them observe their funerals. They have had to ask the police
           to protect them during many funerals, the  police  have  obliged
           and held security for their processions. Kabul Municipality  has
           allocated a large area for Hindus and Sikhs at  Police  District
           21 area of Kabul city where they can build residential units and
           their Shamshan.  District 21 is freshly  annexed  to  the  Kabul
           Municipality though is not developed yet.

         . The new area will take a long time to be developed into a proper
           residential area  as  it  lacks  basic  infrastructure  such  as
           electricity, water, sanitation, roads etc. Some Sikhs face  land
           grabbing problems. Sikhs and Hindus left their property and fled
           the country as a result of  war.   The  properties  are  usually
           grabbed either by some fellow Sikh community  members  or  other
           people from the surrounding area. Most of them  get  the  issues
           resolved through relevant legal systems and have regained  their
           land, however, some do not  claim  their  property  fearing  the
           party grabbing their land would harm them. Currently there is  a
           lack of shelter for some Sikhs who have been living in Gurdwaras
           (worshipping places) across the  country.   There  are  families
           living in a Gurdwaras in Kabul, Jalalabad , Kandahar ,  Helmand,
           Ghanzi and Kunduz.  These families have made  rooms  inside  the
           premises of the Gurdwara and are living there  due  to  lack  of
           housing.

         . The Ministry of Haji and  religious  affairs  has  resolved  the
           problems with the residents around the Shamshan at  Qalacha  and
           residents will let Sikhs undertake ceremonies for the  next  2-3
           years until the Shamshan at PD 21 is developed. The Ministry  of
           Haji and  religious  affairs  has  taken  steps  and  introduced
           awareness  programmes  across  mosques  to   promote   religious
           tolerance with Sikhs and other minority groups which  have  been
           effective and welcomed by the Sikhs and Hindus.

         . Sikhs do not have any complaints against the system and they are
           happy with what the government is doing. However,  some  of  the
           issues they face are common amongst the Sikh  community.   Sikhs
           and Hindus are not the target of any particular  persecution  or
           discrimination in any part of the  country.  They  have  a  good
           relationship with Muslims and attend interfaith ceremonies. They
           are not subject to discrimination by the public. They can set up
           their businesses as everybody else in the country can do. Hindus
           and Sikhs return back in small numbers.  Lately  three  families
           returned back from  India.  Hindus  and  Sikhs  can  participate
           equally in political processes  and  the  Afghan  president  has
           recently issued a decree (#59) through which  Sikhs  and  Hindus
           are reserved seats at the Lower House.  The decree is  currently
           in the Upper House and is awaiting passage.

         . Currently Sikhs and Hindus have to participate in  Parliamentary
           elections through open competition. There are very few prominent
           Sikhs or Hindus. Although another  Sikh  ran  for  Parliamentary
           elections in 2010, he lost. There are opportunities to engage in
           local and national politics.

52. This evidence is specifically criticised by Dr Giustozzi  at  paragraph
    36 of his report of 1st of February 2014 [Appendix A. Item 1] where  he
    writes:

        '36. The figures provided in the letter concerning the size of  the
        Sikh and Hindu community are similar to those discussed in para.  4
        of this report. The number of Sikh and Hindu temples is  stated  as
        64,  but this  figure  also  included  a  majority  of  interactive
        temples, which have been damaged during succession of wars  in  the
        1980s and 1990s and never repaired.  According to the letter,  some
        Sikhs have been able to reclaim their properties  after  2001,  but
        the three senior members of  the  community  interviewed  for  this
        report  have  all  indicated  that  they  were  not  aware  of  any
        successful case of properties having been recovered.  The decree of
        President Karzai, which was  meant  to  give  Sikhs  and  Hindus  a
        reserved seat in Parliament, has been rejected  by  the  parliament
        and therefore the information contained in the letter is not up  to
        date. In other regards the content of the letter coincides with the
        content of this report.'

53. In relation to the position of women Dr Giustozzi refers in his  report
    to other reports that in 2005, nine years ago, two  Sikh  school  girls
    were  reported  missing  after  visiting  the  only  active  temple  in
    Kandahar. They were later found to have been  forcefully  converted  to
    Islam. Attempts to seek redress proved  unsuccessful  as  a  judge  who
    reviewed the case found that  Islamic  jurisprudence  meant  the  young
    women were now Muslim and nothing further could be  done.  Two  similar
    cases have been reported from Charikar and Baghlan. The  conversion  of
    an infidel to Islam is  considered  in  some  circles  to  be  a  great
    achievement in religious terms and actively encouraged by a  number  of
    Muslim clerics.

54. Women are particularly at risk as a result of the presumption they  are
    more likely to convert under duress. As a result is it is  said  to  be
    rare for Sikh families to take their women out and particularly without
    the cover of a Burkah.  Dr  Giustozzi  states  that  in  ten  years  of
    travelling in Afghanistan he has never seen a recognisable  Sikh  woman
    in the streets, even though he has often seen Sikhs. The risk  to  Sikh
    women generally is said to be based upon a fear of  being  harassed  as
    they do not meet Islamic strictures concerning the dress code.  In  his
    opinion it would be unthinkable today for a Sikh man to  let  a  female
    member of his family travel outside the family home alone.

55. Children: In Dr Giustozzi's opinion Sikh children are  more  vulnerable
    and harassment of young Hindus and Sikhs, particular girls, is reported
    as being common  as  are  fights  between  Muslim  and  Sikh  or  Hindu
    children.

56. It is noted that harassment  of  young  Hindu  and  Sikh  children  was
    continuing unabated in 2010 and 2011 with a  total  of  70  school  age
    children at that time in Kabul being forced  to  drop  out  of  school,
    switch school or go to private schools.  Harassment included  bullying,
    beatings, hair being cut by other children.  There is a private  school
    for Sikh and Hindu children in Kabul  with  about  30  students  and  a
    single state school  where  the  teaching  staff  are  judged  by  Sikh
    families to be supportive enough to allow them to send  their  children
    there; although harassment is reported by Muslim children here too.

57. Reports are received of attempted conversions to Islam from  which  the
    school authorities are unwilling or unable to assist.

58. It is said that many Sikh children have been withdrawn from school as a
    result of such harassment. Numbers are estimated to be between  500-550
    in Nangarhar, Helmand, Kandahar, Ghazni,  Baghlan,  Laghman  and  Kumar
    provinces with 200 of these being in Jalalabad  alone.  The  government
    has assigned one teacher to a Gurdwara  in  Kabul  to  teach  Dari  and
    mathematics to Sikh and Hindu children whilst Sikh schools are reported
    to still exist in Ghazni, Nangarhar, Helmand and Kabul.

59. There are no high schools for Sikhs  and  families  rarely  send  their
    children to a high school as their intent would be for the children  to
    help in the trading activities of the family.   There  is  no  official
    barrier to such children attending high school although  the  situation
    would be the same  as  described  above  for  Sikh  children  attending
    primary schools. The school experience is said to be better  for  those
    who do not adopt the distinctive hairstyle and  dress  associated  with
    Sikhs and Hindus and it is said a few  female  Sikhs  are  educated  to
    university level although often do not dress in a recognisable  way  in
    public.

60. We have also noted the document entitled "Compilation  of  Request  for
    Information. UK Request on Afghan Sikhs and Hindus" dated November 2013
    in which replies provided by a number  of  named  States  to  questions
    relating to their individual practices in dealing  with  asylum  claims
    from Afghan Sikhs and Hindus are summarised. We note some  participants
    state they automatically grant  asylum  to  religious  minorities  from
    Afghanistan but that the majority do not, such as  Germany  and  Canada
    for example.

Submissions

61. At the conclusion of the oral evidence (which  only  included  evidence
    from Dr Giustozzi) both parties made submissions,  referring  to  their
    respective skeleton arguments and to the background material.  For  the
    appellants it was submitted that all Sikhs in Afghanistan are  at  risk
    of persecution per se.  It was also submitted that it is  important  to
    consider the cumulative impact of harassment and discrimination  toward
    Sikhs/Hindus  and  that  in  general  they  are  at  risk  of   serious
    harm/harassment/discrimination   and   this    amounts    to    serious
    harm/treatment contrary to article 3 of the ECHR from which there is no
    sufficiency  of  protection  and  that  internal  relocation   is   not
    available.

62. It was also submitted on the appellants' behalf  that  there  are  also
    additional elements/issues in respect of women and children within  the
    Sikh/Hindu community.  Mr Tarlow asked  us  to  find  that  the  asylum
    claims of members of the Sikh/Hindu community from  Afghanistan  should
    be considered on their own individual facts and it cannot  be  properly
    said that all members of the Sikh/Hindu community in Afghanistan are at
    risk.

Legal framework

63. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that:

         'An asylum applicant will be granted asylum in the  United  Kingdom
         if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
        (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of  entry
             in the United Kingdom;
        (ii)      he is a refugee,  as  defined  in  regulation  2  of  The
             Refugee  or  Person  in  Need   of   International   Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
        (iii)     there are no reasonable grounds for regarding  him  as  a
             danger to the security of the United Kingdom;
        (iv)      he does not, having been convicted by a final judgment of
             a particularly serious crime, he does not constitute danger  to
             the community of the United Kingdom; and
        (v)  refusing his application would result in him being required to
             go (whether immediately  or  after  the  time  limited  by  any
             existing leave to enter or remain)  in  breach  of  the  Geneva
             Convention, to a country in which his  life  or  freedom  would
             threatened on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,
             political opinion or membership of a particular social group'.

64. The level of protection required is set out in the Refugee or Person in
    Need of  International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006.
    Regulation 4 (2) states:

         'Protection shall be  regarded  as  generally  provided  when  the
    actors mentioned in
         paragraph (1)(a) and (b)  (see  above)  take  reasonable  steps  to
         prevent the persecution or suffering of serious harm  by  operating
         an effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
         punishment of acts constituting persecution or  serious  harm,  and
         the  person  mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  has  access   to   such
         protection'.

65. We have reminded ourselves  that  the  paramount  aim  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and Qualification Directive is to be found in the  principle
    of surrogacy, ergo a lack of protection in one's own state  called  for
    surrogate protection from the international community. The standard  of
    protection to be applied is not that which would eliminate all risk but
    rather a practical standard which takes account of the duty  which  the
    state owes its nationals.

66. In AW (sufficiency of protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31(IAC)  the
    Tribunal held that  (i)  at  paragraph  55  of  Auld  LJ's  summary  in
    Bagdanavicius [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 it is made clear that the  test  set
    out in Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489 was intended to deal with the ability of
    a state to afford protection to the generality of  its  citizens;  (ii)
    notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection,  a  claimant
    may still have a well founded fear of persecution if  authorities  know
    or ought to know of circumstances particular  to  his/her  case  giving
    rise to the fear, but are unlikely to provide the additional protection
    the particular  circumstances  reasonably  required  (per  Auld  LJ  at
    paragraph  55(vi));  (iii)   in  considering  whether  an   appellant's
    particular circumstances give rise to a need for additional protection,
    particular account must be taken of past persecution (if any) so as  to
    ensure the question posed is whether there are good reasons to consider
    that such persecution (and past lack of sufficient protection) will not
    be repeated.

67. Specifically in relation to religious issues; in Omoruyi v SSHD  (2001)
    INLR 33 Simon  Brown  LJ  said  "it  is  therefore  plain  (and  hardly
    surprising) that, whether the harm is perpetrated by the religious upon
    the non religious or vice versa (or indeed by one religious  body  upon
    another) and whether because of adherence (or a refusal to adhere) to a
    belief or because of behaviour, there will be persecution  for  reasons
    of  religion  provided  always  that  the  other  ingredients  of   the
    definition are satisfied."

68. In MN and others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal analysed the judgment of the
    Court of Justice of the European Union in Federal Republic of Germany v
    Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11) and said this:

        '91. The Grand Chamber of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
        Union in Federal Republic of Germany v Y (C-71/11) & Z  (C-99/11)
        had before it references for a preliminary  ruling  concerning  the
        interpretation of  Articles  2(C)  and  9(1)(a)  of  the  Directive
        relating to proceedings by Y and Z whose applications for asylum
        were on the basis that their membership  of  the  Muslim  Ahmadiyya
        community in Pakistan had forced them to  leave  their  country  of
        origin.  The questions for the preliminary ruling  were  worded  in
        almost identical terms in both cases as follows:

           "1. Is Article 9(1)(a) of [the] Directive...to be interpreted as
           meaning that not every interference with religious freedom which
           infringes  Article  9  of  the  ECHR  constitutes  an   act   of
           persecution within the meaning of [the  former  provision],  and
           that  a  severe  violation  of  religious  freedom  as  a  basic
           human right arises only if  the  core  area  of  that  religious
           freedom is adversely affected?

           2. If question 1 is to be answered in the affirmative:

              (a) Is the core area of  religious  freedom  limited  to  the
              profession and practice of faith in the areas of the home and
              neighbourhood, or can there be an act of persecution,  within
              the meaning of Article 9(1)(a) of [the] Directive..., also in
              cases where, in the country of origin the observance of faith
              in public gives rise to a risk to life, physical integrity or
              freedom and the  applicant  accordingly  abstains  from  such
              practice?

              (b) If the core area of religious freedom can  also  comprise
              the public observance of certain religious practices:

                 - does it suffice in that case, in order for there to be  a
                 severe violation of religious freedom, that  the  applicant
                 feels that such observance of his faith is indispensible in
                 order for him to preserve his religious identity,

                 - or is it further necessary that the  religious  community
                 to which the applicant belongs should regard that religious
                 observance as constituting a central part of its doctrine,

                 - or can further restrictions arise as a  result  of  other
                 circumstances,  such  as  the  general  conditions  in  the
                 country of origin?

           3. If question 1 is to be answered in the affirmative:

           Is there a well founded fear of persecution, within the  meaning
           of Article 2(c) of [the] Directive..., if it is established that
           the applicant will carry out certain religious practices - other
           than those falling within the core area - after returning to the
           country of origin, even though they will give rise to a risk  to
           his life, physical integrity or freedom, or  can  the  applicant
           reasonably be expected to abstain from such practices."

        92. The following conclusions were reached by the court:

           "[57] Freedom of  religion  is  one  of  the  foundations  of  a
           democratic society and is a basic human right. Interference with
           the right to religious freedom  may  be  so  serious  as  to  be
           treated in the same way as the  cases  referred  to  in  Article
           15(2) of the ECHR, to which Article 9(1) of the Directive refers
           by way of guidance, for the purpose of determining which    acts
           must in particular be regarded as constituting persecution.

           [58] However, that cannot be taken to mean that any interference
           with the right to religious freedom guaranteed by Article  10(1)
           of the Charter constitutes an act of persecution  requiring  the
           competent authorities to grant refugee status within the meaning
           of Article 2(d) of the Directive to any person  subject  to  the
           interference in question.

           [59] On the contrary, it is apparent from the wording of Article
           9(1) of the Directive that there must be a 'severe violation' of
           religious freedom having a  significant  effect  on  the  person
           concerned in order for  it  to  be  possible  for  the  acts  in
           question to be regarded as acts of persecution.

           [60] Acts amounting to limitations on the exercise of the  basic
           right to freedom of religion within the meaning of Article 10(1)
           of the Charter which  are  provided  for  by  law,  without  any
           violation of that right arising, are thus automatically excluded
           as they are covered by Article 52(1) of the Charter.

           [61] Nor can acts which undoubtedly infringe the right conferred
           by Article  10(1)  of  the  Charter,  but  its  gravity  is  not
           equivalent to that of an infringement of the basic human  rights
           from which no derogation can be made by  Article  15(2)  of  the
           ECHR, be regarded as constituting persecution within the meaning
           of Article 9(1) of the Directive and Article 1A  of  the  Geneva
           Convention.

           [62] For the purpose of determining, specifically,  which  acts
           may be regarded as constituting persecution within the   meaning
           of Article 9(1)(a)  of  the  Directive,  it  is  unnecessary  to
           distinguish acts that interfere with the  'core  areas'  ('forum
           internum') of the basic right to freedom of religion,  which  do
           not include religious activities in public  ('forum  externum'),
           from acts which do not affect those purported 'core areas'.

           [63]  Such  a  distinction  is  incompatible  with   the   broad
           definition of  'religion'  given  by  Article  10(1)(b)  of  the
           Directive, which encompasses all its constituent components,  be
           they public or private, collective or individual. Acts which may
           constitute a 'severe violation' within the  meaning  of  Article
           9(1)(a) of the Directive include serious  acts  which  interfere
           with the applicant's freedom not only to practice his  faith  in
           private circles but also to live that faith publicly.

           [64] That interpretation is likely to ensure that  Article  9(1)
           of the Directive is applied in such a manner as  to  enable  the
           competent  authorities  to  assess  all  kinds  of  acts   which
           interfere with the basic right of freedom of religion  in  order
           to determine whether, by their nature or  repetition,  they  are
           sufficiently  severe  as  to  be  regarded   as   amounting   to
           persecution.

           [65] It follows that acts which, on account of  their  intrinsic
           severity as well as the severity of their consequences  for  the
           person concerned, may be regarded  as  constituting  persecution
           must be identified, not on the basis of the particular aspect of
           religious freedom that is being interfered with but on the basis
           of the nature of the repression inflicted on the individual  and
           its consequences, as observed by the Advocate General  at  point
           52 of his Opinion.

           [66] It is therefore the severity of the measures and  sanctions
           adopted or liable to be adopted  against  the  person  concerned
           which will determine whether a violation of the right guaranteed
           by Article 10(1) of the Charter constitutes  persecution  within
           the meaning of Article 9(1) of the Directive.

           [67] Accordingly,  a  violation  of  the  right  to  freedom  of
           religion  may  constitute  persecution  within  the  meaning  of
           Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive where an applicant for  asylum,
           as a result of exercising that freedom in his country of origin,
           runs a genuine risk of, inter alia, being prosecuted or  subject
           to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment by  one  of  the
           actors referred to in Article 6 of the Directive."

        93. The court went on to observe at [69] to [71] the objective  and
        subjective factors to be taken into account:

           "[69] Given that the concept of 'religion' as defined in Article
           10(1)(b) of the Directive also includes participation in  formal
           worship in public, either alone or in community with others, the
           prohibition of such participation may constitute a  sufficiently
           serious act  within  the  meaning  of  Article  9(1)(a)  of  the
           Directive and, therefore, persecution where, in the  country  of
           origin concerned, it gives rise  to  a  genuine  risk  that  the
           applicant will, inter alia, be prosecuted or subject to  inhuman
           or degrading punishment by one of  the  actors  referred  to  in
           Article 6 of the Directive.

           [70] In assessing such a risk, the  competent  authorities  must
           take  account  of  a  number  of  factors,  both  objective  and
           subjective.  The subjective circumstance that the observance  of
           a certain religious practice in public, which is subject to  the
           restrictions at issue, is of particular importance to the person
           concerned in order to  preserve  his  religious  identity  is  a
           relevant factor to be taken  into  account  in  determining  the
           level of risk to which the applicant  will  be  exposed  in  his
           country of origin on  account  of  his  religion,  even  if  the
           observance of such a religious practice does  not  constitute  a
           core element of faith for the religious community concerned.

           [71] Indeed, it is apparent from the wording of Article 10(1)(b)
           of the Directive that the scope of protection  afforded  on  the
           basis of persecution on religious grounds extends both to  forms
           of personal or  communal  conduct  which  the  person  concerned
           considers to be necessary to him - namely those  'based  on  ...
           any religious belief' - and to  those  prescribed  by  religious
           doctrine - namely those 'mandated by any religious belief'."

        94. The first two questions therefore were answered by the court in
        terms that Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive must be interpreted  as
        meaning that:

           "- not all interference with the right to freedom  of  religion
           which infringes Article 10(1)  of  the  Charter  is  capable  of
           constituting an 'act of persecution' within the meaning of  that
           provision of the Directive;

           - there may be an act of persecution as a result of interference
           with the external manifestation of that freedom, and

           - for the purpose of determining whether interference with  the
           right to freedom of religion which infringes  Article  10(1)  of
           the  Charter  may  constitute  an  'act  of  persecution',   the
           competent authorities  must  ascertain,  in  the  light  of  the
           personal circumstances of the  person  concerned,  whether  that
           person, as a result of exercising that freedom in his country of
           origin, runs a genuine risk of, inter alia, being prosecuted  or
           subject to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment by one
           of the actors referred to in Article 6 of the Directive."

        95. Turning to the  third  question  which  the  court  considered
        concerned the situation where an applicant  has  not  already  been
        subject to persecution or direct threats of persecution on  account
        of his religion.  The court urged that the assessment of the extent
        of the risk, to be carried out with vigilance and care "...will  be
        based  solely  on  a  specific  evaluation   of   the   facts   and
        circumstances, in accordance with the Rules laid down in particular
        by Article 4 of the Directive".

        96. Echoing the approach of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and RT
        (Zimbabwe), the court observed at [78] to [80]:

           "[78] None of those rules states that, in assessing the  extent
           of the risk of  actual  acts  of  persecution  in  a  particular
           situation, it is necessary to take account  of  the  possibility
           open to the applicant of avoiding the  risk  of  persecution  by
           abstaining  from  the  religious  practice  in   question   and,
           consequently, renouncing the protection which the  Directive  is
           intended to afford the applicant by conferring refugee status.

           [79] It follows that, where it is  established  that,  upon  his
           return to his country  of  origin,  the  person  concerned  will
           follow a religious practice which will expose him to a real risk
           of  persecution,  he  should  be  granted  refugee  status,   in
           accordance with Article 13 of the Directive.  The fact  that  he
           could avoid that  risk  by  abstaining  from  certain  religious
           practices is, in principle, irrelevant.

           [80] In the light of the above considerations, the answer to the
           third question referred in both cases is that  Article  2(c)  of
           the  Directive  must  be  interpreted  as   meaning   that   the
           applicant's fear of being persecuted is well-founded if, in  the
           light of the applicant's personal circumstances,  the  competent
           authorities consider that it may  reasonably  be  thought  that,
           upon his return to his country of  origin,  he  will  engage  in
           religious practices which will expose him  to  a  real  risk  of
           persecution. In assessing an application for refugee status  on
           an individual basis, those authorities cannot reasonably  expect
           the applicant to abstain from those religious practices."

        97. The court was ruling on the questions before it and we  do  not
        consider that in para [79], it was limiting the  risk  category  to
        those persons who are able to establish that  they will follow  a
        pattern of behaviour  that  will  expose  them  to  persecution  as
        opposed to those who  would  wish  to  but  would  not  because  of
        persecution risk. Otherwise the obligation will be on a  person  to
        be unreasonably expected to show a reckless intention  despite  the
        risks involved. That is  not  the  basis  on  which  the  right  to
        religious freedom is intended to be preserved and protected or  the
        basis on which protection is provided under the Refugee Convention.
        The Court of Justice makes clear as did the  Supreme  Court  in HJ
        (Iran) that concealment is not an answer if the reason is a fear of
        harm. Further, the use of the adverb "reasonably" in  para [80]  is
        a reflection of the standard of proof  rather  than  introducing  a
        test of reasonableness to the enquiry how  someone  will  conduct
        themselves on return.  We do not see therefore that  the  Court  of
        Justice was suggesting  a  different  approach  from  that  of  the
        Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).

69. The ultimate question in these appeals is that of internal  relocation.
    Paragraph  339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  intended   to
    incorporate the Directive, states:

     '(i) The Secretary of State will not make:
         (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin a person
           would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and  the
           person can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of  the
           country; or
         (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of  the  country
           of return a person would not  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
           serious harm, and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay
           in that part of the country.
          (ii) In examining whether a part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
           country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of
           State, when making his decision on whether to  grant  asylum  or
           humanitarian  protection,  will  have  regard  to  the   general
           circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to  the
           personal circumstances of the person.
     (iii)(i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to  the
        country of origin       or country of return.'

70. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007]  UKHL  49  the  House  of  Lords
    pointed out that the test to determine whether internal relocation  was
    available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL  5,  namely
    that the decision maker should decide whether, taking  account  of  all
    relevant circumstances pertaining  to  the  claimant  and  his  or  her
    country it would be reasonable to expect the claimant  to  relocate  or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to  do  so.   The
    test was one of great generality.

Discussion

Country expert evidence and letter from the British Embassy

71. We have been assisted by the written evidence of  Dr  Ballard  and  the
    oral and written evidence of Dr Giustozzi.  No other oral evidence  was
    given as the Secretary of State conceded the Article 8 element  of  the
    claims before the hearing. There was no challenge to the suitability of
    either Dr Ballard or Dr Giustozzi to  be  treated  as  country  experts
    although we considered this issue for ourselves in light  of  the  need
    for an expert to (1) demonstrate that they are, in reality,  an  expert
    in relation to those matters on which they are expressing  an  opinion;
    (2) demonstrate that they have current and reliable knowledge on  those
    matters; (3) identify their sources; and (4) give adequate reasons  for
    arriving at the conclusions they expressed.

72. There was a challenge by Mr Tarlow to the weight to be given to certain
    aspects of the written evidence of Dr Giustozzi based upon the fact the
    information recorded therein originates from  a  series  of  interviews
    conducted by an associate in Afghanistan with whom he has worked in the
    past. A copy of that person's C.V. was requested  at  the  hearing  and
    later provided.  That shows the researcher is as Dr Giustozzi described
    him in his oral evidence.   Having  considered  the  substance  of  the
    report and other available material we find the  researcher  is  not  a
    country  expert,  but  that  is  not  his  role.  The  interviews  were
    commissioned by Dr Giustozzi and formed part of the basis of the report
    together with other information in the public domain.  Having  assessed
    the weight he was prepared to give to all  the  evidence  Dr  Giustozzi
    provides his expert opinion in his report.

73. The Appellants challenged the weight to be given to the letter from the
    British Embassy dated 29th December 2013 on the basis it  was  from  an
    anonymous source. This is a situation faced by other tribunals in  this
    jurisdiction and guidance on the correct approach to such  evidence  is
    to be found in cases such as MD (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  989.   In  this  case  the  Upper
    Tribunal heard evidence on whether the claimant, as a lone woman, would
    face a real risk of sexual violence at roadblocks in Abidjan. The panel
    considered a report  from  a  political  officer  at  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office (the "FCO") which opined that road-blocks no longer
    posed a serious safety problem despite there still being  instances  of
    petty police corruption. The appeal grounds criticised the Tribunal for
    accepting anonymous evidence of diplomats about country conditions. The
    Court of Appeal found that this kind of evidence  had  been  considered
    extensively by the European Court of Human Rights in NA  v  the  United
    Kingdom [2008] ECHR 616 and it had nothing to add. Such evidence should
    not be accepted or rejected because it comes  from  diplomatic  sources
    but it should be considered with and  related  to  the  evidence  as  a
    whole. The weight and value to be attached  to  a  political  officer's
    letter had to be assessed in accordance with the guidance contained  in
    NA and TK (Tamils -  LP  updated)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  0049.
    Although the Tribunal in the present case had not referred  to  NA,  it
    adopted the approach described in that case. It treated  the  political
    officer's letter not as expert evidence but as akin to other  kinds  of
    country information. It considered whether it should attach  weight  to
    the fact that the British Embassy had vouchsafed that one of its  staff
    had furnished the evidence in good faith and concluded that it  should.
    The panel also considered the provenance of the information  and,  most
    importantly, concluded that the weight to be attached to that  evidence
    was a matter for the Tribunal to determine. Therein lay  its  expertise
    (paras 35 - 48).

74. In the more recent case of CM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1303 it
    was held that the Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  rely  on  anonymous
    evidence in  the  report  of  a  fact-finding  commission  on  Zimbabwe
    notwithstanding Sufi and Elmi v UK [2011] ECtHR 83187/07.   The  latter
    case had simply drawn attention to the obvious truth that anonymity  of
    information  was  likely  to  inhibit  the  forensic   possibility   of
    challenging it. Whilst it was open to a judge  to  give  no  weight  to
    unsupported anonymous evidence because no realistic assessment could be
    made of its reliability, there was no general rule that  uncorroborated
    material could never be relied on in a country guidance  case.  Whether
    it was relied on would  depend  on  the  circumstances.  Generally  the
    effect of anonymity would go to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    material in question.

75. In line with the above appeals we reject the submission that no  weight
    should be attached to the Embassy letter.  Dr Giustozzi refers to  this
    evidence in his report as noted above and makes no such suggestion.  We
    have attached weight to the letter particularly where its contents  are
    consistent with other parts of the  background  evidence.   However  we
    have not accepted all that is said in the letter  but  have  considered
    its contents in the round together with the available  evidence  before
    us.  Some of the content of the letter is reflected in the  appellants'
    own evidence such as that to be  found  at  page  91  of  their  bundle
    relating to the provision of additional land outside Kabul for the Sikh
    community.

76. Although Dr Ballard did not attend to give evidence we attached  weight
    to his report in relation to the historical experiences  of  Sikhs  and
    Hindus in Afghanistan and as a record of the  difficulties  experienced
    in more recent times, although noting that the  report  is  four  years
    old, as this accords with other aspects of the evidence  we  have  been
    asked to consider, but we do not  find  Dr  Ballard's  evidence  to  be
    determinative and, having considered all the material with  the  degree
    of care required in an appeal of this nature, we reject  his  assertion
    that all  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  faiths  are  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan.  In  particular  we  do  not  find  such  a  claim  to  be
    substantiated as at the date of hearing for the reasons set out below.

77. We found Dr Giustozzi to be a measured and impressive witness who  took
    care to answer questions as accurately as possible. We have  found  his
    evidence helpful and have attached weight to his opinion.   We  do  not
    however accept that his opinion is determinative either in isolation or
    when considered together with all the other material we have been asked
    to consider especially as it is based in part  on  evidence  of  events
    that occurred seven to eleven years ago as  demonstrated  in  paragraph
    40. In particular we do not find the claim that all  Sikhs  and  Hindus
    are at risk in Afghanistan to  be  substantiated  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing for the reasons set out below.

General approach

78. It is not disputed before us that historically members of the Sikh  and
    Hindu community in Afghanistan have  been  subjected  to  what  may  be
    perceived as acts of persecution by both state  and  non-state  actors.
    The material we have been  asked  to  consider  demonstrates  that  the
    number of such incidents has reduced (but this might  be  explained  by
    the reduction in the Sikh and Hindu population) and there is  currently
    little  material  to  support  a  claim  of  official  state  sponsored
    persecution.  The material does support a finding that there is ongoing
    harassment of and discrimination against some members of the  Sikh  and
    Hindu community in Afghanistan, as set  out  above,  but  the  evidence
    includes very few examples of recent acts of harm or  threats  of  harm
    sufficient  to  satisfy  the  necessary  test.   We  bear  in  mind  Dr
    Giustozzi's point that this is an area that has not been prioritised by
    the media for reporting but when we consider all the material available
    to us, we find it of note that there is little to  suggest  that  there
    have been continuing recent  incidents  of  harm  toward  Sikhs/Hindus.
    Although Dr Giustozzi has described a picture of 'intensive harassment'
    at page 12 of  his  report,  he  has  not  supported  this  by  drawing
    attention  to  specific  examples  of  individuals   being   repeatedly
    harassed.  Expropriation has been said to have almost  stopped  because
    the most valuable properties have already been taken away.   Under  the
    heading 'post-2005 violence and harassment'  Dr  Giustozzi  focuses  on
    examples of violence up to 2010 and references to more recent years are
    vague and generalised.   This  is  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  Dr
    Giustozzi's researcher carried out three interviews in  December  2013-
    January 2014 with senior members of  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities.  We
    accept that whilst the subject group diminishes in  size  opportunities
    to inflict harm may also decrease and note that  the  small  number  of
    Sikhs and Hindus who remain in Afghanistan have  been  reported  to  be
    even more vulnerable to abuse (see UNHCR report 2013), but the lack  of
    evidence of such ongoing issues is a  relevant  consideration.  Perhaps
    the best evidence in support of the existence of a  current  real  risk
    from  the  perspective  of  the  appellants  is  to  be  found  in  the
    Respondents OGN of 2013 which we set out above.

79. Many members of these communities have left Afghanistan as a result  of
    past recorded events and refer to their previous lives  in  Afghanistan
    and the loss of status, economic opportunities, and properties. However
    notwithstanding these past events, the relevant question is whether  it
    can be shown that by reason of being Sikhs or Hindus and/or wishing  to
    practice their religion they face a real risk of serious  harm  at  the
    date of the hearing. We accept  that  such  serious  harm  can  include
    either specific acts or an accumulation of adverse  circumstances  such
    as discrimination, which exists in  an  atmosphere  of  insecurity  and
    fear. It is necessary, however, for a distinction to  be  made  between
    the migration which has occurred from Afghanistan  as  a  result  of  a
    desire to find better economic opportunities than  those  available  in
    Afghanistan and migration driven by fear of a human  rights  violations
    tantamount to persecution.

80. The fact that there has been persecution of Sikhs  and  Hindus  in  the
    past does not allow a Sikh or Hindu in Afghanistan to  succeed  with  a
    claim to be entitled to refugee status per se, although paragraph  339K
    of the Immigration Rules which states  "The  fact  that  a  person  has
    already been subject to persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct
    threats of such persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious
    indication of the person's well-founded fear  of  persecution  or  real
    risk of suffering serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution or serious harm will not  be  repeated",
    must be considered for those who  have  experienced  past  persecution.
    Both those to whom 339K may be applicable and those to whom it is  not,
    would need to face a  real  risk  of  harm  sufficient  to  engage  the
    Conventions on return, from which the  State  is  either  unwilling  or
    unable to offer them protection. This has to be assessed on  the  basis
    of the material provided at the date of the hearing before us.

State sponsored persecution

81. The evidence indicates that the relationship between the governments of
    Afghanistan and India is an important element of Afghan political life.
    The Indian Government has made substantial financial contributions  and
    provided assistance to the Afghan Government and  it  appears  accepted
    that it is not in the interests of Afghanistan generally to let  it  be
    known  that  members  of  these  religious   minorities   are   without
    protection, as it may result in a breakdown  of  relationships  at  the
    highest level.   Such  international  considerations  may  provide  the
    explanation for why President Karzai was  supportive  of  the  idea  of
    including  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  community   within   the
    legislative assemblies and why, when the issue  of  harassment  of  the
    Sikh funeral procession arose, he directly ordered the police to attend
    to protect the mourners.  We find it  is  also  as  a  result  of  such
    considerations that there  is  no  clear  evidence  of  official  state
    sponsored persecution to the extent  that  there  may  have  been  with
    previous governments in Afghanistan.

Serious harm - non-state actors

82. We do not find the  material  provided  supports  a  finding  that  all
    Muslims  are  hostile  to  members  of  these  religious  groups.   The
    historical analysis refers to a tradition in which all  religions  were
    able to live in harmony in Afghanistan. There is  no  evidence  showing
    that such attitudes do not remain in existence both amongst  state  and
    non-state actors today.  In a news  article  headed  "Tough  Times  for
    Afghan Hindus and Sikhs" [Appendix A. Item 7] there is reference to the
    problems encountered by these groups but also the following:

        'Yet some people still have fond memories of a  time  when  Muslims
        and Hindu communities lived peacefully  together.  "We  shared  our
        happiness and grief" said Badshah, a Muslim shopkeeper in the  town
        of Khost.  "When we go to India now, we stay in their homes.   They
        are proud Afghans.  They are hospitable.  They worked alongside  us
        to address problems.  I miss them."

        Samiterai, a Hindu from Khost currently living in Kabul,  said  "we
        were so friendly with  our  Muslim  brothers  that  we  never  even
        thought about who we were or who they were. We were all  the  same,
        Afghans.'

      We  accept  the  evidence  of  government  initiatives  such  as   the
    allocation of land to enable a  new  settlement  to  be  built  on  the
    outskirts of Kabul which includes an area  to  allow  cremation  to  be
    undertaken  away  from  residential  areas  and  the  proposal  that  a
    parliamentary seat be reserved for members of these groups even  though
    it was rejected as  being  unconstitutional.  The  Afghan  Constitution
    prohibits the allocation of benefits  based  upon  ethnic  lines.   The
    letter from the British Embassy also refers to other initiatives and an
    alleged lack of  knowledge  of  or  failure  to  mention  the  same  in
    interview, by those interviewed by Dr Giustozzi's researcher, does  not
    mean such initiatives do not exist or are not representative of a  more
    positive attitude existing at the level of the Executive in Afghanistan
    towards the Sikh and Hindu minority than may have been the case in  the
    past. It was put to Dr Giustozzi in his oral evidence that  within  the
    government there is a desire to promote tolerance between the different
    communities in Afghanistan which he accepted.

83. Notwithstanding the  evidence  of  incidents  of  continuing  hostility
    against some members of the Sikh and Hindu community, we do not find it
    established on the evidence that merely by reason of being  a  Sikh  or
    Hindu in Afghanistan there is a real risk of  serious  harm  from  non-
    state actors in  Afghanistan  even  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable to appeals of this nature. We refer in this  regard  to  the
    limited nature of the evidence provided of actual specific incidents of
    such ill treatment toward Sikh and Hindu  individuals  since  2005  and
    more specifically in recent times as  set  out  above.  Notwithstanding
    that the majority of the evidence before us related to members  of  the
    Sikh faith, Sikhs and Hindus are viewed as one by many  in  Afghanistan
    as stated above, they both form religious minorities and are treated in
    a similar manner as a  result,  both  worship  in  the  same  religious
    buildings. No submissions  were  received  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing inviting us to separate the two groups or to suggest that  they
    should not be considered together for the purposes of this guidance. In
    doing so we note the decline in actual  numbers  of  members  of  these
    religious groups remaining in Afghanistan although we  also  appreciate
    this may increase their vulnerability. This can be contrasted with  the
    figures available to the Tribunal in  SL  and  Others  for  the  period
    around 2005 as considered in DSG and others. Dr Giustozzi  referred  to
    an escalation in such events since 2005 but we have not been  taken  to
    actual evidence of specific  incidents  to  support  a  claim  of  such
    escalation.  We also note that there have  been  some  limited  returns
    from India who wish to  conduct  business  activities  in  Afghanistan.
    This lends support to our view that hostilities against members of  the
    Sikh and Hindu communities have not escalated and in fact have  reduced
    in frequency.

84. Although it is very difficult to provide a definitive estimate  of  the
    numbers of Sikhs and  Hindus  remaining  in  Afghanistan  the  evidence
    before us supports, as agreed  by  the  parties,  the  following  clear
    finding: the population has significantly  reduced  due  to  emigration
    from Afghanistan and the numbers left are unlikely to be  above  3,000.
    We accept that  as  numbers  shrink,  remaining  members  may  be  more
    vulnerable to exploitation, and  have  taken  this  into  account  when
    making our findings.

Harassment and discrimination

85. We accept that  in  certain  circumstances  harassment  can  amount  to
    persecution especially if it involves the infliction of some mental  or
    physical cruelty. In the case of Gladys Maribel Hernandez,  Immigration
    Appeal Board of Canada decision  M8101212,  January  6,  1983,  it  was
    found:

        'The criterion to establish persecution is  harassment,  harassment
        that is so constant and unrelenting that the victims feel  deprived
        of all hope of  recourse,  short  of  flight,  from  government  by
        oppression'.

86. The above is consistent  with  the  provisions  of  Article  9  of  the
    Qualification  Directive  applied  by  the  United  Kingdom,  Directive
    2004/83/EC, which states:

        'Article 9


        Acts of persecution


        1.  Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1 A of the
        Geneva Convention must:


           (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition as to
           constitute a severe violation of basis human rights, in
           particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made under
           Article 15(2) of the European Convention for the Protection of
           Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


           (b) be an accumulation of various measures, including violations
           of human rights which is sufficiently severe as to affect an
           individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a)


        2. Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter
        alia, take the form of:


           (a) acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of
           sexual violence;


           (b) legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures
           which are in themselves discriminatory or which are implemented
           in a discriminatory manner ;


           (c) prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
           discriminatory;


           (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
           or discriminatory punishment;


           (e) prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military
           service in a conflict, where performing military service would
           include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion clauses as
           set out in Article 12(2);


           (f) acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature;




        3. In accordance with Article 2(c), there must be a connection
        between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and the acts of
        persecution as qualified in paragraph 1.'

    It is also the  case  that  neither  the  Refugee  Convention  nor  the
    Qualification Directive is intended to protect  against  all  forms  of
    harm.

87. We accept that  some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  community  in
    Afghanistan may continue to suffer harassment and discrimination at the
    hand of Muslim zealots.  Such acts include name calling, spitting,  the
    throwing of  stones  and  rocks,  threats  and  acts  of  violence.  On
    occasions in the past,  such  acts  have  been  far  more  serious  and
    included abductions for  ransom  or  to  forced  conversion  to  Islam,
    seizure of land properties and killings.

88. The frustration felt by members of  these  religious  minority  groups,
    according to the evidence, appears to be based upon a combination of  a
    weariness of discrimination and lack of economic  opportunities.   Such
    anxiety was said to be increasing in  light  of  the  prospect  of  the
    withdrawal of foreign troops  from  Afghanistan  by  the  end  of  2014
    [Appendix A. Item 2]. An article written on 15 April 2009,  five  years
    ago, records complaints by members of the Sikh community  that  despite
    the guarantee for the safeguarding of their religious and social rights
    in the Afghan constitution and  laws  the  behaviour  of  their  Muslim
    countrymen is not satisfactory [Appendix A.  Item  34].  A  named  Sikh
    woman who is also a member of the AIHRC maintains that  it  is  due  to
    these reasons that the migration of Afghan Sikhs and Hindus abroad  has
    not yet stopped. This feeling is reinforced by a recorded comment  made
    by Avtar Singh, stated to be a well-known Sikh  figure  in  Afghanistan
    and a member of the Afghan Senate  (Misharano  Jirha)  who  noted  that
    although in the recent years the social life of Sikhs  and  Hindus  has
    improved there still  remain  numerous  problems  for  these  religious
    minorities and that Sikh religious  sites  which  have  been  destroyed
    during the civil  war  had  not  yet  been  restored  or  reconstructed
    [Appendix A. Item 34].

89. It is clear that a Hindu or Sikh Afghan male is able to  go  about  his
    day-to-day business although he may from time to time be the subject to
    verbal abuse and harassment. If he has a business and property there is
    a risk of being subjected to demands for money by way of  extortion  by
    corrupt individuals and in extreme circumstances may  be  subjected  to
    further more serious threats or acts of violence.  Such  incidents  are
    rare now as the most valuable properties are seen to have already  been
    taken away from Sikhs. Whether such  events  or  combination  of  these
    events and other forms of discrimination amount to persecution such  as
    to entitle an individual to a grant of international protection is fact
    sensitive,  and  will   depend   upon   the   individual's   particular
    characteristics, wealth and background.

Sufficiency of protection

90. In relation to Sikh or Hindu individuals who do experience  persecution
    or harassment and discrimination capable of crossing the threshold into
    serious harm (based upon the Horvath/Hathaway approach that persecution
    = serious harm  +  ineffective  protection),  whilst  there  may  be  a
    willingness at governmental level to provide protection we do not  find
    it established on the evidence that at a local  level  members  of  the
    Afghan  police  are  willing,  even  if  able,  to  provide  them  such
    protection to the level required  in  Refugee  Convention/Qualification
    Directive terms.  There is evidence in the materials provided [Appendix
    A. Items 10 and 33] of police corruption.  We accept the evidence  that
    it is reasonably likely that complaints made directly to the police  of
    harassment by members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  community  have  been
    ignored.  In the event of  intervention  that  has  occurred  this  has
    mainly been as a result of a  specific  instruction  that  they  do  so
    issued at the highest level.  There is also evidence that some of those
    involved in 'Mafia style'  gangs  responsible  for  land  seizures  and
    exploitation of members of these groups, based  upon  a  perception  of
    wealth, have been members of the police  or  security  forces  past  or
    present  who  specifically  target  members  of  the  Sikh  and   Hindu
    communities as a  result  of  the  fact  that  they  are  perceived  as
    religious minorities with little or no  means  to  respond  to  protect
    themselves. It has not been shown that representations made by  members
    of the community holding  posts  in  the  administration  have  secured
    adequate protection, the common complaint recorded in the  evidence  is
    that notwithstanding these concerns being brought to the  attention  of
    those in authority, very little is done  to  remedy  the  situation  in
    practice.

Women

91. In relation to the role of women it is noted in the Rawa  News  article
    dated 11th July 2013 and headed 'Tough  Times  for  Afghan  Hindus  and
    Sikhs' that it is alleged that  Sikh  women  cannot  go  out  of  their
    houses.  Dr Giustozzi in his evidence refers to the fact he  has  never
    seen a single Sikh woman, identifiable  as  such,  on  the  streets  in
    Afghanistan and would not expect to do so. The  role  of  women  within
    Hindu and Sikh families within Afghanistan appears to be  based  around
    the home and family life.

92. Dr Giustozzi also referred to Sikh and  Hindu  women  not  leaving  the
    house unless properly covered,  as  with  most  if  not  all  women  in
    Afghanistan, in order to avoid an adverse reaction amongst some members
    of the Muslim community. We accept that  a  Sikh  or  Hindu  woman  not
    'properly attired' may be subjected to  abuse  and  harassment  on  the
    streets in Afghanistan but the evidence clearly indicates that this  is
    the same for all women, whatever their religious persuasion,  including
    Muslim women. It was submitted that such a requirement may give rise to
    an HJ (Iran) issue. Whilst our attention was not drawn to  Y&Z  by  the
    parties we can confirm that we have considered the application  of  the
    HJ (Iran) issue to the religious context although this argument was not
    adequately developed before us and fails to distinguish between members
    of these religious groups who choose not to go out alone or covered  as
    that is the way they ordinarily behave and those that may be forced  to
    hide a fundamental element of their belief(s) to avoid persecution.

93. Nevertheless we do consider that a Sikh or Hindu single  woman  without
    family protection from a husband, other male member of the  family,  or
    within a family unit in which there is no male member of the  household
    able to provide effective protection, may be entitled to  international
    protection based upon threats and related acts as  a  result  of  their
    perceived vulnerability as a member of a minority religious group  with
    no form of available protection against such. In this respect  we  note
    the evidence regarding abductions of  women  and  female  children  and
    forced conversions to Islam. Credible threats of any form  of  violence
    or serious harm (including forced marriage involving forced  conversion
    or not), where there  is  inadequate  protection  should  entitle  that
    person to a grant of international protection.

Children

94. In relation to Sikh and Hindu children a number  of  areas  of  concern
    arise from the evidence we have been asked to  consider.  The  evidence
    indicates that there have been occasions of Hindu and Sikh families not
    sending their children to school in Afghanistan, especially girls, as a
    result  of  the  fear  of  harassment  and   ill-treatment   which   is
    corroborated by the evidence.  Within the state system  where  children
    of all denominations are taught there is evidence  of  requirements  to
    learn and recite  the  Koran,  discrimination,  and  lack  of  adequate
    education facilities.  In areas where numbers warrant, such  as  Kabul,
    special schools have been set up to provide education for  children  by
    Sikh teachers and some children are taught within  the  Gurdwara  as  a
    result. Such education is only provided however  up  to  and  including
    primary level with the requirement that  at  secondary  level  children
    will be taught within the state system where  they  become  exposed  to
    problems referred to in the evidence unless an individual's family  has
    the means to pay them to be educated privately.  If  credible  evidence
    is provided of a real risk of such ill-treatment and  harassment  to  a
    child  on  return  sufficient  to  prevent  them  receiving  a   proper
    education, which is shown to be a fundamental element of their personal
    identity, that they wish to pursue,  rather  than  a  child  not  being
    further educated as a result of the traditional belief that  they  will
    continue within a family business and therefore do not  require  to  be
    further educated or for some other reason, then this may amount to such
    serious discrimination either on its own  or  cumulatively  with  other
    forms of discrimination such as to cross the threshold of  persecution.
    However, this is a fact sensitive issue that must be considered in each
    case.

95. In relation to children, the UNHCR in the 2013 report identify a number
    of potential areas of concern at pages 57-62 including child-specific
    forms of persecution, including under-age recruitment, child
    trafficking, bonded or hazardous child labour, domestic violence
    against children, forced and/or underage marriage, child prostitution
    and child pornography, and the systematic denial of education. The
    position of the UNHCR in relation to children is summarised as being:

         'Depending on the particular circumstances of the case, UNHCR
         considers that children falling under the following categories may
         be in need of international refugee protection:

          a)  Children from areas where either AGEs or elements of the ANSF
   use underage            recruitment;

          b)  Children from social milieus where bonded or hazardous child
   labour is               practised;

              c)  Victims of violence against children, including sexual
and gender-based violence,                   as well as children from
social milieus where such violence is practised; and

              d)  School-age children, particularly girls. Depending on the
   individual                            circumstances of the case, they may
   be in need of international protection on the                   ground of
   their membership of a particular social group, their religion and/or
          their (imputed) political opinion.

              Asylum claims made by children, including any examination of
exclusion                       considerations for former child soldiers,
need to be assessed carefully and in                  accordance with the
UNHCR Guidelines on child asylum claims.'

Land seizures

96. Members of the Sikh and Hindu community have undoubtedly suffered  land
    seizures. We have referred above to the expert evidence regarding  this
    problem and one of the most common complaints arising from  members  of
    the community both  within  and  outside  Afghanistan  relates  to  the
    difficulties encountered in  trying  to  recover  land  that  has  been
    seized. A former representative of Hindus in the constitutional  Jirga,
    Charan Singh, is recorded as stating "all our efforts to  get  back  to
    these lands were in vain. When we went to the government  institutions,
    no  one  helped  us"  [Appendix  A.  Item  28].    A   quote   from   a
    parliamentarian and lawyer in the same article refers to  Afghanistan's
    constitution granting equal rights to citizens, claiming  there  is  no
    discrimination amongst  Afghan  citizens,  and  that  Hindus  are  also
    entitled to these rights, although the evidence supports a finding that
    the general rule of law is neglected in relation to such issues and the
    application of the law on effective means of redress remains a problem.
    Dr Giustozzi in his oral evidence stated he was  unaware  of  any  Sikh
    successfully recovering land that had been seized in the past.

97. It is asserted before us that the  issue  of  land  seizure  remains  a
    problem in most provinces  of  the  country,  of  which  not  only  the
    government of Afghanistan but also the  Afghanistan  Independent  Human
    Rights Commission (AIHRC) are fully aware. It is stated this group  has
    studied the seizure of land in Kabul and noted that  Hindu  lands  were
    mainly seized in the Kart-e-Parwan area with  there  being  cases  even
    after a final decision of the High Court [Appendix A.  Item  28]  which
    may be indicative of a lack of  effective  judicial  remedy  for  those
    affected.

98. There are however examples in the appellant's own bundle  of  incidents
    where Sikhs have retained valuable property and where the  relationship
    between Sikhs and the local Muslim community appears to be more in line
    with that which existed in the past.  By way of example we refer to  an
    article in the New York Times written by freelance journalist based  in
    New Delhi entitled "Shrinking Numbers and Growing Persecution Threatens
    Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan" dated 6  November  2013  [Appendix  A.
    Item 2]  which towards the end of the report notes:

           'Despite the bleak prospects that  faced  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
           Afghanistan, a handful of these minorities  have  endured  three
           decades of conflict to stay in their home country, having forged
           relationships with Muslims that eclipsed religious persecution.

           One Sikh family lives quietly in a fortress like home with  high
           in mud walls on the outskirts of Kabul. Guarding it is a  Muslim
           family headed by [....] who has served  as  chief  custodian  of
           their property and 24 hectares of farmland for 17 years.

           The Muslim family is left in charge when the Sikh  family  moves
           to India during the Afghan winter months. A  large  man  with  a
           bushy beard, [...] said that in his employers  absence,  he  had
           warded  off  bribes  and  intimidation  by  local  Mafia  groups
           attempting to take over the land.

           "We have a special bond of trust between us. I would never  work
           for anyone else" he said.'

99. Other evidence relied upon by the appellants records that a Gurdwara in
    Helmand province is looked after and  maintained  by  a  Muslim  family
    during the week when not in use by members of the local Sikh community.

100. We accept the evidence that, in theory  at  least,  there  are  systems
    within Afghanistan through the  administration  and  the  courts  where
    individuals who have lost land can pursue claims to recover that  land.
    The Embassy letter referred  to  above,  when  addressing  this  issue,
    states that alternative housing options  are  being  provided  although
    this will take time.  The properties were not only taken by Muslims  as
    some fellow Sikh community members or other people from the surrounding
    area are also said to be responsible. Most who have lost land  get  the
    issue resolved through relevant legal systems and have  regained  their
    land, however, some do not  claim  their  property  fearing  the  party
    grabbing their  land  would  harm  them.  In  relation  to  alternative
    accommodation options, currently there is a lack of  shelter  for  some
    Sikhs who have been living in Gurdwaras across the country.

101. The material we have seen supports a finding  that  it  is  a  criminal
    activity that disproportionately impacts upon Sikhs rather than an  act
    of persecution based upon religious identity.  There may be  those  who
    lodge claims to attempt to recover their land who are threatened  as  a
    result. Such are unlikely to be provided with effective protection  but
    we note the substantial decrease in numbers of such seizures  as  noted
    above.

Cremation

102. In relation to religious issues a considerable amount of  material  has
    been provided relating to difficulties that have  been  experienced  by
    members of the Sikh community in cremating their dead.  Cremation is an
    integral part of the religious beliefs in  Sikhism  and  Hinduism.   We
    have not  been  referred  to  any  specific  evidence  indicating  that
    cremation needs to be undertaken in any particular place, such as  next
    to water, although members of the Hindu faith do scatter the  ashes  of
    the deceased in a river or similar site. The act of cremation is viewed
    as a celebration of the completion of life rather than as lamenting the
    passing of an individual. According to religious rituals the bodies  of
    those above two years of age are to be burnt whereas anyone below  this
    age is to be buried.

103. The material we have been provided with indicates  that  cremation  has
    occurred within Afghanistan, throughout the country, ever  since  there
    has been a Sikh population in Afghanistan.  The area within Kabul where
    cremation traditionally occurred was originally on the outskirts of the
    city but is now in an area which has  become  developed,  resulting  in
    complaints about the smell of the burning bodies. There is evidence  of
    funeral processions being stoned in relation to which, upon the  direct
    order  of  President  Karzai,  a  police  escort  was  provided.    The
    appellants' own material also records incidents of bodies requiring  to
    be cremated being taken from Kabul to other places  within  Afghanistan
    such as Khost province, Jalalabad city and Ghazni province and at times
    even across the border to neighbouring States.

104. The letter relied upon by the Secretary  of  State,  from  the  British
    High  Commission,  refers  to  the  provision  of  a  defined  site  in
    negotiation with the Muslim community which should allow cremations  to
    continue. Although Dr Giustozzi  noted  that  such  provision  was  not
    referred  to  by  the  person  interviewed  by  his   researcher,   the
    appellants' own material from other sources confirms the  provision  of
    an alternative site in Kabul. We have not been furnished with  evidence
    of alternative sites being made available elsewhere  as  that  was  not
    within the  scope  of  the  hearing.   There  is  recognition  that  an
    appropriate location for cremation has been something that  members  of
    this community  have  been  promised  for  some  time  and  indeed  the
    appellants' bundle contains a reference to a  number  of  residents  of
    Qalacha area confirming that land for cremation has been  provided  but
    that due to the influx of population, people no longer want  bodies  to
    be burned near their homes. Residents have indicated that smoke arising
    from the cremation makes people feel ill  and  has  a  bad  smell.  The
    provision of some degree of support is also  noted  in  the  appellants
    bundle in an article headed "Tough Times for Afghan Hindus  and  Sikhs"
    dated 11 July 2013 in which Avtar Singh, described as chairman  of  the
    National Council of Hindus and Sikhs, is recorded as stating  "when  we
    take our dead bodies to the crematorium, we take the  police  with  us.
    Even so, local people throw stones at us. They  disrespect  our  dead".
    The same article records the residents of Qalacha insisting  that  they
    have no problems with Hindus and Sikhs, only with the cremations.

105. When the  evidence  is  viewed  as  a  whole  we  find  that  there  is
    insufficient evidence to support the appellants' claims that  the  Sikh
    and Hindu community have been deliberately targeted to the extent  that
    they are unable to perform religious ceremonies such as cremations. The
    objection to cremations, and  inappropriate  reactions,  appear  to  be
    based upon a more practical issue in that as the  population  of  Kabul
    has  expanded  the  traditional  cremation  ground  is  now  within   a
    residential area prompting numerous complaints when  cremation  occurs.
    It appears from the evidence that the Afghan government,  working  with
    the local authorities, are taking steps to address this issue by making
    alternative provision and taking steps to  ensure  that  cremation  can
    continue in the interim.  We also find the evidence supports a  finding
    that there appears to be protection provided by way of a police  escort
    for funeral  processions,  albeit  that  this  does  not  prevent  some
    occasions when stones are thrown and  an  abusive  response  from  some
    locals. The evidence relating  to  objections  to  cremation  was  also
    limited to Kabul and we were not taken to any evidence to suggest  that
    the difficulties experienced there regarding cremations are  replicated
    elsewhere.  Whilst objection to the cremations may be seen  by  members
    of this community as being a further example of discrimination we  find
    that even when viewed in the round with other discriminatory behaviour,
    it cannot be said that all members of the Sikh and Hindu  community  in
    Afghanistan  are  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or  such  cumulative
    discrimination such as to amount to  persecution.  The  evidence  above
    supports the view that this is likely to be a short-term issue with the
    provision of land on the outskirts of Kabul and therefore away from the
    more highly developed residential areas.

Temple

106. We were referred in the evidence to the fact that the Gurdwara used  by
    Sikhs and Hindus in Kabul is also under threat of demolition.  This  is
    the Temple that is used by both faiths.  We find, in relation  to  this
    issue, that if this is so it has not been established that this is  for
    reasons  relating  to  persecution.   It  is  as  a   result   of   the
    redevelopment of  Kabul.   Available  information  indicates  that  the
    reason for the demolition is due to a proposal to build a  superhighway
    through the land occupied by this particular building, and others.

107. A number of religious buildings were destroyed in  the  civil  war,  as
    were many non-religious structures, and the Indian government  provided
    funds for reconstruction. Not all have been rebuilt but it has not been
    established that this is as a result of any act of discrimination  and,
    even with the declining population of these religious  groups,  it  has
    not been  shown  that  there  are  difficulties  with  those  remaining
    preventing them from worshipping in the Gurdwara in the places in which
    they live.

108. Some may claim that when attempting  to  access  the  Temple  they  are
    subject to ill-treatment or the threat of ill-treatment.  Whether  this
    is sufficient to found a claim  may  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the
    alleged difficulties, the location of the Temple and its  surroundings,
    the level of devotion of the particular individual, the  importance  of
    religious identity to the individual concerned, and whether the alleged
    ill-treatment realistically prevents such a person from  attending  and
    undertaking worship.  Were a Sikh or Hindu credibly  claims  that  they
    are unable to  attend  the  Temple  and  that  such  attendance  is  an
    important aspect of their religious identity, and the reason  for  this
    is a credible fear of serious harm or the threat of serious harm,  then
    consideration should be given to this in accordance with Y&Z (supra).

Employment opportunities

109. As with many aspects of this country the evidence relating to  economic
    reality for Sikhs and Hindus is contradictory.  On the one  hand  there
    is evidence  of  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  community  holding
    positions within the legislative bodies and various community and other
    influential  groups,  holding  trading  licences  and   having   viable
    businesses, owners being able to retain land and property  or  to  rent
    accommodation for themselves and their families and being able to  send
    remittances to families living abroad, in places such as India. On  the
    other hand, there is evidence of poor members of  the  community  being
    unable to earn a living and having to live in the  Gurdwara  which,  in
    accordance with the tradition of Sikh and Hindu  hospitality,  provides
    food aid, shelter, and a degree of companionship  and  protection.  The
    evidence indicates that the declining numbers and  economic  well-being
    of those remaining in Afghanistan has an impact on the ability  of  the
    Gurdwara to continue to provide such hospitality and support as  it  is
    itself dependent upon donations to be able to meet  its  own  financial
    needs and purchase food and other items.

110. A family without adequate resources is unlikely to be able to  pay  for
    private education which may be relevant when considering the  situation
    of Sikh and Hindu children in Afghanistan whom it is proposed to return
    if receiving such education is demonstrated to be fundamental  to  that
    person's identity.  There is also evidence that a Muslim is unlikely to
    employ a member of the Sikh or Hindu community in place  of  a  Muslim,
    out of fear of potential  reprisal  or  loss  of  business,  indicating
    difficulties in securing an income with which to fund accommodation  or
    essentials such as food, heating, clothing. The evidence we  have  been
    able to consider indicates that  there  is  nothing  in  the  law,  the
    attitude of the Afghan government, or in theory preventing a member  of
    either of these faith groups returned to Afghanistan from being able to
    set up their own businesses but whether they are able  to  do  so  will
    depend upon the availability of  adequate  funding,  their  ability  to
    secure  business  premises  in  the  light  of  possible  hostility  or
    opposition from Muslim traders who may see them as competition  or  not
    wish to rent premises out to them, making  it  difficult  for  them  to
    pursue  what  has  now  become  the  remaining  traditional  trade   of
    shopkeeper/trader. Whether an individual is in such a position is  fact
    specific and they will have to  satisfy  the  Tribunal  that  they  are
    without economic means especially if they have paid a considerable  sum
    of money to come to the United Kingdom, that they will not be  able  to
    re-establish  themselves  economically,  and  the  impact  upon  family
    members as a result.  Such individuals may also be required to  provide
    appropriate evidence to show that there are  no  alternatives  such  as
    being supported by NGOs or through the Gurdwara  and  that  any  impact
    upon them, if destitution is alleged, is such  that  the  threshold  of
    Article 3 ECHR will be breached.

111. In relation to families with children it may be possible  to  establish
    that it is not in the best interests of such children to  be  returned,
    even if the threshold of Article 3 is not breached, if  the  degree  of
    hardship and destitution is such that it leads to  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences on return for such family members.  As with all cases  any
    assessment of the best interests of children will have to  be  balanced
    against the public interest if it is a consideration of a private  life
    argument.

Position of the Afghan Government on returnees

112. Within the recent  bundle  [Appendix  C]  are  a  number  of  documents
    referring    to    this    issue.    An    article     published     on
    kabulblogs.wordpress.com dated 28th February 2015 [Appendix C. Item 13]
    refers to a meeting with  a  Mr  Rasooli,  described  as  the  Head  of
    Returnee Department in the Ministry of Refugees and  Repatriation,  and
    his reference to a number of  returnees  being  refused  permission  to
    disembark at  Kabul  and  being  returned  to  the  removing  countries
    (Netherlands and Norway) as their return was in breach of  the  current
    Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the deporting  countries  and
    Afghanistan, because they were for example ill  or  women  without  any
    support in Afghanistan.

113. It is reported that at a meeting with the Afghan Minister for  Refugees
    and Repatriation, a Mr  Hossein  Alami  Balkhi,  it  was  claimed  some
    returning countries were breaching the terms of the  MoU  by  deporting
    women and children  as  well  as  those  who  cannot  return  to  their
    provinces of origin.

114. A  copy  letter  from  the  Ambassador  for  the  Islamic  Republic  of
    Afghanistan based in London, dated 6th March 2015 [Appendix C. Item  1]
    goes further in stating that the current  stance  of  the  Ministry  of
    Migration and Repatriation Affairs on this issue is as follows:

         'The ministry of Migration and Repatriation Affairs of  Afghanistan
has decided to         reconsider the terms of the  existing  Memorandum  of
Understandings'  through              diplomatic  channels   and   requested
partner countries to suspend deportation  of  Afghan         Migrants  until
decided  otherwise,  where  the   Ministry   can   provide   the   necessary
services to returning Afghans. Until that time the  Ministry  cannot  accept
responsibility         regarding any Afghan Deportee.'

Internal relocation

115. If there is a real risk of persecution in the  individual's  home  area
    then consideration must be given to whether there is a viable  internal
    relocation option. Whether there is a  viable  relocation  option  will
    depend upon the safety in the place  of  relocation  and  whether  that
    option is reasonable based upon all the facts of the case.   In  Januzi
    (supra) at [20], citing UNHCR  guidance,  Lord  Bingham  explained  the
    relevant considerations will be medical care, the  ability  to  earn  a
    living and find accommodation,  taking  particular  account  of  family
    links, ethnic affiliations, the ability to live  a  life  at  least  at
    subsistence level,  and  whether  support  might  be  forthcoming  from
    sources in the country of origin or abroad.   UNHCR  intervened  in  AH
    Sudan  (supra) and their  contribution  was  found  to  be  helpful  by
    Baroness Hale [20]:

         '...the correct approach when  considering  the  reasonableness  of
         [internal  relocation   alternative]   is   to   assess   all   the
         circumstances  of  the  individual's  case  holistically  and  with
         specific  reference  to  the  individual's  personal  circumstances
         (including past persecution  or  fear  thereof,  psychological  and
         health  condition,  family  and  social  situation,  and   survival
         capacities).  This assessment is to be made in the context  of  the
         conditions in  the  place  of  relocation  (including  basic  human
         rights,    security    conditions,    socio-economic    conditions,
         accommodation, access  to  health  care  facilities)  in  order  to
         determine the impact on that individual of settling in the proposed
         place of  relocation  and  whether  the  individual  could  lead  a
         relatively normal life without undue hardship.'

116. The particular concerns applicable to members of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
    communities that we have already noted above will have to be considered
    with the required degree of anxious scrutiny in relation to the area in
    which it is  proposed  that  the  individual  can  move  to.   For  the
    avoidance of  doubt  these  include:  gender;  availability  of  family
    support/protection;  availability  of  support  from   others;   likely
    financial circumstances; access to accommodation;  level  of  religious
    devotion and practical accessibility to a suitable  place  of  worship,
    and; access to education for children.  In addition, we  consider  that
    the nature, extent, duration and impact of any past persecution  and  /
    or harassment is likely to be a particularly relevant  factor  to  take
    into account when assessing the reasonableness of  internal  relocation
    for a member of the Sikh or Hindu communities.   This  is  because  the
    evidence  indicates  that  some  of  these  individuals  have  suffered
    persecution and / or harassment in relation to  which  they  have  been
    unable to get protection from the authorities, over a prolonged period.
     As Kirby J in the High Court of  Australia  in  SZATV  v  Minister  of
    Immigration and Citizenship [2007]  HCA  40  observed  "...the  support
    mechanisms available if an applicant has already  been  traumatised  by
    actual or feared persecution...will need to be weighed in  judging  the
    realism of the hypothesis of internal relocation".

117. It is also important to bear in  mind  that  partly  because  of  their
    declining number, access to extended family /  community  /  charity  /
    religious support is generally very difficult for members of  the  Sikh
    and Hindu communities in Afghanistan.  It is likely to be even more  so
    upon relocation.  As  a  consequence  of  this  the  practicability  of
    settling elsewhere and the availability of meaningful support  must  be
    carefully considered.  Those members of the Sikh or  Hindu  communities
    without access to an independent income are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
    reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.  It follows
    that such individuals are unlikely to have a viable internal relocation
    alternative.

118. As noted above, whether a person will be accepted on return may  depend
    upon the availability of support, which is a fact sensitive assessment.
     We have not been provided with any up to date  guidance  published  by
    the Respondent regarding this, but note an article dated  6th  February
    2015 by European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE), titled  "Norway
    not to return  families  at  risk  in  their  home  area  to  parts  of
    Afghanistan with no support" in which it is reported that  Norway  will
    not return families with children who would face persecution  in  their
    home areas to areas of Afghanistan where they do  not  have  sufficient
    networks or resources. This  is  in  accordance  with  the  2013  UNHCR
    Guidelines calling for the internal flight alternative  in  Afghanistan
    to  only  apply  where  the  individual  can  expect  to  benefit  from
    meaningful support of their own family, community or tribe in the  area
    of  possible  relocation,  and  consistent  with  our  own   assessment
    (although our own assessment has been restricted to members of the Sikh
    and Hindu communities).

Conclusions

119. We summarise our findings, relevant to providing  country  guidance  in
    relation to these religious minorities in Afghanistan, currently living
    Afghanistan or in relation to which  it  is  proposed  they  should  be
    returned to Afghanistan, as follows:

   i) Some members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan continue
      to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.




  ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan do not face a
      real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle them to a
      grant of international protection on the  basis  of  their  ethnic  or
      religious identity, per se. Neither can it be said that the cumulative
      impact of discrimination suffered by the Sikh and Hindu communities in
      general reaches the threshold of persecution.



 iii) A consideration of whether an individual member of the Sikh and  Hindu
      communities is at risk real of persecution upon return to  Afghanistan
      is fact-sensitive.  All the relevant circumstances must be  considered
      but careful attention should be paid to the following:
   a. women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of  appropriate
      protection from a male member of the family;
   b.  likely  financial  circumstances  and   ability   to   access   basic
      accommodation bearing in mind
    . Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a  member  of  the  Sikh  and
      Hindu communities
    . such individuals may face difficulties (including threats,  extortion,
      seizure of land and acts of violence) in retaining property and  /  or
      pursuing their remaining traditional pursuit, that of a  shopkeeper  /
      trader
    . the traditional source of support for such individuals,  the  Gurdwara
      is much less able to provide adequate support;
   c. the level of religious devotion and the practical accessibility  to  a
      suitable place of religious worship in light of declining numbers  and
      the evidence that some have been subjected to harm and threats to harm
      whilst accessing the Gurdwara;
   d.  access  to  appropriate  education   for   children   in   light   of
      discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children  and  the  shortage  of
      adequate education facilities for them.



  iv) Although it appears there is a willingness at  governmental  level  to
      provide protection, it is not established on the evidence  that  at  a
      local level the police are willing,  even  if  able,  to  provide  the
      necessary    level    of    protection     required     in     Refugee
      Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members of the Sikh
      and Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious  harm  or  harassment
      amounting to persecution.



               v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of  the  Sikh
                  or Hindu communities to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive
                  assessment. The relevant factors to be considered include
                  those set out at (iii)  above.   Given  their  particular
                  circumstances and declining number, the practicability of
                  settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
                  communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
                  access to an independent income are unlikely to  be  able
                  to  reasonably  relocate  because  of  depleted   support
                  mechanisms.

              vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in  the  cases
                  of K (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan  CG  [2003]  UKIAT
                  00057 and SL and  Others  (Returning  Sikhs  and  Hindus)
                  Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT 00137.

Application of country guidance to these Appellants

120. At the hearing Mr Tarlow made no specific submissions relating  to  the
    appellants individually, preferring instead to focus on  the  issue  of
    country conditions, and nor were they called to give oral  evidence  or
    to be cross-examined. We have, therefore, assessed the risk  on  return
    and entitlement to a grant of international protection on the basis  of
    our core findings set out above. The statement of agreed facts accepted
    the Article 8 claims as detailed below.

First, second and third appellants

121. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on  26th  January  2003.
    He was granted exceptional leave to remain as  an  unaccompanied  minor
    until 31st December 2005.  On 30th November 2005 he applied for further
    leave to remain which was refused and an  appeal  against  the  refusal
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Milligan-Baldwin in a  determination  of
    8th October 2007. Adverse credibility findings were made  and  on  11th
    June 2008 he  left  the  UK  and  returned  to  Afghanistan  under  the
    Voluntary Departure Scheme.

122. The first appellant left Afghanistan again in July  2011  and  returned
    to the United Kingdom with his wife and daughter on 4th  December  2011
    without leave. They claimed asylum at port on arrival.  The  claim  was
    refused and an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal dismissed on 13th June
    2012. The core of the claim is that the family are pharmacists and with
    the  financial  assistance  the  first  appellant  received  from   the
    Voluntary Departure Scheme he was able to set up his own pharmacy. That
    business failed and he then went to work for his father  in  Kabul.  In
    May 2011 the pharmacy provided a medicine in which  an  ingredient  was
    missing. A report showed that entire batch supplied to the pharmacy was
    faulty as a result of which the supplier of the medicine,  a  Mr  Aziz,
    and the police were  informed.  Mr  Aziz's  warehouse  was  raided  and
    thereafter  Mr  Aziz  was  convicted  and  sentenced   to   ten   years
    imprisonment.

123. The first appellant's father then began to receive threats  which  were
    reported to the police who refused to help. Mr Aziz is said to be a man
    with links to parliamentarians. The family moved to  another  area  and
    were told that men in police uniforms had visited their house and broke
    the windows. In  July  2011,  as  a  result,  the  entire  family  left
    Afghanistan  and  flew  to  Moscow  where  his  brothers  were   living
    illegally.

124. An appeal against the refusal of his  claim  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Batiste and rejected. That determination was  set  aside
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor in January 2013 on the basis that a more
    detailed examination of the background material was required  than  had
    been undertaken by Judge Batiste when assessing  risk  on  return.  The
    factual findings of the Judge are preserved  which  are  summarised  in
    paragraphs 35 of the determination in the following terms:

        '35. I have tried to consider  the  issue  of  credibility  in  the
        round. I have considered all the factors raised  in  the  preceding
        paragraphs.  When  considered  together   they   do   fundamentally
        undermine the credibility of the appellant's  account.  The  issues
        raised are not peripheral but go to the  core  of  the  appellant's
        account.  I find that the appellant is not a credible witness and I
        find his account of events that occurred to be  a  fabrication.  As
        such I reject each and every aspect of the appellants  claim  other
        than the fact that he is from Afghanistan and may be  of  the  Sikh
        faith.  As such I do not accept that he is at risk from Mr Aziz  or
        from any friends or associates of his.  I reject the claimed threat
        in its entirety.'

125. The Judge also did not accept that the first appellant did not  have  a
    family network to return too, as there was an uncle living in Kabul, or
    that there were no relatives who would be able to provide  support  for
    him.

126. We are obliged to assess prospective risk for the first  appellant  and
    members of his family on the basis of the findings of  fact  that  have
    already been made.  They have family living in Kabul who they can  turn
    to for support.  As support is available from family it  has  not  been
    shown this family will be destitute on return. A lack of  prospects  of
    employment within the family has also not been established - there  are
    family members to turn to for support.   We do not find that the first,
    second and  third  appellants  are  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    discrimination (on an individual  or  cumulative  basis)  amounting  to
    persecution upon return.   They  are  reasonably  likely  to  have  the
    support of family members and our findings based  upon  the  background
    evidence do not give rise to a real risk of  persecution  in  light  of
    this.   We bear in mind that  the  third  appellant  child  is  due  to
    commence primary school and will face a risk  of  bullying  within  the
    state educational system. It has  not  however  been  established  that
    available resources will not enable  the  child  to  attend  a  private
    school.  This is not a case in which the child will be deprived  of  an
    education.  There is a potential risk to the second appellant as a Sikh
    women but the evidence does not establish that the necessary  threshold
    to entitle her to international protection  has  been  crossed  on  the
    evidence available to us for reasons we have  already  set  out  above.
    Drawing all the relevant threads together we are not satisfied that the
    first, second and third appellants are at real risk of  persecution  or
    discrimination amounting to persecution upon return to Afghanistan.

127. As stated above, the Article 8 element was accepted by Mr Tarlow  based
    upon the family life the members of this family have with each other in
    the UK, elements of dependency and the private life formed since  their
    arrival. On the basis of the concession in relation to  the  Article  8
    alone these appellants must succeed.

Fourth appellant

128. In relation to the fourth appellant, he entered the United  Kingdom  in
    December 2006 and claimed asylum in Croydon on 18th December 2006.  His
    claim was refused and he appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy found him to be credible with a well  founded
    fear of persecution in Jalalabad by non state agents on account of  his
    Sikh religion but found relocation  to  Kabul  was  possible.  In  2010
    further submissions regarding the  reasonableness  of  relocation  were
    rejected by the respondent and the fourth  appellant's  further  appeal
    was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth.

129. In the document "Statement of Facts" submitted for the  hearing  it  is
    noted that the  findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  this  family  are
    preserved from the First-tier Tribunal and accepted.  It  is  therefore
    not disputed before us that this family would be at risk of persecution
    if returned to Jalalabad and the only question upon which a  ruling  is
    sought  is  whether  they  can  reasonably  be  expected  to   relocate
    internally to Kabul.

130. In paragraph 11 of the determination  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ruth
    summarised the core of the claim in the following terms:

        "The appellant is a Sikh and  had  been  working  in  his  father's
        textile shop in Jalalabad.  He and his family had  long  experience
        of harassment, beatings and discrimination  at  the  hands  of  the
        majority  population  in  Jalalabad  but  the  situation   markedly
        deteriorated around ten years ago when the appellant's  father  was
        killed  in  a  sectarian  attack.   The   appellant   himself   was
        subsequently abducted by the  Taliban  and  only  returned  to  the
        family after his brother had paid a substantial  ransom.   In  2006
        the appellant and his family  came  under  pressure  from  a  local
        Muslim who wished to marry the appellant's daughter.  They received
        death threats and  decided  to  sell  the  family  shop  and  leave
        Afghanistan."

131. Both the fourth appellant and his wife have a number of  health  issues
    and receive ongoing medical treatment in the United Kingdom. The family
    have no  remaining  relatives  in  Afghanistan  and  in  particular  no
    contacts or relatives in Kabul.

132. In his witness statement  dated  29  July  2010  the  fourth  appellant
    states that both his wife and daughter  are  with  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom. At that time his daughter  was  studying  in  year  13  having
    achieved good grades at GCSE and was  therefore  in  education  in  the
    United Kingdom with good prospects of reaching her  full  potential  if
    she is permitted  to  complete  her  education.  As  stated  above  the
    prospects of that occurring in Afghanistan for a Sikh are very  limited
    at secondary or university level unless such a  person  is  willing  to
    study within the existing state system  where  the  evidence  indicates
    there is  a  high  degree  of  likelihood  of  discrimination  and  the
    possibility of such a person being targeted based upon their  religious
    beliefs, which may include abduction, forced marriage, or  other  forms
    of ill-treatment.  It has not been established  on  the  evidence  that
    resources or facilities exist that will enable such an education to  be
    obtained in a more conducive environment in this case.

133. We find no real  risk  of  state  sponsored  persecution  against  this
    family established on return. There is evidence of the  possibility  of
    harassment as noted above and of facilities to worship in  the  Temple.
    The first appellant is 64 and is  not  fit  for  manual/menial  labour,
    assuming such employment is available, and it has not been  established
    that he will have the contacts in Kabul that will be required to enable
    him to re-establish the family, even  assuming  there  is  evidence  of
    available capital or the  required  mental  strength  to  open  another
    trading facility in light of his accepted experiences in Jalalabad.

134. Unlike the first three appellants, the fourth appellant has  no  direct
    means or ability to support his family and it is likely  that  he  will
    have to turn to the  Temple  for  support.  We  comment  above  on  the
    resource issues in relation to the tradition of support provided by the
    Temple, which is enshrined  in  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  these
    religious groups, which is funded by donations from an  ever  dwindling
    and economically challenged congregation. The evidence also refers to a
    number of individuals already having sought the support of  the  Temple
    and the overcrowding that occurs there already as a result.

135. The situation of the fourth  appellant's  wife  and  daughter  will  be
    similar with the additional factor that they are unlikely to be able to
    leave the very difficult conditions at the Temple without male  support
    to provide a form of protection, although whether this is credible  and
    effective from an elderly  gentleman  with  his  own  health  needs  is
    debatable.

136. Having assessed the situation of  the  fourth  appellant  and  his  two
    dependents we find it would be unreasonable to expect them to  relocate
    to  Kabul.   He  has  no  family  or  other  contacts  there  and   his
    circumstances are such that will find  it  very  difficult  to  survive
    economically in the absence of access to an independent income.  He  is
    likely to have to resort to living in the Temple with his  family  with
    little or no contact with the outside world.  We  find  that  when  his
    circumstances are considered cumulatively they  support  a  finding  he
    will be prevented from living a relatively normal  life  without  undue
    hardship. We find internal relocation in such circumstances not  to  be
    reasonable.

Decision

137. The First-tier Tribunals have been found to have erred in law  and  its
    decisions have been set aside. We remake the decisions as follows.  The
    appeals of the first second and third Appellants  are  dismissed  under
    the Refugee Convention and Humanitarian protection  but  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR. The appeal of the fourth appellant is allowed under the
    Refugee Convention as well as under Article 8.

Anonymity

138. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     We make that order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th August 2015
                 SCHEDULE OF BACKGROUND AND EXPERT EVIDENCE

                                 APPENDIX A

          Documents before the Upper Tribunal - Appellants' Bundle
|Item |Document                                             |Date           |
|1    |"Expert report" by Dr Antonio Giustozzi              |1 February 2014|
|2    |"Shrinking numbers and growing persecution threaten  |6 November 2013|
|     |Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan" Reported by The New |               |
|     |York Times India Ink.                                |               |
|3    |"Taliban deny killing Shushmita Banerjee, But Hindu  |6 September    |
|     |Sikhs vanishing from Afghanistan" reported by Palash |2013           |
|     |Ghoshon.                                             |               |
|4    |"Minority Report" reported by Afghanistan Today.     |16 August 2013 |
|5    |"Hindus, Sikhs of Afghanistan angered by Afghan      |31 July 2013   |
|     |Parliament decision", reported by Khaama Press.      |               |
|6    |"Sikh girls in Afghanistan face difficulty in finding|31 July 2013   |
|     |Mr Right" reported by IBN Live.                      |               |
|7    |"Tough times for Afghan Hindus and Sikhs - dwindling |11 July 2013   |
|     |community struggles to maintain identity", reported  |               |
|     |by RAWA News.                                        |               |
|8    |"Afghan Sikhs, already marginalised, are pushed to   |10 July 2013   |
|     |the brink", reported by Los Angeles Times.           |               |
|9    |Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) DSG &|4 April 2013   |
|     |Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan |               |
|     |[2013] UKUT 148 (IAC)                                |               |
|10   |"Afghan police accused of corruption and child       |25 February    |
|     |abuse". Reported by the BBC News, Asia.              |2013           |
|11   |"Afghan police 'sell weapons to Taliban, are addicted|25 February    |
|     |to drugs and kidnap and rape of young boys" reported |2013           |
|     |by Mail Online.                                      |               |
|12   |"World Report 2013: Events of 2012" Report by Human  |2013           |
|     |Rights Watch                                         |               |
|13   |"Charity warns of religious attacks" by Robert       |12 October 2012|
|     |Cumber.                                              |               |
|14   |"Citing Taliban strife, Afghan Sikhs and Hindus ask  |8 August 2012  |
|     |UN for asylum", reported by Heath Druzin Stars and   |               |
|     |Stripes.                                             |               |
|15   |"Human Rights Features".                             |3 July 2012    |
|16   |"Sikh man deported to Afghanistan returned to UK",   |3 July 2012    |
|     |reported by the Guardian.                            |               |
|17   |"Sikh's Detention Reveals Flaws in Afghan Justice,   |30 January 2012|
|     |Nation's Religious Intolerance", reported by         |               |
|     |Washington Post.                                     |               |
|18   |"Afghan police 'Killers and Corrupt'", article by    |13 September   |
|     |Rafael Epstein and Jeremy Kelly.                     |2011           |
|19   |"Billions Spent on Afghan Police But Brutality,      |24 August 2011 |
|     |Corruption Prevail", article by Reuters.             |               |
|20   |"Afghan Hindu and Sikhs, Their situation and         |July 2011      |
|     |recommendations for the assessment of claims", UNHCR |               |
|     |Regional Representation for Western Europe Brussels. |               |
|21   |"Afghan Sikhs, Risk on return to Kabul" by Roger     |20 May 2011    |
|     |Ballard.                                             |               |
|22   |"The history and current position of Afghanistan's   |18 May 2011    |
|     |Hindus and Sikh Population" by Roger Ballard.        |               |
|23   |"Oxfam Accuses Afghan Police of Torture and Child Sex|10 May 2011    |
|     |Abuse", article by the Daily Telegraph.              |               |
|24   |"Amnesty International Calls on Afghan Authorities to|25 January 2011|
|     |Investigate Human Rights Violations by the           |               |
|     |Government" Report                                   |               |
|25   |"The History And Current Position of Afghanistan's   |2011           |
|     |Hindus And Sikhs Population" Reported by Roger       |               |
|     |Ballard CASAS                                        |               |
|26   |"The State of the World's Human Rights" Amnesty      |2011           |
|     |International Report.                                |               |
|27   |"Only one Hindu left in Khost", reported by Maiwand  |18 October     |
|     |Fida, Pajhwok, Afghan News, dated 18th October 2010  |2010           |
|28   |"Afghan Hindus, the Most Deprived in Afghanistan",   |9 August 2010  |
|     |written by Parwiz Shamal.                            |               |
|29   |"Afghan Police Failings Fuelling Taliban Recruitment,|3 June 2010    |
|     |Say UK Army Chief's" article by the Guardian.        |               |
|30   |"Corruption, not insecurity, biggest concern for     |19 January 2010|
|     |Afghan - UN Report", article by UN News Centre.      |               |
|31   |"Afghanistan: Investigate Death in Custody" Human    |21 December    |
|     |Rights Watch Report.                                 |2009           |
|32   |"Afghan Corruption a Political Obstacle", article by |18 November    |
|     |the BBC News.                                        |2009           |
|33   |"Afghan Police: Corrupt and Brutal, And still Not Fit|6 November 2009|
|     |for Purpose", article by the Guardian.               |               |
|34   |"The Hindus have no Proper Place for Cremation",     |24 October 2009|
|     |reported by RAWA News.                               |               |
|35   |"Is Afghanistan A Narco-state?" article by The New   |27 July 2008   |
|     |York Times.                                          |               |
|36   |"Sikhs and Hindus claim persecution", Reported by    |17 May 2008    |
|     |Chris Sands, Foreign Correspondent - The National.   |               |
|37   |Afghan Sikhs under threat: A brief history", reported|Undated        |
|     |by Jagmit Singh.                                     |               |
|38   |"No Human Rights in Afghanistan, especially no rights|Undated        |
|     |for Afghan Hindus/Sikhs" reported by                 |               |
|     |http://www.rights-4-afghanhindus-and-sikhs.com       |               |
|39   |Roger Ballard CV                                     |Undated        |
|40   |"Sikhs struggle under Afghan Intolerance" reported by|Undated        |
|     |the Washington Post.                                 |               |
|41   |"Summary of the DVD produced by Pritpal Singh -      |Undated        |
|     |Mission Afghanistan".                                |               |

                                 APPENDIX B

          Documents before the Upper Tribunal - Respondent's Bundle
|Item |Document         |Weblink                                |Date       |
|1    |Radio Free       |http://www.rferl.org/content/afghan-hin|4 September|
|     |Europe/Radio     |du-sikh/25095406.html                  |2013       |
|     |Liberty          |                                       |           |
|2    |Minority Rights  |http://www.minorityrights.org          |September  |
|     |Group            |                                       |2013       |
|     |International;   |                                       |           |
|     |State of the     |                                       |           |
|     |World's Minority |                                       |           |
|     |and Indigenous   |                                       |           |
|     |Peoples 2013;    |                                       |           |
|     |Events of 2012   |                                       |           |
|3    |Wakht News Agency|http://wakht.af/en/index.php/social-cul|13 August  |
|     |                 |ture/4510-hundus-sikh-enjoy-equal-right|2013       |
|     |                 |s-khazi.html                           |           |
|4    |UNHCR Eligibility|http://www.unhcr-northerneurope.org/no_|6 August   |
|     |Guidelines for   |cache/resources/legal-documents/guideli|2013       |
|     |assessing the    |nes-and-positions/eligibility-guideline|           |
|     |International    |s.html?cid=3490&did=998&sechash=1b06061|           |
|     |Protection Needs |7                                      |           |
|     |of Asylum Seekers|                                       |           |
|     |from Afghanistan |                                       |           |
|5    |Los Angeles Times|http://articles.latimes.com/2013/jun/10|10 June    |
|     |                 |/world/la-fg-afghanistan-sikhs-20130611|2013       |
|6    |Hindu American   |http://www.hafsite.org/sites/default/fi|5 June 2013|
|     |Foundation;      |les/HHR_2012_Final.pdf                 |           |
|     |Hindus in South  |                                       |           |
|     |Asia and the     |                                       |           |
|     |Diaspora: A      |                                       |           |
|     |survey of Human  |                                       |           |
|     |Rights 2013      |                                       |           |
|7    |US Department of |http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/irf/reli|20 May 2013|
|     |State            |giousfreedom/#wrapper                  |           |
|     |International    |                                       |           |
|     |Religious Freedom|                                       |           |
|     |Report for 2012: |                                       |           |
|     |Afghanistan.     |                                       |           |
|8    |Freedom in the   |http://www.freedomhouse.org/report/free|May 2013   |
|     |World 2013;      |dom-world/2013/afghanistan-0           |           |
|     |Afghanistan      |                                       |           |
|9    |Institute for War|http://iwpr.net/report-news/afghan-sihk|28 July    |
|     |and Peace        |s-and-hindus-face-discrimination-school|2011       |
|     |Reporting        |                                       |           |
|10   |Deccan Herald    |http://www.deccanherald.com/content/546|24 February|
|     |                 |80/afghan-siks-face-threats.html       |           |
|     |                 |                                       |2010       |



                                 APPENDIX C

  Documents before the Upper Tribunal - County Information Bundle 28th May
                  2015 - filed (on behalf of appellant TG)

|Item|Document                                                  |Date       |
|1   |Afghan Embassy Letter                                     |6 March    |
|    |                                                          |2015       |
|2   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Suicide-Bomb Blast Kills |18 April   |
|    |Dozen In Jalalabad, In Afghan East                        |2015       |
|3   |United Nations News Centre, Afghanistan condemns 'brutal' |18 April   |
|    |suicide attack in Jalalabad                               |2015       |
|4   |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), |12 April   |
|    |Press Release: Latest UNAMA figures show continuing record|2014       |
|    |high civilian casualties                                  |           |
|5   |United Nations News Centre, UN official 'shocked' by      |11 April   |
|    |killing of aid worker in Afghanistan                      |2015       |
|6   |D+C Development and Cooperation (Germany), Civil strife: "|5 April    |
|    |Bandits in uniform"                                       |2015       |
|7   |Voice of America News, Suicide Bomber Strikes Afghan      |29 March   |
|    |Capital                                                   |2015       |
|8   |Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), Displaced women and girls|23 March   |
|    |trapped in Afghanistan's cities                           |2015       |
|9   |United Nations News Centre, Afghanistan: UN condemns      |20 march   |
|    |brutal killing of mentally ill woman                      |2015       |
|10  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, UN: IS Appears To Have   |17 March   |
|    |Presence in Afghanistan                                   |2015       |
|11  |Voice of America News, No Signs of Peace Talks as Afghan  |13 March   |
|    |Fighting Season Nears                                     |2015       |
|12  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 13 Killed in Afghan      |11 March   |
|    |Bombing                                                   |2015       |
|13  |Kabulblogs.wordpress.com, Afghan minister for refugees and|28 February|
|    |repatriation warns against forced returns                 |2015       |
|14  |Voice of America News, Report: Afghan Civilian Deaths Rose|18 February|
|    |25 percent in 2014                                        |2015       |
|15  |European Asylum Support Office (EASO) EASO publishes a    |13 February|
|    |Country of Origin Information Report on security situation|2015       |
|    |in Afghanistan                                            |           |
|16  |International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),          |9 February |
|    |Afghanistan: Escalating violence brings increased         |2015       |
|    |suffering to war-weary Afghans                            |           |
|17  |International Organisation for Migration (IOM), Sharp     |6 February |
|    |Increase in Afghans Returning form Pakistan Raises        |2015       |
|    |Concerns                                                  |           |
|18  |European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE), Norway not|6 February |
|    |to return families at risk in their home area to parts of |2015       |
|    |Afghanistan with no support                               |           |
|19  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Insurgents Kill 15 in    |29 January |
|    |Afghan Attacks                                            |2015       |
|20  |Voice of America News, 3 US Defence Contractors Shot Dead |29 January |
|    |at Kabul Airport                                          |2015       |
|21  |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC),  |11 January |
|    |The prosecutor of Appeal Court of Nangarhar Province was  |2015       |
|    |killed                                                    |           |
|22  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Officials blame Afghan   |2 January  |
|    |Troops For Wedding Bloodbath                              |2015       |
|23  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, NATO Holds Ceremony      |29 December|
|    |Formally Ending Afghan Operation                          |2014       |
|24  |Voice of America News, After Pivotal 2014,  Afghanistan   |22 December|
|    |faces New Challenges With Less Help                       |2014       |
|25  |Voice of America News, 14 Killed in Attacks in Afghanistan|21 December|
|    |                                                          |2014       |
|26  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Afghan Sikhs Found in    |17 August  |
|    |Shipping Container in Britain                             |2014       |
|27  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 'When Are You Going      |19 August  |
|    |Back?' Afghan Sikhs Strangers in Their Own Land           |2014       |
|28  |Afghan Sikhs face an uncertain future - Aljazeera         |23 February|
|    |                                                          |2014       |
|29  |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the            |6 August   |
|    |International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from     |2013       |
|    |Afghanistan                                               |           |
|30  |Tough Times for Hindus and Sikhs                          |11 July    |
|    |                                                          |2013       |
|31  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Familiar Faces and       |7 October  |
|    |Warlords Set to Dominate Afghan Election Campaign         |2013       |
|32  |Human Rights Watch, Dispatches: The War in Afghanistan is |31 July    |
|    |Escalating, Not Ending                                    |2013       |
|33  |Human Rights Watch, Afghanistan: Escalating Setbacks for  |16 July    |
|    |Women                                                     |2013       |
|34  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK), Tough Times   |11 July    |
|    |for Afghan Hindus and Sikhs                               |2013       |
|35  |Hindu American Foundation (USA), Hindus in South Asia and |5 June 2013|
|    |the Diaspora: A Survey of Human Rights 2012:              |           |
|36  |US Department of State, 2012 Report on International      |20 May 2013|
|    |Religious Freedom: Afghanistan                            |           |
|37  |US Commission on International Religious Freedom, United  |30 April   |
|    |States Commission on International Religious Freedom      |2013       |
|    |Annual Report 2013: Afghanistan                           |           |
|38  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK), Afghan Sikhs  |28 July    |
|    |and Hindus Face Discrimination at School                  |2011       |
|39  |HJT Research, Sikh asylum seeker jailed in Kabul after    |4 July 2012|
|    |being deported from the UK                                |           |
|40  |UK Home Office Border Agency, Operational Guidance Note:  |7 June 2012|
|    |Afghanistan (v10 issued June 2012)                        |           |
|41  |US Commission on International Religious Freedom, US      |20 March   |
|    |Commission on International Religious Annual Report 2012: |2012       |
|    |Afghanistan                                               |           |
|42  |Hindu American Foundation (USA), Islamic Republic of      |14 November|
|    |Afghanistan - Policy Brief: 2011-2012                     |2012       |
|43  |Hindu American Foundation (USA), HAF Concerned over       |20 December|
|    |Worsening Plight of Afghan Hindus and Sikhs               |2012       |
|44  |EurasiaNet, Afghanistan: Dwindling Sikh Community         |20 January |
|    |Struggles to Endure in Kabul                              |2010       |
|45  |Integrated Regional Information. Networks News (IRIN),    |18 March   |
|    |Sikh, Hindu minorities "disappointed, isolated and        |2009       |
|    |oppressed"                                                |           |



