
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Wagner (advocates' conduct - fair hearing) [2015] UKUT 00655 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 October 2015                            |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                             KLAUS PETER WAGNER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       In person
For the Respondent:      Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer


 i) Legitimate advocacy does not extend to aggressive  questioning  of,  or
    confrontation with, a party or witness.  The Tribunal should  intervene
    where this occurs.

ii) Similarly, mere comments by an advocate under the guise of  questioning
    are improper and may also require judicial intervention.

iii)  Improper  conduct  on  the  part  of  an   advocate,   unchecked   and
    unrestrained  by  judicial  authority  and  hearing   management,   can
    potentially render a hearing unfair.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

     Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a national of South Africa, aged 73 years.   His  wife
    is a British national. Having lived in South Africa for most  of  their
    lives, they moved to Northern Ireland  in  2012,  residing  there  ever
    since. His appeal to this Tribunal originates in  a  decision  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  dated  06
    December 2013, refusing his application for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  By its decision promulgated on 16 February  2015,  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed his  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal was granted in the following terms:

         "The Appellant complains that he and his wife were  prevented  from
         giving evidence by  the  Judge,  that  they  were  bullied  by  the
         presenting officer and that this was tolerated by  the  Judge.   In
         short, it is said that the Appellant did not have a fair hearing."


         The FtT Hearing and Decision

 2. Immediately following the hearing before the FtT, on the same day,  the
    Appellant wrote to the Secretary of State's presenting officer's  unit.
    His  letter  complained  in  general  terms  of  "ill  mannered,  rude,
    insulting, bias and prejudicial conduct" on the part of the  presenting
    officer concerned (the "PO").  He adverted to a letter from his  wife's
    General Practitioner containing the statement  that  "....  She  is  on
    appropriate medication".  Having done so, he attributed to the  PO  the
    comment, when questioning his wife at the hearing:

    [a]  "....  It is strange  that  you  do  not  know  the  name  of  the
         antidepressant even though you take it every day".

         The letter continues:

    [b]  "The Honourable Judge intervened and  mentioned  that  the  doctor
         stated she is on 'appropriate' medication."

         This, per the Appellant's letter, was followed by a  question  from
the PO:

    [c]  "Why are the names of any medication not mentioned?"

    Next, the letter complains that,  with  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    condition of DVT, the PO stated:


    [d]  "That's not a problem."

 3. The decision of the FtT addresses medical issues in a number of places.
     First, the Judge summarises the Appellant's evidence that his wife  is
    suffering from osteoporosis and arthritis; her health had  deteriorated
    since arriving in the United Kingdom and he was her  carer  in  various
    respects, which he  particularised.   The  Judge  also  summarises  the
    evidence of the Appellant's spouse,  in  these  terms:   she  has  been
    suffering from osteoporosis since the age  of  40;  her  condition  has
    deteriorated; she also suffers from osteoarthritis; she  has  been  "in
    and out of hospital" on account of  depression;  she  takes  medication
    which does not help; the Appellant performs the basic household  tasks;
    and she was "one step away" from resorting to a wheelchair.

 4. In later passages of its decision, the FtT makes certain  comments  and
    findings about the medical issues:

         "I have before me a brief letter from her GP ... who confirms  that
         Mrs Wagner suffers  from  osteoporosis  and  osteoarthritis.   This
         letter provides little information about the extent of her  medical
         conditions and how they affect her.  [The doctor] does not indicate
         that she will be confined to a wheelchair in the near future.   The
         Appellant has suggested that she would be unable  to  live  on  her
         own.  This suggests a significant level of  disability  but  I  had
         little medical evidence to support this claim ....


         I also find it significant that in spite of claiming to be severely
         disabled, Mrs  Wagner  has  not  made  application  for  Disability
         benefits which would assist her.


         There was no medical evidence to suggest that Mrs Wagner  would  be
         unable to travel to South Africa with the Appellant."

    This latter statement is a reference to the scenario of  the  Appellant
    returning to South Africa  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  settlement
    application, the evidence being  that  96%  of  such  applications  are
    processed and determined within a period of 60 days.

         This Appeal

 5. The Appellant's letters in the immediate aftermath of  the  hearing  at
    first instance stimulated the  generation  of  some  further  evidence.
    First, as part of its investigation into the Appellant's complaint, the
    UKVI obtained a written  response  from  its  PO.   Second,  the  Upper
    Tribunal Principal Resident Judge procured  a  response  from  the  FtT
    Judge.  Each was to the effect that nothing untoward  or  improper  had
    occurred at the hearing.  It was also highlighted  that  the  Appellant
    was represented by Counsel, who made no protest or intervention.

 6. Having considered the accounts provided by the Appellant,  the  PO  and
    the Judge, it seems to me that there is no  substantial  dispute  about
    the particulars of the  matters  raised  by  the  Appellant.   However,
    recalling the terms of the grant of permission to appeal, I can find no
    basis for concluding that the Appellant and his  wife  were  "prevented
    from giving evidence by the Judge".  This is simply not made out.   The
    second limb of the grant of permission is that they were "...bullied by
    the presenting officer and ... this was tolerated by the Judge".   This
    has two elements.  As regards the first, I can ascertain no basis for a
    finding of bullying.  It is reasonable to conclude that conduct of this
    kind would have been the subject of vocal objection by the  Appellant's
    representative. As regards the second on the Appellant's  own  account,
    the Judge was prepared to intervene when considered appropriate by him.
     Viewed in the round and realistically, I consider that  the  Appellant
    was not anticipating the adversarial element of  the  hearing  and  the
    vigorous, sometimes intrusive questioning which this can entail.

 7. While it is clear from both the terms and the timing of the Appellant's
    letters that the conduct of the hearing at first instance was  a  cause
    of substantial concern and  upset,  I  must  balance  his  perceptions,
    genuinely held to my mind, with the assessment in  the  last  preceding
    paragraph and the factor of legal representation. I must  further  take
    into account the Appellant's acknowledgement that there  was  at  least
    one proactive judicial intervention in  response  to  an  objectionable
    question.

 8. The ultimate question is whether the conduct of  the  hearing  blighted
    the Appellant's ability to put forward his case or to  respond  to  the
    challenge made to his case.  I have concluded, on balance,  that  there
    was no such impairment.  However, I would add that, as  highlighted  in
    the recently reported  decision  of  Alubankudi  (Appearance  of  bias)
    [2015] UKUT 54, the interaction of most litigants  and  witnesses  with
    the judicial system  is  a  transient  one.   Indeed,  it  is  normally
    confined to a single litigation experience.  I repeat what was said  in
    Alubankudi at [14]:

         "The interface between the judiciary  and  society  is  of  greater
         importance nowadays than it has ever been.  In both the conduct  of
         hearings and the compilation of judgments, Judges must  have  their
         antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences ...  it  is  of
         seminal importance that the  fairness,  impartiality  and  detached
         objectivity  of  the  judicial  office  holder  are  manifest  from
         beginning to end."

    To this I would add that the importance of appearances, impression  and
    perceptions must never be underestimated.


 9. I would, however, hold unequivocally that questions and comments of the
    kind detailed at [2](a),(c) and (d) above are improper.  As regards the
    second of these two matters, it was plainly inappropriate  to  ask  the
    Appellant or his spouse why the medical expert  who  had  compiled  the
    report in question had  not  detailed  the  relevant  medication.   The
    Judge, of course, could not have prevented  this  question  from  being
    asked.   However,  the  intervention  which  he  had  made  immediately
    beforehand suffices to indicate that he was  discharging  his  duty  of
    fairness to both parties.  As regards the  first  and  third  of  these
    matters,  fairness  did  not   necessarily   dictate   any   particular
    intervention or ruling on the part of the Judge, given  the  margin  of
    appreciation  available  to  him.  However,  the  judge   should   have
    appreciated  that  the  comment  was  perceived  to  be  demeaning  and
    insulting and a suitable intervention would have been appropriate.

10. To this I would add that mere comments  by  representatives  under  the
    guise of questioning of a party or witness are not  appropriate.   They
    are forbidden by the most elementary principles and rules of  advocacy.
    Swift disapproval by presiding judges can only  enhance  both  fairness
    and advocacy  standards,  thereby  emphasising  the  authority  of  the
    Tribunal and enhancing its status of fair  and  impartial  adjudicator.
    My final observation on this issue is that the  role  of  the  advocate
    does  not  properly  encompass   either   aggressive   questioning   or
    confrontation: where either occurs, a boundary has been crossed and the
    presiding Judge should intervene.  Improper conduct on the part  of  an
    advocate, unchecked and unrestrained by judicial authority and  hearing
    management, can potentially render a hearing unfair.

11. I take this opportunity to summarise  the  governing  principles.   The
    Upper Tribunal has considered the right of every  litigant  to  a  fair
    hearing in a  series  of  reported  decisions.   The  wide  variety  of
    contexts in which this issue has  arisen  underlines  the  truism  that
    every case is invariably fact sensitive.   The  central  tenet  of  the
    right to a fair hearing is having the opportunity to put one's case and
    to respond on all material  issues.   In  MM  (unfairness;  E&R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC),  this  Tribunal  noted,  at  [15],  that  it  is
    doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two stage process of asking  whether
    there was a procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety  giving  rise  to
    unfairness and, if so, whether this had any  material  bearing  on  the
    outcome.  These are, rather, two elements of a single question,  namely
    whether there was procedural unfairness.  This  Tribunal  further  held
    that the reviewing  or  appellate  Court  should  exercise  caution  in
    concluding that the outcome would have been the same if  the  diagnosed
    procedural irregularity or impropriety had not occurred

12. One particular reflection  is  apposite.   Adjudication  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of complaints relating to the conduct  of  a  first
    instance hearing can be a difficult exercise.  Since the FtT is  not  a
    court  of  record  no  transcript  of   the   hearing   is   available.
    Furthermore, disagreement between the parties about  the  issues  under
    scrutiny can occur.   In  some  cases,  as  in  Alubankudi,  a  party's
    representative makes a witness statement which may be  of  considerable
    assistance to the appellate tribunal.  The contemporaneous notes of the
    parties' representatives may also be provided  in  certain  cases.   In
    addition,  the  record  of  proceedings,  compiled  by  the  Judge  and
    maintained on the Tribunal's file, may provide insight and  assistance.
    Sometimes, as in the present case, the response of the Presiding  Judge
    is also available. Even where some or all of these aids are  available,
    it is impossible to recreate matters such  as  atmosphere,  intonation,
    facial expression, speed of response et  al;  and,  fundamentally,  the
    elusive quality of demeanour cannot be reproduced on appeal.  The basic
    handicap is that there is no audio or written record of the words  used
    by representatives, parties, witnesses and the presiding Judge.

13. I highlight also that in cases of this genre first  instance  advocates
    have the potential to become witnesses, normally via the provision of a
    witness  statement.   As  this  Tribunal  emphasised  in  BW   (Witness
    Statements by Advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC) the  roles
    of advocate and witness are distinct and, thus, in cases where a  first
    instance advocate becomes a witness a different representative must  be
    instructed.

Error of Law Conclusion

14. In pronouncing my decision at the conclusion of the hearing, I observed
    that, on careful analysis, the real issue of substance in  this  appeal
    concerned  the  FtT's  consideration  of  the  medical  evidence.    An
    unsophisticated assessment exposes the fact that part  of  the  medical
    evidence was disregarded by the Judge.  While in his decision he refers
    to a brief letter from a particular medical practitioner, he  makes  no
    mention of a  second  letter  written  some  two  weeks  earlier  by  a
    different practitioner belonging to the same practice.  In this earlier
    letter the doctor confirms that the Appellant's spouse:

         "...  has  difficulties  with  her  health  due  to  arthritis  and
         osteoporosis that  requires  the  assistance  of  a  carer  ie  her
         husband.  She would be greatly affected if he was  not  present  to
         assist her due to her neck and hand problems especially."

    The Judge makes no mention  of  this  evidence.   Furthermore,  in  his
    decision he suggests that he had "little medical evidence"  to  support
    the Appellant's claim that his wife would be unable to live on her own.
     This does not withstand analysis, since the report which the Judge did
    consider, contains the following unambiguous statement:


         "She would not be able to cope living in a house on her own."


    These two omissions  are  of  obvious  materiality  given  the  Judge's
    generally sceptical attitude regarding the medical issues.

15. Given the above analysis I conclude that the decision of the FtT cannot
    be sustained.  It is infected by a demonstrable failure to consider all
    the evidence and an associated failure to ensure a fair  hearing.   The
    decision is set aside accordingly.

The decision re-made

16. I have acceded to the Appellant's  application  for  the  admission  of
    further evidence.  This consists of a third  medical  report  emanating
    from the source mentioned above. It contains the  following  additional
    evidence relating to the Appellant's spouse:

         "She is currently awaiting gall  bladder  surgery  after  an  acute
         admission from A&E on 24/04/15 ....  Over the past  few  years  she
         has had several visits via ambulance to  A&E  with  back  pain  ...
         chest infection ... chest pain ... for which she later attended the
         chest pain clinic ....."

         The medical practitioner states further:

         "She relies on her husband as  her  main  carer  with  her  ongoing
         health issues and would find it very difficult to manage on her own
         physically and mentally."

17. The two Tribunal appeals in which the Appellant has been  engaged  have
    been conducted on the unspoken premise that if  the  claims  about  his
    wife's health and dependency on him are made good the impugned decision
    of  the  Secretary  of  State  will,  potentially,   be   unlawful   as
    constituting a disproportionate interference with the right to  respect
    for the private and family life of the couple.   The  Appellant's  case
    falls outwith the framework of the Article 8 r�gime of the  Immigration
    Rules.

18. With reference to the obligatory exercise to be conducted under Part 5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

     a) The public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
        controls provides the starting point.


     b) The public interest relating to English  speaking  members  of  the
        population is not infringed.

     c)  The  public  interest  in  a  population  comprising   financially
        independent members is not infringed either.

     d) The Appellant's private life and his  relationship  with  his  wife
        were established long before his advent to the  United  Kingdom  in
        2012.

     e) While the Appellant's immigration status has been  precarious,  his
        case does not depend upon private life further established  by  him
        during the period of uncertainty and, given the couple's ages, this
        pales into insignificance in any event.

    Accordingly, the application of  Part  5A  yields  a  largely  positive
    outcome for the Appellant.

19. Very properly, it forms no part of the Respondent's case  to  challenge
    the medical evidence which has been assembled.   Having  no  reason  to
    doubt or question this  evidence,  I  accept  it.   Considered  in  its
    totality, it makes a potent case for the Appellant and his spouse under
    Article 8.  I find without hesitation that the  Appellant's  spouse  is
    heavily dependent upon him, increasingly so  and  is  of  deteriorating
    health.  In contrast with the Judge, I decline to speculate  about  the
    availability  of  assistance  from   relatives   or   publicly   funded
    interventions. There is absolutely no evidence relating  to  either  of
    these measures.  Furthermore, it is not in dispute that they  have  not
    had to resort to the latter.

20. Given the very particular and highly  fact  sensitive  nature  of  this
    case, it is unsurprising that it has no  specific  prescription  within
    the Article 8 regime in the Immigration Rules.  Finally, I weigh in the
    balance the implicit acceptance on the part of the Respondent  that  if
    the  Appellant  were  to  return  to  South  Africa,   his   settlement
    application would be decided within a period of some three months  and,
    further, would have a positive outcome.  This means that the  Chikwamba
    principle is engaged.

21. The  findings,  analysis  and  assessment  above  impel  to  the  clear
    conclusion that this is one of those comparatively rare cases out  with
    the framework of the Immigration  Rules  in  which  a  disproportionate
    interference with the Article 8 rights  of  those  concerned  has  been
    demonstrated.  In the balancing exercise, the facts and  considerations
    on the Appellant's side of the scales combine to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in play.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.
                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date:   20 October 2015
