










R (on the  application  of  Semeda)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (statelessness; Pham [2015] UKSC  19  applied)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
00658 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






           The Queen on the application of Hussein Mohammed Semeda
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



                                  Judgment

                        Delivered on 21 October 2015



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

On  this  substantive  application  for  judicial   review   and   following
consideration of the documents lodged by the parties and having heard  Mr  M
Karnik (of Counsel), instructed by  Amelius  Solicitors  on  behalf  of  the
Applicant and Mr S Murray (of Counsel), instructed by the  Government  Legal
Department on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  conducted  at  Field
House, London on 07 September 2015.

   i) Paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules co-exists, and  must  be  given
      effect in tandem, with the United Nations Convention Relating  To  The
      Status Of Stateless  Persons  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
      instruction.

  ii) In every statelessness case, the four interlocking components  of  the
      governing test are whether the person concerned is considered as ... a
      national ... by any state ... under the operation of its law:  Pham  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 19 applied.

 iii) Given that statelessness applications and decisions  are  made  within
      the realm of public law, the governing principles include the Tameside
      (Secretary of State for Education and Science v  Metropolitan  Borough
      Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014) and the  British  Oxygen  (British
      Oxygen v Minister of Technology [1971] AC 610) principles.

  iv)  The  policies  of  public  authorities  are   not   merely   material
      considerations to  be  taken  into  account  by  the  decision  maker.
      Rather, they trigger a duty to give effect to their terms, absent good
      reason for departure.

   v) In some cases it may be necessary to  consider  the  practice  of  the
      government of a foreign state as well as its nationality laws.


          Decision:  the application for judicial review is granted


McCloskey J

Introduction

   1. This judgment determines the Applicant's substantive  application  for
      judicial review, permission having been granted by order of His Honour
      Judge Russell QC dated 27 June 2014.

The Governing Legal Rules

   2. The impugned decision of the Respondent, the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated 29 October 2013,
      is a rejection of the Applicant's application  for  limited  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom as a stateless person under paragraph 403
      of the Immigration Rules. It is  appropriate,  at  this  juncture,  to
      rehearse their material provisions.  By  paragraph  401,  a  stateless
      person is defined as someone who -

        a) satisfies the requirements of Article 1 of  the  United  Nations
           Convention Relating to the Status  of  Stateless  Persons  ("the
           1954 Convention"), namely who is a person not considered to be a
           national by any state under the operation of its law;


        b) is in the United kingdom; and


        c) is not excluded from recognition as  a  stateless  person  under
           paragraph 402.


      The fourfold requirements for securing leave to remain in  the  United
      Kingdom  as  a  stateless  person  are,  per   paragraph  403  of  the
      Immigration Rules:


           "  .................................... that the applicant:


           (a) has made a valid application to the Secretary of State for
           limited leave to remain as a stateless person;
           (b) is recognised as a stateless  person  by  the  Secretary  of
           State in accordance with paragraph 401;
           (c) is not admissible to their country of former habitual
           residence or any other country; and
           (d) has obtained and submitted all reasonably available evidence
           to enable the Secretary of State to determine whether  they  are
           stateless."


      Where  the  outcome  of  the  decision   making   process   yields   a
      statelessness conclusion a grant of leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom for a period of 30 months is the normal consequence.

The Impugned Decision

   3.  The  decision  letter  rehearses  the  information  provided  by  the
      Applicant in support of his application.   This  includes  information
      provided during interview.  This digest discloses that  the  Applicant
      has been in the United  Kingdom  for  approximately  seven  years  and
      applied unsuccessfully for asylum at an early stage.  His  application
      for leave to remain as a stateless person was made on  17  June  2013.
      It is based on his claim that he is "an undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon".
      It is suggested that when the Applicant underwent his stateless person
      interview on 09 July 2013, upon being asked to participate in language
      analysis as part of the decision making process he  refused.   By  the
      terms of  the  decision  the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  the
      Applicant is indeed Kuwaiti Bidoon.  The critical issue is  formulated
      as being whether he was "documented or  undocumented".   The  decision
      notes that during interview the Applicant confirmed that he  had  been
      issued with a birth certificate.  The decision further records that in
      previous Tribunal determinations,  while  it  was  accepted  that  the
      Applicant is a Kuwaiti Bidoon there was no finding on the  "documented
      or not" issue.  Continuing, the decision notes that during the  asylum
      screening interview  the  Applicant  stated  that  he  had  a  Kuwaiti
      identity  card  and  that  his  subsequent  attempt  to  retract  this
      statement was later rejected by Immigration Judge Dickinson.  On  this
      basis, the decision maker concluded that the Applicant is a documented
      Kuwaiti Bidoon.


   4. Next, the Secretary of State's decision addresses the interview of the
      Applicant  at  the  Libyan  Embassy  in  London  on  06   July   2009,
      highlighting  that  subsequently  the  Acting  Consul  disclosed   the
      following:

           "...  The detainee has stated that he has visited Libya in  1999
           with his mother for one year, but was not able  to  provide  any
           places or names of locations that he may have visited, or  lived
           in.  The detainee would have been approximately  16  years  old.
           This has led the Libyan Acting Consul to deem that the  detainee
           lacks any credibility and that he is not Libyan."

      While the Applicant  disputes  this  account  of  the  interview,  the
      decision maker notes that  he  has  adduced  no  supporting  evidence.
      Next, the decision  highlights  the  discrepancy  in  the  Applicant's
      stateless person interview, arising out of his statement that  he  was
      in Libya from 1999 to 2007 (rather than one  year,  from  1999).   The
      decision maker then suggests a contradiction between  the  Applicant's
      earlier statement that his mother is Libyan and his claim not to  have
      Libyan  nationality.   The  decision  also  draws  on  a  Country   of
      Information Report relating to Libya,  dated  March  2012,  indicating
      that any child  born  of  a  Libyan  mother  thereby  acquires  Libyan
      citizenship.  The gist of the Respondent's decision is  formulated  in
      these terms:


           "Based  upon  the  objective  information   and   the   negative
           credibility findings previously cited, it is not  accepted  that
           you are not entitled to  some  form  of  Libyan  nationality  or
           residence based upon your mother's nationality .....


           As you have not submitted any fresh evidence to demonstrate that
           you are not entitled to Libyan nationality and you have  refused
           to undergo language analysis, notwithstanding that you may be  a
           Kuwaiti Bidoon, it is considered that you have a claim to Libyan
           nationality ....


           You have provided no evidence to substantiate  your  claim  that
           you are an undocumented Bidoon.  Furthermore, it  is  considered
           that you have a claim to Libyan nationality .....


           Therefore you do not qualify for leave to remain as a  stateless
           person."

      The Applicant's claim was, therefore, refused under paragraph  404  of
      the Immigration Rules.

The Applicant's Challenge

   5. The grant of permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  (supra)  was
      formulated in the following terms:


            "The uncertainty as to the Applicant's nationality, referred  to
            by  the  Respondent  in  the  Acknowledgement  of   Service   as
            'ambiguous', indicates that there is an arguable case  that  the
            Applicant may be stateless."


      I observe, with deference to  the  Judge,  that  the  issue  in  these
      judicial review proceedings cannot be  the  question  of  whether  the
      Applicant is stateless.  Rather, the issue is whether the Secretary of
      State's  determination  that  the  Applicant  is  not   stateless   is
      contaminated by any recognised public law  misdemeanour  canvassed  in
      the Applicant's grounds of challenge.   In this respect,  I  make  the
      immediate observation that the formulation  in  [4]  of  the  grounds,
      summarising the Applicant's case, does not readily satisfy this test:


            ".....  The Defendant's refusal to grant the Claimant  leave  to
            remain as a stateless person is unlawful as  the  Defendant  has
            failed to adequately and properly consider the  facts  of  [the]
            application."


      This is opaque at best. In the passages which follow, the case is made
      that the Respondent had a duty of enquiry;  that  such  duty  required
      further investigation/interaction with the Libyan  Embassy;  and  that
      the Respondent unlawfully failed to undertake same. The  grounds  also
      appear to formulate the  contention  that  the  impugned  decision  is
      vitiated by Wednesbury irrationality.


   6. The analysis that the original grounds of challenge are vague, diffuse
      and non-compliant with SN v  SSHD  (striking  out  -  principles)  IJR
      [2015] UKUT 227  (IAC)  at  [29]-[32]  is,  I  consider,  unavoidable.
      However, some measure of  coherence  was  restored  by  the  amendment
      authorised at an intermediate stage of the proceedings and the ensuing
      written and oral submissions of Mr Karnik on behalf of the  Applicant.
      His disentangling of the less than  felicitous  pleading  reduced  the
      Applicant's  grounds  of  challenge  to  the   following   two   basic
      contentions:


        a) There was a failure to give proper effect to  the  Secretary  of
           State's published policy.


        b) Further, or alternatively, the impugned decision is vitiated  by
           irrationality.

     The Applicant also seeks to re-open, if permitted, a ground upon which
      permission to apply for judicial review was refused. The gist of  this
      ground is that the impugned decision is infected by error  of  law  on
      the basis that the decision maker focused on the question  of  whether
      the Applicant was stateless, rather than the question of whether he is
      a documented or undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.

The Secretary of State's Policy

   7. The first of the Applicant's two grounds of challenge,  as  summarised
      above, is founded on the Secretary of  State's  guidance,  or  policy,
      published on 01 May 2013.  This is entitled "Applications for Leave to
      Remain as a  Stateless  Person"  (identified  as  "V1.00").   This  is
      described as an "Instruction" which - "........ provides  guidance  on
      the new Immigration Rules which came into effect on 06 April  2013  on
      the consideration of applications for leave  to  remain  as  stateless
      persons".

      Paragraph 2.2 of the Instruction states:

           "The  case  worker  will  assess  the  case  on  the   available
           information, conduct research  as  necessary  and  make  written
           enquiries to seek further evidence or information ....".


           [Emphasis added.]

      Paragraph 2.2 further indicates that  a  personal  interview  will  be
      arranged in cases where the process envisaged above does not establish
      sufficient evidence of statelessness.  This paragraph continues:


           "The burden of proof rests with applicants, who are expected  to
           do all they reasonably can to demonstrate their statelessness. A
           clear lack of co-operation or evidence of bad faith may lead  to
           refusal of an application.  Caseworkers must however be ready to
           undertake  research  or  make  enquiries   of   other   national
           authorities where  the  applicant  has  been  unable  to  obtain
           relevant information."

                 [Emphasis added].

      This latter theme is reiterated in paragraph 3.2, which introduces the
     concept of caseworkers assisting the Applicant  "in  establishing  the
     necessary evidence, whether by research or enquiry".  In paragraph 3.3
     it is suggested that, for caseworkers, there will normally be two main
     categories of information, namely that pertaining to  the  applicant's
     personal circumstances and "evidence concerning the law  and  practice
     in the country in question".

   8. In paragraph 3.3 of the Instruction it is stated:

           "Information provided by foreign authorities may be  of  central
           importance to stateless determination procedures,  although  not
           necessary if there is otherwise adequate evidence ....


           It is the  subjective  position  of  the  other  State  that  is
           critical in determining whether an individual  is  its  national
           for the purposes of the stateless person definition."

      Developing this theme, paragraph 3.4 states:

           An individual's nationality is to be assessed as at the time  of
           determination of eligibility under the 1954  Convention.  It  is
           neither a historic nor a predictive exercise.  The  question  to
           be answered is whether, at the point of making an  Article  1(1)
           determination, an individual is a national  of  the  country  or
           countries in question ......


           An  understanding  of  the  laws  of   nationality   and   their
           administration in practice in the State or States  concerned  is
           essential to the consideration of a claim to be stateless ....


           Establishing whether  an  individual  is  not  considered  as  a
           national under the operation of its law requires an analysis  of
           how a State applies its nationality laws ...."

      The issue of documentation is addressed in the following terms:


           "In non-automatic procedures, where  an  act  of  the  State  is
           required for acquisition of nationality, there will generally be
           a  document  recording  that  act,   such   as   a   citizenship
           certificate, and such documentation will be decisive in  proving
           nationality.   The  absence  of  such  evidence  may  mean  that
           nationality was not acquired,  but  this  cannot  be  taken  for
           granted and the caseworker may well  decide  to  obtain  further
           evidence from the  applicant  or  to  check  with  the  relevant
           overseas authority."

            This is followed by the passage:

           "Where the national authorities  have  in  practice  treated  an
           individual as a non-national even though he or she would  appear
           to meet the criteria for automatic  acquisition  of  nationality
           under the operation of a country's laws, it  is  their  position
           rather than the letter of  the  law  that  is  determinative  in
           concluding that a State does not consider such an individual  as
           a national."

                 [Emphasis added.]

      The highlighted words purport to be a statement of  the  law  and,  as
      our analysis in [29] infra  and  the  conclusions  which  follow  make
      clear, it is of no little importance.

   9. The evidence also includes a  Home  Office  "Country  and  Information
      Guidance"  publication  of  February  2014  relating  specifically  to
      Kuwaiti Bidoons.  We highlight the following passages:

           "The Kuwaiti state regards the Bidoon as illegal residents  ....
           the   vast   majority   of   nationality   applications   remain
           outstanding.  The Kuwaiti Government maintains that the majority
           of Bidoon are nationals of other countries, therefore that  they
           are not stateless ....


           The majority of the Bidoon live in the state of Kuwait .....


           The  crucial  document  for  determining  whether   Bidoon   are
           documented or not is the 'security card'.   This  conclusion  is
           based on the country guidance case of NM ..........


           A claimant may hold a range of documents and still  be  regarded
           as 'undocumented' if they do not hold a security card ......


           Kuwaiti Bidoon by descent either from  a  stateless  or  foreign
           father,  or  whose  ancestors  failed  to  apply  for  or   gain
           nationality in 1961, will generally be stateless ....."

      This publication  contains  the  following  passage  relating  to  the
      acquisition of nationality by descent:


           "Kuwaiti women can pass their nationality on to  children  (upon
           reaching the age of majority) when the  couple  divorce  or  the
           father dies, when  the  father  is  unknown  or  has  failed  to
           establish legal paternity ....


           Under Kuwaiti nationality law, children born to a Kuwaiti  woman
           and a Bidoon man are considered stateless."

      Appended to this Home Office publication is a letter  of  the  Foreign
      and Commonwealth Office, which includes the following statement:


           "There is a  distinction  between  documented  and  undocumented
           Bidoon. Put simply,  documented  Bidoon  have  legal  rights  in
           Kuwait and undocumented Bidoon do not ....


           The Government states that the majority of  undocumented  Bidoon
           are concealing their true nationality and  that  they  or  their
           forebears entered Kuwait illegally."

      It is  noted  from  the  associated  evidence  that  possession  of  a
      security card is prerequisite to being "documented" and, hence,  being
      recognised by the Kuwaiti state as one of its nationals.

The Applicant's Challenge

  10. While  the  argument  of  Mr  Karnik,  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
      acknowledges, unavoidably, that prior to receipt  of  the  Applicant's
      statelessness application the Secretary of State's officials had  made
      certain enquiries of both the Libyan  and  Kuwaiti  Embassies  in  the
      United  Kingdom,  he  submits  that  the  making  of  the  Applicant's
      application subsequently triggered the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
      guidance (viz the Instruction outlined above) and, thus, gave rise  to
      proactive duties of enquiry and assistance.  Mr  Karnik's  submissions
      harness to this the contention that the Secretary of State's officials
      failed to consider and/or to  give  effect  to  the  decision  in  NM,
      specifically [34] and [82] - [88], highlighting that this decision  is
      not even mentioned in the decision letter of  29  October  2013.   His
      submissions further highlight the following passages in the decision:

           ".....  It is not accepted that you are  not  entitled  to  some
           form of Libyan nationality or residence based upon your mother's
           nationality ....


           It is considered that you have a  claim  to  Libyan  Nationality
           .....


           It is considered that while you may be Kuwaiti Bidoon, you  have
           submitted no evidence to reverse the findings of  the  Judge  at
           your asylum appeal  that  you  would  be  a  documented  Kuwaiti
           Bidoon, or that you would not be admitted to your  true  country
           of origin.  It  is  therefore  considered  you  have  failed  to
           demonstrate that you are a person who is  not  considered  as  a
           national by any state under the operation of its law .....


           It is not accepted that you are a stateless person or  that  you
           are not entitled to nationality.  Therefore, you do not  qualify
           for leave to remain as a stateless person."

      In this context, Mr Karnik's submissions also draw  attention  to  the
      following passage in the witness statement of the Secretary of State's
      official:


           "As set out in the decision letter ....   the  Applicant  either
           has a claim to  Libyan  Nationality  or  he  is  a  'documented'
           Kuwaiti Bidoon.  As the Kuwaiti Embassy  has  already  confirmed
           and accepted the Applicant as a Kuwaiti Bidoon, there was and is
           no necessity for UKVI to approach them again."

      Mr Karnik submits that this  betrays  a  clearly  erroneous  approach:
      there is no evidence of any such recognition by the Kuwaiti Embassy.

  11. The contours and thrust of the second of the  Applicant's  grounds  of
      challenge are considerably leaner than the first.   The  irrationality
      ground complains that the Secretary  of  State  failed  to  take  into
      account that Immigration Judge Dickinson, in his decision of 06  March
      2009 dismissing  the  Applicant's  asylum  appeal,  erred  in  law  in
      relation  to  Libyan  nationality  law  in  his  assessment   of   the
      Applicant's  ability  to  acquire  Libyan  Nationality   by   descent.
      Properly, this error is not contested on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
      State and is, in our view, manifest.  In developing this argument,  Mr
      Karnik highlighted the contrasting assessment of FTT Judge Brass  who,
      in his decision determining the Applicant's appeal against the refusal
      of asylum support dated 14 January 2010, stated, at [12]:

           "....  I am satisfied that it would appear that  this  Appellant
           is not entitled to Libyan nationality by way of his mother."

      It is contended that the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State
      is infected by a failure to either consider this  judicial  assessment
      or to give same proper weight.

  12. The submissions of Mr Murray on behalf of the Secretary of State  drew
      attention to a range of factors in  the  history  of  this  case:  the
      discrepancies in the Applicant's accounts relating to the duration  of
      his sojourn in Libya,  ranging  from  one  year  to  nine  years;  the
      statement attributed to the Applicant when  interviewed  that  he  had
      previously been  in  possession  of  a  national  passport  issued  in
      Aljahara (Kuwait) which he "threw away" prior  to  travelling  to  the
      United Kingdom; the Applicant's statement to a Libyan embassy official
      in 2009 that his father is Kuwaiti  and  his  mother  is  Libyan;  the
      Acting Consul's firm statement that the  Applicant  is  not  a  Libyan
      national; the discrepancies in the evidence given by the Applicant  to
      the AIT in February 2009; the Tribunal's finding  that  the  Applicant
      and his mother had been in Kuwait (for an unspecified period) prior to
      1999, when they travelled to Libya, where they resided until his entry
      to the United Kingdom on 16 July 2008;  and  the  Tribunal's  findings
      adverse to the Applicant's credibility.

Our Conclusions

  13. We begin with the observation that the relevant rules of international
      law viz Article 1 of the Convention and those of domestic  law  namely
      paragraphs 401-403  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  in  harmony.  We
      consider it unexceptional that  in  any  case  where  a  statelessness
      decision  is  to  be  made  under  the  operative  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Rules (the "Rules"), the crucial question for the decision
      maker is, in the language of Article  1(1)  of  the  1954  Convention,
      whether the person is "considered as a national by any state under the
      operation of its law".   This definition demands careful analysis.  It
      consists of four interlocking components: "considered  as  .......   a
      national .... by any state ..... under  the  operation  of  its  law".
      Decision makers must address each of these components in every case.


  14. It is no coincidence that statelessness was made  the  subject  of  an
      international treaty during the same era when elaborate  international
      provision was made for refugees.  Statelessness, as a matter  of  law,
      denotes the lack of any nationality.  While some stateless persons are
      also refugees, not all asylum claimants  are  stateless  and  not  all
      stateless persons are refugees.  Statelessness is a global  phenomenon
      which  has  multiple  causes.   It  invites  reflection  on  the   two
      conventional mechanisms whereby nationality is  acquired,  namely  (a)
      through birth on the territory of a state  (jus  soli)  and  (b)  from
      birth through descent (jus sanguinis).    Statelessness  is  addressed
      not only in the 1954 Convention but also  in  the  Convention  on  the
      Reduction of Statelessness (1961), the American  Convention  on  Human
      Rights, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and
      the European Convention on Nationality.

  15. The UNHCR has an important mandate  in  the  field  of  statelessness.
      Though  its  responsibilities  were  initially  limited  to  stateless
      persons who also had  the  status  of  refugees,  they  were  expanded
      following the adoption of the 1954 and  1961  Conventions.   In  March
      2010, by UN General Assembly resolutions, UNHCR was designated as  the
      agency with global responsibility for examining individual  cases  and
      assisting claimants  in  the  presentation  of  their  claims  to  the
      relevant national authorities.  UNHCR also has responsibility for  the
      identification, prevention and  reduction  of  statelessness  and  the
      international protection of stateless persons.  November  2014  marked
      the beginning of a 10 year UNHCR global campaign to end statelessness.
       The main NGO active in this  field  is  the  International  Stateless
      Persons Organisation, founded in  March  2012.    In  April  2013  the
      United Kingdom formally adopted a new procedure for the  determination
      of statelessness cases: see [7] above.  This was doubtless  stimulated
      at least in part by the joint UNHCR - Asylum Aid report  published  in
      November 2011.


  16.  At a practical level, the  question  of  whether  the  definition  of
      statelessness is satisfied will frequently require  an  assessment  of
      whether the person concerned  possesses or has access to  a  document,
      such as a passport or a national identity card or  something  kindred,
      which denotes that the individual is recognised by one of  the  states
      of the world as one of its nationals.  This  will  form  part  of  the
      enquiry, assessment and decision in the generality of  cases  of  this
      kind. Furthermore, it is appropriate to observe that  most  cases  are
      likely to involve a significant measure of evaluative  assessment,  to
      be contrasted with stark fact finding, on the  part  of  the  decision
      making official.

  17. The decision making process in all statelessness cases is overlaid  by
      the mantle of public law.  The principle of public law most  obviously
      engaged is the requirement to identify and then take into account  all
      relevant considerations. Linked to this is the Tameside principle:

         "......  It is for a court of law to determine whether it has  been
         established  that  in  reaching  his  decision  ............   [the
         Secretary of State] had directed himself properly in law and had in
         consequence taken into consideration the  matters  which  upon  the
         true construction of the  Act  he  ought  to  have  considered  and
         excluded from his consideration matters  that  were  irrelevant  to
         what he had to consider .....


         Or, put more compendiously, the question for the court is  did  the
         Secretary  of  State  ask  himself  the  right  question  and  take
         reasonable steps to acquaint himself with the relevant  information
         to enable him to answer it correctly?"


      (per Lord Diplock in Secretary of State for Education  and  Science  v
      Metropolitan Borough Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014, at 1065b).

      In the particular context of statelessness cases,  it  is  appropriate
      to emphasise the latter part of Lord  Diplock's  seminal  formulation:
      the decision maker must take reasonable steps to acquaint himself with
      the relevant information.  In the evolution of public law  during  the
      four subsequent decades, this has sometimes been coined the  "duty  of
      enquiry".  It is  not  an  absolute  duty.   Rather,  it  imports  the
      standard of reasonableness.  In the present context, it coexists with,
      and gives emphasis to, the obligations of enquiry specifically imposed
      on the decision maker by the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  guidance
      (supra).

  18. The main thrust of the Applicant's challenge is that the Secretary  of
      State, in making the impugned  decision,  failed  to  have  regard  to
      and/or give  effect  to  the  relevant  policy  guidance,  namely  the
      Instruction which we have outlined in some detail in [8] - [9]  above.
      Where a challenge of this kind is made, it is  necessary  to  identify
      the public law duties associated with such  an  instrument.  In  Lumba
      (WL) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 12, Lord Dyson stated at [35]:

           "The individual has a basic public law right to have his or  her
           case considered under whatever policy the executive sees fit  to
           adopt provided that the adopted policy is a lawful  exercise  of
           the discretion conferred by the statute ....."

      This is unexceptional dogma, to be considered in  conjunction  with  -
      and not in isolation from - Lord Dyson's formulation  of  two  further
      cornerstone principles of public law:

           "[21] ... it is a well established principle of public law  that
           a policy should not be so rigid as to amount to a fetter  on  the
           discretion of decision makers"

            (The well known British Oxygen principle).

            And at (26):

      "... a decision maker must follow  his  published  policy  ...  unless
           there are good reasons for not doing so".

  19. There is very  recent  authority  on  this  subject.   In  Mandalia  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC  59  the  focus
      was on a so-called "Process Instruction" addressed to the Secretary of
      State's case workers. Lord Wilson, delivering the  unanimous  decision
      of the Supreme Court, having reflected on the ascription of the  legal
      effect of policy to the doctrine of legitimate expectation  continues,
      in [29]:

           "So  the  applicant's  right  to  the   determination   of   his
           application in accordance with policy is now generally taken  to
           flow from a principle, no  doubt  related  to  the  doctrine  of
           legitimate  expectation  but  free-standing,  which   was   best
           articulated by Laws LJ in R (Nadarajah) v Secretary of State for
           the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 163, as follows:


                 '[68] ...... Where a public authority has issued a  promise
                       or  adopted  a  practice  which  represents  how   it
                       proposes to act in a given area, the law will require
                       the promise or practice to be honoured  unless  there
                       is good reason not to do so.  What is  the  principle
                       behind this proposition? It is not far to  seek.   It
                       is said to be grounded in fairness and  no  doubt  in
                       general terms that is so. I would prefer  to  express
                       it rather more  broadly  as  a  requirement  of  good
                       administration, by which public bodies ought to  deal
                       straightforwardly and consistently with the public.'"

      The effect of these developments in the law is that  the  policies  of
      public authorities are not merely material considerations to be  taken
      into account by the decision maker. Rather, they trigger  (as  regards
      the public authority) a duty to give effect  to  their  terms,  absent
      good reason for departure and (as regards the citizen) a corresponding
      right or expectation.  We would highlight one further feature  of  the
      decision in Mandalia.  The Court will frown  on  attempts  to  subject
      documents such as instructions to case workers to any "high  level  of
      pedantry" when construing  their  meaning:  see  [33].   Subtlety  and
      sophistication which  would  not  be  reasonably  appreciated  by  the
      citizen will gain no traction.

  20. I return to the Applicant's first ground of challenge, which  contends
      that the impugned decision of the Secretary of State is vitiated by  a
      failure to give proper effect to the policy rehearsed  in  [8]  -  [9]
      above. In an endeavour to counter this first ground  of  challenge,  a
      witness statement on behalf of the Secretary of State was lodged  mid-
      proceedings. This mechanism, implicitly, betrays a recognition of  the
      force of the principles of public law in play.  Notably, the author of
      the statement was not the decision  maker.   The  evidence  which  she
      provides  is  limited  to  her  "assessment"  of  the  UKVI   records.
      Furthermore, it is acknowledged  that  the  caseworker  who  made  the
      decision is no  longer  employed  by  UKVI  and,  evidently,  made  no
      contribution to the witness statement.  In  these  circumstances,  the
      claim by the deponent that "... the decision maker had full regard  to
      the policy when making their decision" simply does not bear  scrutiny.
       Nor is it bolstered by the references to the caseworker's training or
      the "usual practice of all decision  makers".  Virtually  all  of  the
      statement is pure comment, adding nothing of value to  the  evidential
      matrix.  The effect of this analysis is that the mechanism  which  has
      been deployed  in  an  attempt  to  counter  the  centrepiece  of  the
      Applicant's case has, in our judgment, failed.

  21. Lord Dyson's formulation (supra) provides the starting point,  but  is
      not exhaustive of the public law duties associated  with  and  flowing
      from the Instruction.   These  duties,  as  a  minimum,  required  the
      decision maker to be alert to the Instruction, being  an  indisputably
      material consideration, and to give  conscientious  attention  to  its
      contents. Our evaluation of the evidence as a whole impels  inexorably
      to the conclusion that these elementary duties  were  not  discharged.
      As our formulation of the principles  engaged  acknowledges,  however,
      this diagnosed failure is not necessarily determinative of  the  first
      ground  of  challenge.   This  is  so  by  virtue  of  the  factor  of
      flexibility, in terms of both  policy  content  and  legal  principle,
      coupled with every public authority's discretion to depart from policy
      where good reason for doing so  can  be  demonstrated.  These  further
      principles could, in the abstract, operate to exonerate,  or  nullify,
      the failing assessed above.


  22. In this context, we  concur  with  Mr  Murray's  submission  that  the
      Instruction is not formulated  in  rigid  terms.   In  particular,  we
      accept that those  passages  upon  which  the  Applicant  places  most
      reliance invest the decision maker with choices, or discretion.   Thus
      we acknowledge that it is not obligatory to take specified  steps  and
      to follow certain courses in every decision  making  process  of  this
      kind.  This analysis  is  fortified  by  the  overlay  of  public  law
      principles. However, there was a duty on the caseworker to be alert to
      these choices and to conscientiously consider them.   Having  rejected
      the evidence noted in [21] above, we can identify no  other  evidence,
      direct or inferential, to  warrant the conclusion that this basic duty
      was performed.  Furthermore, the importance of this duty is reinforced
      by the analysis that the further steps and enquiries specified in  the
      Instruction are clearly expected to be undertaken in the generality of
      cases. To this we add that it cannot realistically be  contended  that
      further enquiries would inevitably have been pointless. Finally, it is
      not contended that this is  a  case  of  justified  departure  from  a
      policy. Accordingly, we conclude that the Applicant has made good  his
      primary ground of challenge.

  23. The irrationality challenge, the second ground, focuses mainly on  the
      aforementioned decision of the AIT. We  accept  Mr  Karnik's  analysis
      that this decision contains two notable  errors:  first,  the  Judge's
      incorrect exposition of  Libyan  nationality  laws  and,  second,  his
      factual error  relating  to  the  maximum  possible  duration  of  the
      Applicant's sojourn in Libya (eight years, not ten).  A further aspect
      of this challenge is the conflicting assessment in the later  decision
      of the FtT (Asylum Support) that the Applicant's is  not  entitled  to
      Libyan nationality by descent via his mother.  While we acknowledge Mr
      Murray's  submission  that  this  Tribunal   cannot   circumvent   the
      credibility findings adverse to the Applicant in the  AIT's  decision,
      this does not engage with the thrust of this ground.

  24. Once again, we consider it appropriate to  adjudicate  on  the  second
      ground of challenge by identifying and applying the  main  public  law
      duty on the decision maker.  In this context, the duty engaged was  to
      take into account all material facts and factors.  This  included  the
      two previous judicial determinations.  These  determinations  required
      of the decision maker careful analysis and reflection, as  opposed  to
      wholesale  and  slavish  submission.  The  effect  of  the  Wednesbury
      principles is that in public law, provided that all material facts and
      considerations are recognised and scrutinised by the  decision  maker,
      the  ensuing  decision  will  be  unimpeachable  unless  the  elevated
      standard of intervention of irrationality is overcome.

  25. There has been evidence of the nationality  laws  of  Libya  at  every
      stage.  The content of this evidence has been consistent.   Given  the
      protracted and inconclusive nature of the saga which has, regrettably,
      materialised, this discrete issue is crying out for the  injection  of
      clarity  and  certainty.   Factually,  the  high  water  mark  of  the
      Secretary of State's case is that the Applicant resided in Libya  from
      1999  to  2007.   The  unequivocal  import  of  the  decision  maker's
      assessment is that the Applicant is "entitled to some form  of  Libyan
      nationality or  residence"  based  solely  upon  his  mother's  Libyan
      nationality. This assessment, a pure question of law, is confounded by
      the evidence of Libyan nationality laws.   Such  evidence  yields  the
      conclusion that a person who is the  direct  descendent  of  a  Libyan
      national (viz persons such as the Applicant) must reside in Libya  for
      a period of 10 years in order to acquire Libyan nationality.  As noted
      in [12] above, this  analysis  is  not  contested  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State.


  26. The question of whether the Applicant is a  national  of  Libya  is  a
      mixed question of fact and law. We take this opportunity to  pronounce
      that, having regard to the extant evidence of (a) the relevant factual
      matters and (b) Libyan  nationality  laws,  the  Applicant  is  not  a
      national of Libya.  We trust  that  this  unambiguous  statement  will
      facilitate and expedite finality in this saga.   The  effect  of  this
      analysis is that the Secretary of  State's  decision  is  vitiated  by
      error of law.  This, in our judgment,  is  the  appropriate  prism  to
      apply to the Applicant's second ground of challenge.

  27. We further observe that the decision making process in a statelessness
      case may involve some subtlety and sophistication,   arising from  the
      recognition in international law of a distinction between de jure  and
      de facto statelessness.  In this context, the focus is on the words of
      Article 1 of the 1954 Convention.   By virtue of Article 31(1) of  the
      Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the  construction  of  these
      words requires that they be read in good faith and in the light of the
      object and purpose of the Convention.


  28. In its recent decision in Pham v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2015] UKSC 19, the  Supreme  Court,  in  considering  this
      issue, reflected on the special role of the UNHCR (noted  above)  and,
      specifically, its guidance published in February 2012 and  June  2014.
      This contains  some  emphasis  on  the  implementation  of  a  state's
      nationality laws and state practice in this regard.  Lord Carnwath did
      not express a concluded view on either the relevant provisions of  the
      UNHCR guidance or the policy guidance of the Secretary of State  which
      we have summarised above:  see [28] - [29].  However,  delivering  the
      majority judgment, he  answered  the  first  question  of  law  to  be
      determined in the following terms, at [38]:

           ".... I would accept that the  question  arising  under  Article
           1(1) of the 1954 Convention in this case is not  necessarily  to
           be decided solely by reference to the text  of  the  nationality
           legislation of the state in question ...  reference may also  be
           made to the practice of the Government ....."

      Reverting to our breakdown of the several components of  Article  1(1)
      of  the  1954  Convention,  in  [13]  above,  we  consider  that  this
      conclusion highlights the importance of the words "not  considered  to
      be a national by any state".  Secondly,  this  conclusion  establishes
      that a broad meaning is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  words  "under  the
      operation of its law". Notably, the Supreme Court did not endorse  the
      reasoning of the Court of Appeal.

  29. We conclude that the impugned decision is unsustainable in  law  on  a
      further basis. In every case where a statelessness decision is  to  be
      made under the operative  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the
      crucial question for the decision maker is, in the language of Article
      1(1) of the 1954 Convention, whether the person is  "considered  as  a
      national by any state under  the  operation  of  its  law".  Both  the
      international legal rules and their domestic  counterparts  require  a
      determination of  the  recognition  issue  in  the  present.  This  we
      consider to be clear from the  language  used.  Future  forecasts  are
      alien to this exercise.  However,  the  main  ground  upon  which  the
      Applicant's application was refused was the  assessment  that  he  was
      considered to have "a claim to" Libyan nationality.  We consider  that
      the decision maker misdirected himself in  law.   The  question  which
      should have been addressed,  and  answered,  was  whether  the  Libyan
      government recognised the Applicant as one of  its  nationals  at  the
      time when the decision was made. The decision maker, in our  judgment,
      failed to pose and answer this key question .   Moreover,  it  was  in
      conflict  with  the  policy  Instruction,  specifically  the   passage
      highlighted towards the end of [9] above.  This emphasises:

           "....it is [the] position [of the government  concerned]  rather
           than the letter of the law that is determinative  in  concluding
           that  a  State  does  not  consider  such  an  individual  as  a
           national".

      Thus the decision maker has, simultaneously, lapsed into an  error  of
      law and a breach of the policy.  We grant permission to the  Applicant
      to amend his grounds to incorporate this additional challenge.


Order

  30. Giving effect to our analysis and conclusions  above,  we  decide  and
      order as follows:

      (a)   The Secretary of State's decision is hereby quashed.

      (b)   The Applicant is entitled  to  his  costs,  to  be  assessed  in
           default of agreement.

      (c)   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is  not  appropriate
           as this case raises no question of law of any major significance
           or broad application, going  no  further  than  an  exercise  in
           applying well established principles to the  particular  factual
           matrix.

Postscript

  31. In the further decision making process which must now  be  undertaken,
      the Applicant would be well advised to remember that there is  a  duty
      of mutual co-operation and, further, that any unreasonable refusal  on
      his part to actively co-operate and participate could operate  to  his
      disadvantage. Decision making in statelessness cases is not a one  way
      street.  There is  scope  for  future  development  of  the  law  with
      reference to the conduct  of  the  claimant  in  the  formulation  and
      presentation of his claim and his role in the ensuing decision  making
      process.





                     Signed :
                       [pic]
                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber


            Dated:          08 October 2015





