
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AB (para 399(a)) Algeria [2015] UKUT 00657 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 October 2015                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before:

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

                                   Between

|           |             Secretary of State for the Home      |Appellant    |
|           |Department                                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|    And                                                                     |
|           |        A B                                       |Respondent   |
|           |(Anonymity Order Made)                            |             |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr F Farhat, of Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors.


Head note 3 of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ogundimu (Article  8  -  new
rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC)  applies  to  the  version  of  para
399(a) of the Immigration Rules that was in force as at  27  July  2014.  It
does not apply to the current version of  para  399(a)  of  the  Immigration
Rules which came into force on 28 July 2014. This  is  because  the  current
version does not have the requirement that "there is no other family  member
who is able to care for the child in  the  UK"  which  concerned  the  Upper
Tribunal in Ogundimu.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed  with  permission  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 8 June 2015 against the decision of a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  (hereafter  the
    "judge" unless  otherwise  stated)  promulgated  on  30  January  2015,
    following a hearing on 15 December 2014, by which he allowed the appeal
    of Mr A B  (hereafter  the  "claimant")  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    (hereafter the "IRs") against a decision of the Secretary of  State  of
    15 May 2014 (served on 21 May 2014) to  make  a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971. The decision  followed
    the claimant's conviction at Snaresbrook Crown Court on 10 July 2006 of
    three counts of having a false instrument with intent and one count  of
    handling of stolen goods in respect of which  he  was  sentenced  on  8
    September 2006 to 12  month's  imprisonment  for  each  count,  to  run
    concurrently.

 2. The claimant has other convictions as described at [6]-[8] below and  a
    caution for the offence described at [17] below.

    Immigration history and background facts

 3. The claimant is a national of Algeria. He first arrived in the UK on 23
    May 1997 from France with his brother who had leave to  remain  in  the
    UK. The claimant used a false French passport.  He was interviewed.  He
    said he had in his possession a  visa  to  enter  Italy  which  he  had
    obtained personally by attending the Italian Embassy  in  Algeria.   He
    also said he held a Turkish visa to travel to Istanbul which  was  also
    obtained in Algeria. He said that his brother and sister  had  financed
    his travel to London.  During the interview he stated that he  did  not
    claim asylum in Italy as he thought that London was better than  Italy.
    Following the interview he was refused entry to the UK and returned  to
    Genoa.

 4. The claimant arrived for the second time in the UK on 25  August  1997.
    He did not claim asylum until 10 November 1998.  His asylum  claim  was
    refused on  29  August  2001.   His  appeal  against  the  refusal  was
    dismissed on 7 March 2003 and his appeal rights were  exhausted  on  26
    March 2003.

 5. The claimant claims to have met his partner, Ms L P (hereafter "Ms P"),
    a Colombian national, in 2002.  She entered the UK on  a  student  visa
    valid until 30 November 2003.  They married on 17 December  2003  at  a
    time when neither had any  valid  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The
    marriage  certificate  gives  the  claimant's  false  French  name  and
    identity.

 6. On 18 July 2003 at City of London Magistrates' Court, the claimant  was
    convicted of fraudulently using a vehicle licence and using  a  vehicle
    whilst uninsured.  He also  failed  to  surrender  to  custody  at  the
    appointed time.  His licence was endorsed with six points  and  he  was
    fined a total of �335 plus costs.

 7. On 28 October 2003 at Cambridge Magistrates' Court he was convicted  of
    shoplifting for which he received a twelve month conditional  discharge
    and ordered to pay costs.

 8. On 19 December 2003  at  Highbury  Corner  Magistrates'  Court  he  was
    convicted of driving an unlicensed taxi  and  using  a  vehicle  whilst
    uninsured for which he was fined �250, disqualified  from  driving  for
    nine months and his licence was endorsed.

 9. On 7 June 2004, the claimant and his wife  had  a  daughter  (hereafter
    "S").  S was 9 years old at the date of refusal  letter  dated  15  May
    2014 and 10 � years old at the date of the hearing  before  the  judge.
    In line with her mother, she is a Colombian national.   She  has  since
    been  naturalised  as  a  British   citizen   (the   judge's   decision
    inconsistently states both that she is a British citizen and  that  she
    is not). S's name on her birth certificate is that  of  the  claimant's
    alias.

10. It is not known at what date the claimant and his wife left the UK  but
    they both re-entered from Spain  on  18  September  2005.   The  French
    passport that the claimant used on arrival at Heathrow was found to  be
    forged.  He and his wife were both  stopped  by  Immigration  Officers.
    They were both refused leave to enter.  They were removed to Spain  the
    same day.  At the time it was unclear where S was living.

11. It is known that the  claimant  left  Spain  alone.   He  travelled  to
    France.  He obtained a false document for his  wife.   He  subsequently
    mailed it to her in Spain.  His wife  then  re-entered  the  UK  on  20
    October 2005 travelling on a false French  passport.   They  were  both
    arrested on 3 February 2006 for handling stolen goods.  As a result  of
    the forged documents the leave that Ms P had fraudulently  obtained  as
    the spouse of a claimed EEA national was cancelled and she  was  served
    with illegal entry papers.  During the interview the wife  stated  that
    she and the claimant had parted ways  when  the  claimant  returned  to
    Spain and claimed that the claimant left Spain for France.  It  is  not
    known on what date the claimant re-entered the UK.

12. On 10 July 2006 at Snaresbrook Crown Court the claimant  was  convicted
    of offences described at [1] above in respect of which, on 8  September
    2006, he received the sentence of twelve months' imprisonment  referred
    to at [1] above.

13. On 14 January 2008, the claimant's second daughter (hereafter "A")  was
    born.  At the date of the refusal letter, she was 6 years old  and,  at
    the date of the hearing before the judge, she was nearly 7  years  old.
    She is a Colombian national.  She has no leave or status to  remain  in
    the UK.  A's name on her birth certificate is that  of  the  claimant's
    alias.

14. On 17 August 2009, the claimant applied for leave under  the  Secretary
    of State's so-called  "legacy  programme".  His  case  was  subject  to
    investigation by the Case Resolution Directorate. The Home  Office  was
    alerted to the claimant's previous criminal convictions  and  his  case
    was transferred to the Criminal Casework in Liverpool where deportation
    was considered.

15. On 13 June 2012,  the  claimant  was  informed  of  his  liability  for
    deportation.  In a letter dated 28 June 2012 reference was made to  the
    reasons why he should not be deported from the UK.  A decision to  make
    a deportation order was made on 18 August 2012.  The appellant appealed
    against that decision.  Due to deficiencies in the refusal  letter  the
    claimant's case was withdrawn at appeal for reconsideration by the Home
    Office.

16. In a  letter  dated  30  April  2013,  the  claimant's  representatives
    submitted a further  letter  stating  reasons  why  he  should  not  be
    deported from the UK.  As  part  of  the  temporary  admission  he  was
    required to report monthly  to  Becket  House  Reporting  Centre.   The
    records indicate that he failed to report on 12 December 2013.

17. On 22 December 2013 the  claimant  was  arrested  by  Kent  Police  for
    shoplifting.  He had removed all the tags but  the  stolen  items  were
    recovered.  He was cautioned.  When arrested he provided false  details
    stating that he was known by another name with another  date  of  birth
    and another nationality (French).  It was only after  Livescan  results
    were received that his true identity came to light.

    Relevant legal provisions

18. The  relevant  legal  provisions  are  ss.117B-D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") and paras 398, 399 and
    399A of the IRs.

19. Ss.117A-D of the 2002 Act, which came into  effect  on  28  July  2014,
    provide as follows:


        117A Application of this Part


        (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
              determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


           (a)   breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
              family life under Article 8, and
           (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
              Rights Act 1998.


        (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
              tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
           (a)   in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
              117B, and
           (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
                   to the considerations listed in section 117C.
        (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
              the question of whether an interference with a person's right
              to respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under
              Article 8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
              cases


        (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
              the public interest.


        (2)      ...


        (3)      ...


        (4)      Little weight should be given to-


           (a)   a private life, or
           (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                   established by a person at a time when the person  is  in
                   the United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5)      ...


        (6)      ...


        117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving foreign
              criminals.


        (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
              interest.


        (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
              criminal, the greater is the public interest  in  deportation
              of the criminal.


        (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,
              the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
              1 or Exception 2 applies.


        (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


           (a)   C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
              most of C's life,
           (b)   C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
              Kingdom, and
            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                   integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                   deported.


        (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
              relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
              subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
              the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child  would
              be unduly harsh.


        (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
              to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,  the
              public interest requires deportation unless  there  are  very
              compelling circumstances, over and above those  described  in
              Exceptions 1 and 2.


        (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
              taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
              decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
              the reason for the decision was the offence or  offences  for
              which the criminal has been convicted.


        117D Interpretation of this Part
        (1)      In this Part-


        "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
        Rights;
        "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
        who-


           (a)   is a British citizen, or
           (b)   has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
        seven years or more;


        "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


           (a)   is a British citizen, or
            (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom  (within  the  meaning
                   of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of  that
                   Act).


        (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


           (a)   who is not a British citizen,
           (b)   who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
        offence, and
           (c)   who -
                 (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
        least 12 months,
                 (ii)  has been convicted of an  offence  that  has  caused
        serious harm,  or
                 (iii) is a persistent offender.

20. Given that an issue which arises in this  case  is  whether  the  judge
    applied the correct version of the IRs, it is necessary to note that HC
    352 amended paras 398, 399 and 399A of the IRs with effect from 28 July
    2014. The words added by HC 352 are in bold below and the words deleted
    are crossed and in square brackets. As at the date of the Secretary  of
    State's decision on 15 May 2014, the rules that applied were  the  same
    as those in force on 27 July 2014, i.e. immediately  prior  to  HC  352
    coming into effect.


        A.398.  These rules apply where:


      (a)   a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
              deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United   Kingdom's
              obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

      (b)   a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against
        him to be revoked.


        398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and


            (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
                   the public good and in the public interest  because  they
                   have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
                   been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least
                   four years;

      (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because they have been
              convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
              a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
              months; or

      (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because,  in the  view
              of the  Secretary  of  State,   their  offending  has  caused
              serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who  shows  a
              particular disregard for the law,


      the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will  consider  whether
        paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
        interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
        where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
        described  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  [it  will  only  be   in
        exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
        will be outweighed by other factors].


        399.     This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
        applies if -
      (a)   the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
              with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK and


           (i)   the child is a British citizen;  or
            (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least
                   the seven years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                   immigration decision;
            and in either case

                 (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in
                        the country to which the person is to  be  deported
                        [it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
                        leave the UK];  and
                 (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                        the UK without the person who  is  to  be  deported
                        [there is no other family member  who  is  able  to
                        care for the child in the UK];
      or
      (b)   the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
              partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, or settled
              in the UK [or in the UK with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
              protection],  and
            (i)  the relationship was formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
                   (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                   status was not precarious;  and

            (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  the
                   country to which the person is to be deported because  of
                   compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
                   in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and

            (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                   in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

             [(i)  the  person  has  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid   leave
              continuously for at least the 15 years immediately  preceding
              the date of the immigration decision (discounting any  period
              of imprisonment) and
            (ii) there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with
              that partner continuing outside the UK]


     399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -




      (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
        life;  and
      (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK;  and
      (c)   there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
              into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

      [(a)  the  person has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
              years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
              decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he  has
              no ties (including social,  cultural or  family  )  with  the
              country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
              UK;  or
      (b)   the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent  at  least  half
              of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
              preceding the date of the immigration  decision  (discounting
              any period of imprisonment) and he  has  no  ties  (including
              social, cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which  he
              would have to go if required to leave the UK.]

      The decision of the judge

21. The judge did not consider para 399A in terms,  although  he  said  (at
    [73]) that Exception 1 referred to at s.117C(4) does not apply  because
    (he said) "It cannot be said that "very significant obstacles" exist to
    the integration of the [claimant] in Algeria". Given that  he  did  not
    make any reference to para 399A  in  his  decision,  it  is  not  known
    whether, if he had considered para 399A,  he  would  have  applied  the
    version of para 399A that was  in  force  as  at  27  July  2014  which
    provided  for  the  requirement  that  the  individual  "has  no   ties
    (including social cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK" or the "very  significant
    obstacles" criterion in the version of para 399A that came  into  force
    on 28 July 2014. The significance of this will become apparent from  my
    assessment later on in this decision.

22. As for para 399(a), the judge  did  not  carry  out  an  assessment  of
    whether it was unduly harsh for the children to leave the UK or  remain
    in the UK without the claimant, although he considered whether it would
    be unreasonable to expect the claimant's children to leave the  UK.  At
    [69], the judge said that he was satisfied that "[Ms P] can  remain  to
    look after the two girls but the damage to the family life of  the  two
    girls with the [claimant] and the [claimant] with the  two  girl  [sic]
    satisfie[d] [him] that the claimant's right to  family  life  outweighs
    the public interest  in  seeing  him  deported".    In  his  concluding
    paragraph ([74]), he said that he found that "it would be unduly  harsh
    on the two children to deport the [claimant]".

23. As for para 399(b), the judge said (at [70]) that he considered whether
    there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  between  the
    claimant and his wife continuing outside the UK.  He  did  not  make  a
    clear finding in this respect and did not carry out an assessment as to
    whether it would be unduly harsh for Ms P to leave the UK or remain  in
    the UK without the  claimant.  However,  in  his  concluding  paragraph
    ([74]), he said that he found that "it would be unduly harsh on [Ms  P]
    if [the claimant] was to be deported".

24. I shall now quote [61]-[74] of the judge's decision:


        Findings


        61. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules lays down that "where  a
              person claims that their deportation would be contrary to the
              obligation of  the  UK  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  the
              deportation is regarded as being conducive to the public good
              where he/she has been convicted of an offence for which  they
              have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
              4 years but at least 12 months".   On  8  September  2006  at
              Snaresbrook Crown Court the appellant  was  sentenced  to  12
              months imprisonment.  The deportation  of  the  appellant  is
              therefore conducive to the public good.   The  respondent  is
              under an obligation to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
              applies   and   further   to   assess   whether   exceptional
              circumstances apply that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
              deportation.  I also bear in mind  the  new  public  interest
              considerations set down in the Immigration Act 2014.


        62. Paragraph 399(a) lays down the criteria which must be satisfied
              in order for a parental relationship with a child to outweigh
              the public interest  in  seeing  the  parent  deported.   The
              criteria reflect the duty  in  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
              Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have  regard  to  the
              need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are
              in the UK.  The appellant has two daughters - [S] and  [A]  -
              and the duty to safeguard and promote their  welfare  is  now
              considered.


        63. The respondent accepts that the appellant is in a  genuine  and
              subsisting relationship with  [S].   She  is  not  a  British
              citizen but she has been living in the UK continuously for at
              least seven years preceding the  deportation  decision.   The
              respondent concludes that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
              [S] to leave the UK.


        64. [S] was born on 7 June 2004.  She is now aged ten  years.   She
              has lived in the  UK  since  birth.   She  has  attended  [X]
              Primary School since September 2008.  I have read a  Progress
              and Achievement  Report  for  the  academic  year  2013-2014.
              Aside from an encouragement from her teachers to  think  more
              about the feelings of other pupils the Report speaks well  of
              her progress.  There is nothing to suggest that  she  is  not
              integrated  within  the  daily  life  of  the  School.    She
              participates in sports and shows good teamwork.   The  Report
              states that "she has good friends within the class and  likes
              to support them if she feels there is a problem".   The  Head
              Teacher concludes "Well done [S] on  your  academic  progress
              this year.  Please be mindful of other's  feelings.   Have  a
              good summer."


        65. Bearing in mind that [S] is a UK citizen; that  she  has  lived
              all her life in the UK; that she is at an age where the focus
              of relationships is more  her  contemporaries  and  less  her
              parents; that she has been at the same school for six  years;
              that  her  culture  and  language  is  consistent  with   her
              nationality I find that it would not be reasonable to  expect
              [S] to leave the UK.


        66. I reach a similar conclusion with regard to [A]  despite  being
              four years younger than [S] and  therefore  more  focused  on
              relationships with her parents than with her  contemporaries.
              I note in [A's] school report - also from [X] Primary  School
              - that she communicates well with adults and  children.   She
              is growing in confidence and "contributes more  regularly  to
              class discussions".  She has made "excellent  progress"  with
              her reading.  As regards her personal and social  development
              "her behaviour is excellent and she  always  does  the  right
              thing".  The Head Teacher records her satisfaction  with  the
              [A's] progress with the words "Well done [A] on your pleasing
              end of year report".


        67. It is accepted that [A] is not a UK citizen and  that  in  line
              with her mother she is a Columbian citizen but she  was  born
              in the UK and has lived all her life  in  the  UK.   She  has
              grown up in the culture  of  British  society  and  has  made
              progress as an integrated  member  of  the  school  that  she
              attends.  She is at the age where school  friends  become  an
              important part of her life and the evidence from  the  school
              is that she is "learning to manage her friendships  well  and
              she now plays with a wider group of friends."  I find that it
              would not be reasonable to expect [A] to leave the UK.


        68. I also bear in mind that both children would struggle with  the
              either [sic] languages of  Algeria  or  Columbia.   The  long
              period of presence in the UK would make  more  difficult  the
              process of adjustment in the  country  in  which  they  would
              settle if deported.  That is not to say  that  adjustment  is
              not possible.  It does happen that children are uprooted  and
              required to live  in  an  unfamiliar  country  but  it  is  a
              question of what is in the best interests of the two children
              and I am satisfied and so find that their best interests  are
              to remain in the UK and to pursue their personal  and  social
              development.


        69. I am satisfied that the appellant and his wife would be able to
              settle in a third country.  They have been able to  adapt  to
              past changes in location and  they  could  do  so  again  but
              having found that the two children should remain in the UK  I
              am satisfied that the mother can remain to look after the two
              girls but the damage to the family life of the two girls with
              the appellant and the appellant with the two girls  satisfies
              me that the appellant's right to family  life  outweighs  the
              public interest in seeing him  deported.   In  reaching  this
              conclusion I bear in mind as per Ogundimu v SSHD that  little
              weight should be attached to paragraph 399(a) if there exists
              a clear conflict with the consideration of the best interests
              of the two children.


        70.  As  regards  paragraph  399(b)  I  consider  that  there   are
              insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant
              and his wife being continued outside the UK.  The  respondent
              accepts that the appellant and his wife are in a genuine  and
              subsisting relationship.  If the appellant was to be deported
              and the children were to remain because it  is  in  the  best
              interests of the children to remain in the UK there would  be
              a disruption of family life.  The family would be  separated.
              Whilst it is possible for the appellant to  maintain  contact
              with his wife using modern forms of communication it  remains
              the case that the absence of the father from the family  home
              because of the need for the mother to remain  in  the  UK  to
              look after the two children and  the  separation  that  would
              involve leads me to find that the continuance of the  genuine
              and subsisting relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
              wife outweighs the public interest in deportation.


        71. In reaching these conclusions I have borne in mind  the  extent
              to which it is conducive to the public  good  to  deport  the
              appellant.  I note  the  remarks  of  the  sentencing  Judge.
              Whilst people do use a false identity to engage  in  criminal
              activity the Judge accepted  that  in  the  appellant's  case
              "there is no evidence that you have behaved in any other form
              of  criminal  activity".   Whilst  accepting  that  a  prison
              sentence was inevitable the Judge said "I am therefore  going
              to pass a  sentence  of  imprisonment  but  it  will  be  the
              shortest which in my opinion matches the seriousness of  your
              offence and takes into account the mitigating factors in your
              case".  The sentence of 12 months imprisonment is also at the
              lowest end of the range of sentencing periods which makes the
              deportation of the appellant conducive to the public good.


        72. I also take into account that the appellant  was  convicted  in
              July 2006 and sentenced on 8 September 2006 - five years  and
              nine  months  before   any   deportation   proceedings   were
              commenced.  There is, quite properly, a balance to be  struck
              between the right of government to pursue the  implementation
              of its deportation policy and the right of the individual  to
              have the benefit of certainty about his  status  in  the  UK.
              However a delay of more  than  five  years  tips  the  scales
              unreasonably against the individual.  It has to be noted that
              the appellant is not free of criticism because on 23 December
              2013 he was arrested  by  Kent  Police  for  shoplifting  and
              giving false details to the police.  He  was  not  cautioned.
              He was not charged.  The date on which the appellant  carried
              out the  offences  that  gave  rise  to  his  sentence  on  8
              September 2006 are not revealed in the papers but  the  point
              is made that from the date of his committal for trial in  May
              2006 to the date of hearing the appellant has the one blemish
              on his record - the caution referred to above.


        73. In reaching my conclusions in this appeal  I  have  taken  into
              account section  117C  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The
              deportation of a foreign criminal is in the  public  interest
              and the more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
              criminal the greater is the public interest  in  deportation.
              The  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless   either
              Exception 1 or Exception 2.  Exception 1 does  not  apply  in
              this case because it cannot be said  that  "very  significant
              obstacles" exist to  the  integration  of  the  appellant  in
              Algeria.


        74. Exception 2 applies because the appellant is in a  genuine  and
              subsisting relationship with his wife and his two  daughters.
              The  issue  is  whether  the  effect   of   the   appellant's
              deportation on his wife or his daughters is unduly harsh.   I
              am satisfied for reasons I have stated  in  paragraphs  63-68
              that it is in the best interests  of  the  children  for  the
              appellant to remain in the UK.  On the same facts I also find
              it would be unduly harsh on the two children  to  deport  the
              appellant.  Again on the same facts I also find it  would  be
              unduly harsh on the wife of the appellant if  he  was  to  be
              deported.

           Notice of decision

          The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

      The grounds

25. There are three grounds. At the commencement of the hearing before  me,
    the parties agreed that ground 3 commences at para 8  of  the  grounds,
    not para 13.

26. The three grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i)      Ground 1 raises the following points:

            a)   The judge considered the IRs that were in force as at  the
             date of the Secretary of State's decision, as opposed to  those
             that were in force as at the date of the hearing,  contrary  to
             the guidance in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

            b)   Although the judge went on to consider  the  IRs  "now  in
             force", he gave the IRs only brief consideration.

            c)   The judge erred in allowing the appeal outside the IRs.

    ii)     Ground 2 is that the judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding
        that the claimant met  the  exceptions  in  para  399(a)  and  (b).
        Detailed reasons are given at [4]-[6] of the grounds,  which  I  do
        not need to summarise.

      iii)  Ground 3 contends that the judge made errors in relation to  the
        public interest which may be summarised as follows:

            a)   He failed to consider  that  "the  starting  point  in  any
             assessment of paras 398-399A is the recognition that the public
             interest in deportation is so great that  only  in  exceptional
             circumstances will it be outweighed by other factors, including
             the effect of deportation on children": LC (China) [2014]  EWCA
             Civ 1310 at [24] and that it is necessary for the  Tribunal  to
             take account of Convention rights "through the lens of the IRs"
             (AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636, at [39].

            b)   The judge failed to recognise that the  scales  were  "very
             heavily weighted in favour of deportation" and  that  something
             "very compelling" was required to outweigh the public  interest
             in deportation: HA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1304.  The
             judge approached the appeal  from  a  neutral  starting  point,
             instead of one heavily weighed in favour of deportation.

            c)   The judge gave scant  consideration  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's public interest policies  given  the  severity  of  the
             offence committed. Deportation  is  not  to  be  seen  as  one-
             dimensional in its effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
             removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee  himself  but
             also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar position
             and it preserves public confidence in a system of control whose
             loss itself tends towards crime and disorder.

            d)   The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  following
             factors: The claimant has  demonstrated  a  propensity  to  re-
             offend. There has been an  escalation  in  seriousness  of  his
             offences. He has shown a blatant disregard  for  the  law.  His
             sentences have not acted  as  any  deterrent.  His  family  has
             demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to exert  sufficient
             influence over  him.  He  has  been  motivated  to  offend  for
             financial benefit. His evidence as  recorded  at  [40]  of  the
             judge's decision, that he shoplifted in 2013 because  he  could
             not work, shows that he was making excuses  for  his  offending
             rather than taking responsibility for his actions. He has  been
             convicted of fraud offences and he has demonstrated through his
             immigration history that he is not a trustworthy character  and
             will use deception to benefit himself. He has been a burden  to
             the state through his convictions and the cost  of  prosecuting
             him and imprisoning him.

             e)    There  was  therefore  a  strong   public   interest   in
             deportation which has not been taken into account.

            f)   To the extent that the judge allowed the appeal because  of
             the delay that has taken place  in  taking  deportation  action
             against the claimant, the judge failed  to  address  the  issue
             correctly. Whilst the Secretary of State accepts that the delay
             allowed the claimant to develop stronger Article 8  rights,  he
             knew that his  immigration  remained  precarious.  Furthermore,
             there was no evidence that the Secretary of State was aware  of
             the claimant's conviction until  2010  when  checks  were  made
             following his request to be considered under the  Secretary  of
             State's "legacy programme" in 2009.

      The grant of permission and the ambit of the grounds before me

27. Mr Farhat submitted that, given that the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    had refused permission, the grounds before me  were  limited  to  those
    specifically  mentioned  in  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
    McWilliam dated  8  June  2015  granting  permission.  Accordingly,  he
    submitted that ground 3 was not before me.

28. Judge McWilliam's decision reads as follows:

            1.   The grounds seek leave to appeal against  the  decision  of
              [the judge] to allow the appeal against the decision  of  the
              [Secretary of State] to make a deportation order against  the
              [claimant].

            2.   It is arguable that the  judge  inadequately  reasoned  the
              finding that the effect of deportation  on  the  [claimant's]
              partner and children would be unduly harsh  (whether  in  the
              context of the rules or the  2014  regime)  because  arguably
              inadequate consideration is given to the possibility  of  the
              children remaining here in the UK without the [claimant].

29. I ruled that,  as  Judge  McWilliam  had  not  said  that  she  refused
    permission on those grounds that were not referred to  at  [2]  of  her
    decision, all of the grounds were before me. My reasons are as follows:

    i)      If Judge McWilliam had intended to refuse permission on  ground
        3, she would no doubt have said so. Any  such  refusal  would  have
        entitled the Secretary  of  State  to  renew  her  application  for
        permission.

    ii)     Furthermore, it is misconceived to suggest, as Mr  Farhat  did,
        that the refusal of permission by the  FtT  restricts  the  grounds
        that are before the Upper Tribunal to those specifically  mentioned
        in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  to  grant   permission.   The
        application to the Upper Tribunal for permission is an entirely new
        application for permission  which  can  be  made  on  the  same  or
        additional or entirely different grounds. A party  who  applies  to
        the Upper Tribunal for permission cannot be in a worse position  by
        relying upon the same grounds than a  party  who  submits  entirely
        different grounds.

    Accordingly, the refusal by the FtT  of  permission  is  irrelevant  in
    deciding what grounds are before the Upper Tribunal.

      Assessment

30. Mr Avery relied upon the grounds and addressed me briefly to  elaborate
    them. Mr Farhat submitted a skeleton argument at  the  commencement  of
    his submissions in reply. I took issue with the fact that the  skeleton
    argument was submitted so late, the important point being that Mr Avery
    had completed his opening submissions but had not had  the  opportunity
    to even see the skeleton argument. It was not possible for me,  without
    putting at risk my ability to complete my  list,  for  me  adjourn  the
    hearing for a short while in order to enable Mr Avery and  me  to  read
    the skeleton argument. If the skeleton argument had been handed  to  Mr
    Avery and to my clerk before the time listed for the hearing  to  begin
    (10 am), the difficulty could have been avoided. As I did not  consider
    it fair to the appellants in the other cases to risk my not being  able
    to reach their cases, I informed Mr Farhat that if, upon my reading his
    skeleton argument in my own time, I find I have questions on the  basis
    of the material before me, I will resolve those issues on such material
    as is before me and bearing in mind the potential prejudice to Mr Avery
    who had not had an opportunity to see the skeleton argument.

31. I shall first deal with ground 1 beginning with the argument summarised
    at 26.i) c) above which I can dispose of in brief terms. The judge  did
    not allow the appeal outside the IRs.  He made it clear in  the  single
    sentence under the heading "Notice of Decision" at the end of  [74]  of
    his decision that the appeal was allowed under  the  IRs.  Accordingly,
    ground 1 c) is misconceived.

32. The remainder of ground 1, in particular ground 1.a) is  important.  Mr
    Farhat's skeleton argument does not deal with it, as the position taken
    in the skeleton argument is that the grounds before me were limited  to
    those specifically mentioned by Judge McWilliam, a submission  which  I
    rejected at the hearing, as stated above. Nor did Mr Farhat address  me
    on ground 1 at the hearing. Nevertheless, the claimant  has  had  ample
    notice of the Secretary of State's grounds.

33. Before turning to deal with ground 1.a), it is appropriate to deal with
    head note 3 of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT
    00060 (IAC) upon which Mr Farhat relied albeit in the context of ground
    2. Head note 3 of Ogundimu reads:

            3.   Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules  conflicts  with
           the Secretary of State's  duties  under  Article  3  of  the  UN
           Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 and section 55 of the
           Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.  Little  weight
           should be attached to this  Rule  when  consideration  is  being
           given to the assessment of proportionality under  Article  8  of
           the Human Rights Convention.

34. Mr Farhat submitted that the judge did not err in his consideration  of
    para 399(a). He was entitled to place  little  weight  on  para  399(a)
    given the guidance in head note 3 of Ogundimu to which he  specifically
    referred.

35. However, it is clear from [80] of the determination  in  Ogundimu  that
    the Tribunal in that case was considering the version  of  para  399(a)
    that was in force prior to 28 July 2014. There are  two  paragraphs  in
    the determination in Ogundimu which provide the context  in  which  the
    head note 3 of Ogundimu was formulated. These are [95]-[96] which  read
    (the emphasis is mine):

        95.      Although there is no dispute that the  appellant's  child,
             JT, is a British citizen, or that the appellant has  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship with this child, Ms Hooper accepted
             that the appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph
             399(a) of the Rules as a consequence of the fact  that  CT  'is
             able to care for the child'.  We were concerned as  to  whether
             the new rules should be read literally so  as  to  exclude  any
             appellant from being granted  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
             grounds under this rule if there was any person  able  to  care
             for the child, irrespective of whether the child's welfare  and
             best interests required regular contact  with  the  parent  who
             faced removal. We accordingly asked for written  assistance  on
             this issue from the  Secretary  of  State;  a  summary  of  the
             question asked and answer received being set out in  paragraphs
             76 and 77 above.


        96.      Having done so we agree that the terms of paragraph 399(a)
             of the Rules do not provide for a consideration  of  where  the
             best interests of a child lies, and Ms Hooper  was  correct  to
             concede that the appellant could not succeed under  this  limb.
             However, when we come below  to  make  our  overall  Article  8
             assessment of the proportionality of the interference with  the
             family life of the  remaining  family  members  we  propose  to
             attach little weight  to  this  aspect  of  the  rules,  as  we
             consider  that  its  terms  are  in  clear  conflict  with  the
             respondent's duty under Article 3 UN Convention on  the  Rights
             of the Child 1989 to make the child's welfare and best interest
             a primary, albeit not the paramount, consideration. As is  well
             known this duty has been imported into Article 8 considerations
             by case law, notably ZH Tanzania [2011]  UKSC  4,  as  well  as
             section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009. We doubt whether it is in any child's best  interests  to
             lose the contact and support with a caring and  devoted  parent
             simply because someone else can be found to care for them.

36. The underlined text, in particular,  the  final  sentence  of  [96]  of
    Ogundimu, shows that head note 3  arose  from  the  Tribunal's  concern
    about the requirement in the now deleted para 399(a)(b), that "there is
    no other family member who is able to care for the child  in  the  UK".
    Head note 3  of  Ogundimu  cannot  apply  to  the  current  version  of
    paragraph 399(a) given not only that this criterion  was  deleted  with
    effect from 28 July 2014 but also that the phrase "unduly harsh" in the
    version of para 399(a) that came into effect  from  28  July  2014  can
    accommodate consideration of the best interests of a child pursuant  to
    the Secretary of State's duty under Article 3 of the UN  Convention  on
    the Rights of the Child 1989.

37. As stated above, the amendments to the IRs that are shown at [20] above
    came into effect on  28  July  2014,  i.e.  between  the  date  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 15  May  2014  and  the  date  of  the
    hearing on 15 December 2015. The judge should  therefore  have  applied
    the version of the IRs that came into force on 28 July 2014.

38. However, an analysis of the judge's reasoning  from  [61]-[74]  of  his
    decision shows that he in fact applied the wrong version of  para  399.
    My reasons are given at [39]-[46] below.

39. The only paragraph in which the  judge  mentioned  the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh" is at [74] where he said that Exception 2 in s.117C(5)  applies.
    It is clear therefore that he  was  aware  that  Exception  2  required
    consideration of the issue of undue hardship as regards the  impact  on
    the claimant's wife and on his children of his being deported. However,
    there is no mention of the phrase "unduly harsh" at [61]-[72] where  he
    assessed whether the claimant's could meet the  requirements  of  paras
    399(a) and (b). One would have expected specific  engagement  with  the
    criteria of "undue hardship" if the judge had  considered  the  correct
    version of para 399(a) and (b) at [61]-[72].

40. Instead,  in  his  assessment  of  paras  399(a)  and  (b),  the  judge
    considered:

    i)      in relation to para 399(a), whether it would be unreasonable to
        expect the claimant's children to leave the UK, in respect of which
        he considered the best interests of the children (at [62]-[68]) and
        whether Ms P can remain to look after the children (at [69]);

    ii)     in relation to para 399 (b), the judge said (at [70])  that  he
        considered whether  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
        family life between the claimant and his  wife  continuing  outside
        the UK.

41. These are the requirements in the previous  version  of  the  IRs.  The
    criteria of whether it is reasonable for children to leave the  UK  and
    whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
    between a claimant and his/her partner do not apply in the  version  of
    para 399(a) and (b) that came into force on 28 July 2014.

42. Accordingly, read as a whole, it is abundantly  clear  that  the  judge
    applied the version of para 399(a) and (b) that was in force as  at  27
    July 2014 and not the version of para 399(a) and  (b)  that  came  into
    force  on  28  July  2014.  This  explains  why   he   considered   the
    reasonableness of S and A leaving the UK, whether Ms P could remain  in
    the UK to look after the children and whether there were insurmountable
    obstacles to family life between the claimant and his  wife  continuing
    outside the UK. It explains why he applied head note 3 of Ogundimu.

43. Although the judge was  aware  that  Exception  2  of  s.117C  required
    consideration of whether the effect of deportation  on  the  claimant's
    wife and the two children would be  unduly  harsh,  he  was  completely
    unaware of the fact that the new para 399(a)  and  (b)  dovetails  with
    Exception 2 of s.117C(5) by providing that  undue  hardship  is  to  be
    decided by considering  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    partner/child or children to live in the country to which the  deportee
    is to be deported  and  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    partner/child or children to live in the UK without the deportee.  This
    explains why he failed to consider the specific questions of whether it
    was unduly harsh for the claimant's children and his wife to remain  in
    the UK without him, questions that he would have had to engage with  if
    he had applied the correct version of para 399(a) and (b).

44. The only paragraphs in which the judge considered  the  possibility  of
    the claimant's wife and  children  remaining  in  the  UK  without  the
    claimant  are  [69]-[70].  However,  it  is  clear  that  he  did   not
    contemplate at all the possibility of the family being separated. It is
    plain that he considered that separation was sufficient  in  itself  to
    outweigh the state's interests. This was because he applied head note 3
    of Ogundimu. He referred to this guidance in Ogundimu in terms at [69].

45. Finally, I noted that the judge failed to consider whether the claimant
    satisfied  the  requirement  in  para  399(b)(i),  i.e.   whether   the
    relationship between the claimant and Ms P was formed at  a  time  when
    the deportee was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration  status  was
    not precarious. If the judge had applied the correct  version  of  para
    399(b), he would have had to engage with para 399(b)(i). If he had done
    so, he would have had to have found that the claimant could not satisfy
    para 399(b)(i) and therefore that he  could  not  satisfy  para  399(b)
    because the  requirements  in  para  399(b)  are  conjunctive  and  the
    relationship between the claimant and Ms P was plainly formed at a time
    when their immigration status was not only precarious but unlawful.

46. Such were the number  and  nature  of  difficulties  with  the  judge's
    assessment of para 399, as explained above, that I  am  driven  to  the
    conclusion that he did apply the wrong version of para 399.

47. I am fortified in my view that the judge applied the wrong  version  of
    para 399 by reason of the fact that he referred to the guidance in head
    note 3 of Ogundimu not only at  [69]  of  his  decision  but  also,  in
    summarising the submissions made on behalf  of  the  claimant  at  [51]
    where he said:

            Skeleton argument

            51.  The [Secretary of State's] assessment of  the  [claimant's]
             circumstances is fundamentally flawed. The public interest does
             not require the claimant's deportation. when  considering  para
             399 (a) it was said in Ogundimu v SSHD that little weight would
             be attached to  paragraph  399(a)  if  there  was  as  a  clear
             conflict with the consideration of the best interests to  [six]
             the child. The court considered it unlikely that it was in  the
             best interests to be  separated  from  a  parent  just  because
             someone else could care for them....

48. It is plain that head note 3 of Ogundimu can only apply to the  version
    of para 399(a) that was in force as at 27 July 2014. It cannot apply to
    the version of para 399(a) that was in force from 28 July 2014  because
    para 399(a)(b) was amended in a way as to make  the  guidance  in  head
    note 3 inapplicable. If the judge  had  applied  the  version  of  para
    399(a) that came into force on 28 July 2014, as he should have done, he
    would have realised that head note 3 of Ogundimu could not apply.

49. I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in law  by  applying  the
    wrong version of para 399(a) and (b) of the IRs, as contended in ground
    1.a).

50. I am further satisfied that this error is material even  taken  on  its
    own. The judge's application of the wrong version of  para  399(a)  and
    (b) is sufficient in itself for his decision on the  claimant's  appeal
    to be set aside in its entirety, whatever may be said about  grounds  2
    and 3. This is because of the clear and  material  differences  between
    the requirements as set out in the versions of  paras  399(a)  and  (b)
    that were in force as at 27 July 2014 and the versions that  came  into
    force on 28 July 2014.

51. Although ground 1.b) appears to suggest that  the  Secretary  of  State
    detracted from her earlier argument  that  the  judge  had  applied  an
    incorrect version of the IRs, I am satisfied that this is not the case.
    Properly examined, I am satisfied that ground 1.b was advanced  in  the
    alternative to ground 1.a). My treatment of  ground  1.b)  is  subsumed
    within my treatment of ground 3.

52. Before turning to grounds 2 and 3, it is necessary  to  deal  with  the
    Upper Tribunal's conflicting guidance  on  the  interpretation  of  the
    phrase "unduly harsh" in the version of para 399(a) and (b)  that  came
    into force on 28 July 2014. This may be summarised as follows:

    i)      In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435  (IAC),
        the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  and  Deputy  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Phillips) held that the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  in
        para 399 of the Rules and s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act does not import
        a balancing exercise requiring the public interest  to  be  weighed
        against the circumstances  of  the  individual  (whether  child  or
        partner of the deportee).  The Tribunal  held  that  the  focus  is
        solely upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact  upon  the
        individual concerned.



    ii)     However, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern took a different view in
        KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  00543  (IAC).
        The head note of KMO reads:




            The Immigration Rules, when  applied  in  the  context  of  the
                 deportation of a foreign criminal,  are  a  complete  code.
                 Where an assessment is required to be made as to whether  a
                 person  meets  the  requirements  of  para   399   of   the
                 Immigration Rules, as that comprises an assessment of  that
                 person's claim under article 8 of the ECHR, it is necessary
                 to have regard, in making that assessment, to  the  matters
                 to which the Tribunal must have regard as a consequence  of
                 the provisions of s117C. In particular, those include  that
                 the more serious the offence committed, the greater is  the
                 public interest  in  deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal.
                 Therefore, the word "unduly" in the phrase  "unduly  harsh"
                 requires consideration of whether,  in  the  light  of  the
                 seriousness  of  the  offences  committed  by  the  foreign
                 criminal and the public interest considerations  that  come
                 into play, the impact on the child, children or partner  of
                 the foreign criminal  being  deported  is  inordinately  or
                 excessively harsh.




53. In reaching his decision, Judge Southern considered and dealt with  (at
    [8]-[25]) the reasoning of the panel in MAB in reaching its conclusion.



54. Neither MAB nor KMO is binding upon  me.  Although  of  course  I  take
    account of the need  for  judicial  comity,  this  is  not  necessarily
    determinative. In any event, given the clear conflict between  the  two
    decisions, it is not possible for me to follow both.

55. Mr Farhat mentioned MAB at the hearing in response to which I mentioned
    KMO. He did not address me on which  of  the  two  decisions  I  should
    follow and why. His skeleton argument refers to MAB. It  is  noticeable
    for its complete failure to mention KMO.

56. I take into account the fact that,  whilst  the  decision  in  MAB  was
    reached by a panel, the decision in KMO was  made  by  a  single  Upper
    Tribunal Judge. Nevertheless, I am entirely persuaded by the  reasoning
    at [8]-[25] of KMO. I prefer to follow KMO.

57. I will now deal with ground 3 before turning to ground 2.

58. At [69]  of  his  decision,  the  judge  said  that,  in  reaching  his
    conclusion that "the damage to the family life of the  two  girls  with
    [the claimant] and [the claimant] with the two  girls  satisfies  [him]
    that the  [claimant's]  right  to  family  life  outweighs  the  public
    interest in seeing him deported", he had borne in mind "as per Ogundimu
    v SSHD that little weight should be attached  to  paragraph  399(a)  if
    there exists a clear  conflict  with  the  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the two children".  Given that head note 3 of Ogundimu did
    not apply to the version of para 399(a)  that  the  judge  should  have
    applied, I am  satisfied  that  he  took  into  account  an  irrelevant
    consideration in reaching his conclusion that the public  interest  was
    outweighed. It also shows that he  effectively  discounted  the  public
    interest.

59. Pursuant to KMO, the judge was obliged to take into account the  weight
    that should be given to the public interest in deportation in  reaching
    his findings on para 399(a) and (b). The judge's failure to  apply  the
    correct version of para 399 (a) and (b) may be part of the  reason  why
    he failed to attach any, or sufficient, weight to the  public  interest
    in deportation.

60. However, the fact is that the judge failed to recognise that the scales
    were very heavily weighted in favour of deportation. I  agree  with  Mr
    Avery that he approached the appeal from a neutral starting point.

61. I am also satisfied that the judge failed  to  consider  the  different
    facets of the public interest, namely, the deterrence  of  others,  the
    expression of society's revulsion at such  offences  and  the  need  to
    maintain public confidence in the system.

62. I agree that the judge also erred in failing to take into  account  all
    of the factors summarised at my [26.iii)d)] and which I do not need  to
    repeat here. Even after the decision that was the subject of the appeal
    before the judge, the claimant committed another offence  when,  again,
    he gave false identity details. This  should  have  led  the  judge  to
    increase the weight to be attached to the public interest. Instead,  he
    impermissibly  minimised  its  significance,  by  referring   to   this
    subsequent offence as "one  blemish"  on  his  record  for  the  period
    following his committal for trial in May 2006, saying  that  "[he]  was
    not free of criticism". Instead of this increasing  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest, he minimised the public  interest.  He
    was wrong to say at [72] that the claimant was not  cautioned  for  the
    offence in December 2013. As he said  at  [16]  of  his  decision,  the
    claimant was cautioned for this  offence.  He  would  not  have  had  a
    caution administered to him if he had not accepted the offence.

63. The judge mentioned the public interest in the final sentence  of  [70]
    and at [71] and [72].  In the final sentence of [70], it is clear, as I
    have said above, that the judge simply considered that the mere fact of
    separation was sufficient in itself to outweigh  the  public  interest.
    That is clearly an incorrect approach.  The mere fact that  deportation
    of an individual will effectively lead to permanent separation does not
    automatically mean that the deportation will  be  disproportionate,  as
    the judge appeared to assume.

64. I agree with Mr Avery that, at [71], the judge was selective in what he
    quoted from the sentencing remarks. He chose to focus  on  comments  by
    the sentencing judge which minimised the  seriousness  of  the  offence
    without also taking into account what the  sentencing  judge  had  said
    about the seriousness of the offences themselves.

65. In relation to [72] of the judge's decision, the   grounds  state  (see
    [26.f] above) that there is no evidence that the Secretary of State was
    aware of the claimant until 2010 when checks were  made  following  his
    request to be considered under the legacy  programme.  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge erred when he took  into  account,  against  the  public
    interest in deportation, a delay of 5 years 9 months. The period  of  5
    years 9 months is the period from the date of the sentence (8 September
    2006) until 13 June 2012, the date on which the claimant  was  informed
    of his liability to deport. However, it is clear  from  the  sentencing
    remarks of the sentencing judge that the claimant was  charged  of  the
    offences for which he was sentenced  on  that  occasion  in  his  false
    identity. This fact supports the Secretary of State's  contention  that
    she was not aware of the claimant until checks were made following  his
    application  made  on  17  August  2009  for  leave  under  the  legacy
    programme. Given that the claimant's immigration history showed that he
    was an individual who had used  a  false  identity  on  more  than  one
    occasion, the judge ought to have given reasons why he considered that,
    notwithstanding the use by the claimant of such  false  identities  and
    notwithstanding the fact that he was charged in his false  identity  in
    relation to the offences for which he  was  sentenced  on  8  September
    2006, the Secretary of State could nevertheless be reasonably  expected
    to  have  become  aware  of  the  claimant  and  commenced  deportation
    proceedings as early as September 2006.  In  the  absence  of  such  an
    explanation, he was not entitled to take this period of 5 year 9 months
    into account against the public interest. In  doing  so,  he  erred  by
    assuming that the Secretary of State  was  aware  of  the  claimant  to
    enable her to commence deportation action as early as September 2006.

66. Indeed, when [70]-[72] are read as a whole, it is plain not  only  that
    the judge paid lip service to the public interest but he  mentioned  it
    not as a means to explain the  weight  that  he  considered  should  be
    attached to the public interest but as a means to minimise  the  public
    interest and tip the scales in the claimant's favour.

67. Mr Farhat drew my attention to the fact that the first decision to make
    a deportation order of 18 August 2012 was withdrawn due to deficiencies
    in the refusal letter. This is irrelevant. The period  the  judge  took
    into account was from the date of  the  sentence  being  imposed  on  8
    September 2006 to the date that deportation proceedings were  commenced
    on 13 June 2012. Given that deportation proceedings had  commenced,  he
    rightly did not take into account the period between the making of  the
    first decision to deport and the decision that was the subject  of  the
    appeal before him.

68. For all of these  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  ground  3  is  also
    established. I am satisfied that this is also,  in  itself  a  material
    error of law.

69. I turn to ground 2.

70. I am satisfied that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the  claimant  satisfied  the  requirements  in  paragraph
    399(a) and (b), in that, for the reasons given above:

    i)      He failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for  the
        claimant's children to leave the UK, as opposed to  whether  it  is
        reasonable for them to do so.

    ii)     He failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh from the
        children to remain in the UK without the claimant.

    iii)    He failed  to  consider  whether  the  claimant  satisfied  the
        requirements of para 399(b)(i) in relation to his relationship with
        his wife.

    iv)     In any event, he failed to consider whether it would be  unduly
        harsh for her to remain in the UK without the claimant.

      v)    He failed to take into account the public interest and give  due
        weight to it. He failed to carry out a proper  balancing  exercise,
        recognising that the scales are weighted in favour of deportation.

71. Ground 2 is therefore also  established.  Again,  this  error  is  also
    material, even taken  on  its  own.  Indeed,  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's  wife  and
    children to remain in the UK without the claimant was itself  material,
    even leaving aside the other failings at [69] above.

72. Finally, I should say that Mr Farhat submitted, in reliance  upon  head
    note 3 of Ogundimu, that, if a course of action is  not  in  a  child's
    best interests, then it would be unduly harsh to follow that course  of
    action. In other words, if deportation of the parent of a child is  not
    in the child's best interests, then the impact of  the  deportation  on
    the child would be unduly harsh. Although he did not accept  that  this
    meant that the child's best interests were to be regarded  as  a  trump
    card, the reality is that  his  submission,  if  accepted,  would  mean
    exactly that.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  rejecting  his  submission.
    Depending on the seriousness  of  the  offences  in  question  and  the
    circumstances of the case, deportation can be proportionate even if  it
    effectively results in the permanent separation of a child from one  of
    its parents.

73. I have found that, with the exception  of  the  argument  described  at
    [26.i)c)] above, all three grounds are  established.  Except  for  this
    argument, the judge materially erred in law as contended in each of the
    grounds. Each error justifies my setting aside the judge's decision.  I
    set aside his decision in its entirety. None of his findings stand.

74. Mr Farhat drew my attention to the fact that the claimant's convictions
    of July 2006 have been  spent.  My  attention  was  not  drawn  to  any
    evidence to show that those convictions have been spent. In any  event,
    even if the convictions are spent, it is plain that the judge  did  not
    rely upon that fact and, furthermore, I cannot see  how  that  fact  is
    capable of rendering the errors of law I have identified immaterial  on
    any legitimate view.

75. Given that the claimant succeeded in the appeal before the FFT and that
    there are children involved in this appeal and having regard to para  7
    of the Practice Statements and the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in  JD
    (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the  view  that  in  this
    case Practice Statement 7.2(b) applies. I therefore remit this case  to
    the FtT with the direction that it be heard by  another  judge  of  the
    FtT.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I set  aside  the  decision.  The
    case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the direction that  it
    be heard by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity - variation of anonymity order

      The FtT made an anonymity order which  applied  to  the  claimant  and
    members of his family. I vary that  order  so  that  it  prohibits  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public  to  identify  the  claimant's  children.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction
    applies to both the claimant and to the Secretary of State. Failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 3 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
