
  IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Bent) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00654 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                    Wednesday, 3 August 2015





                      the queen (on the application OF)

                             damian robert bent
                                                                   Applicant

                                     AND

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P  Haywood,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Messrs  Owen  Stevens  Solicitors,
appeared on behalf of the applicant

Miss  J  Anderson,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Government  Legal  Department,
appeared on behalf of the respondent



                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE Mcgeachy: The applicant is a  citizen  of  Jamaica,  born  on  15
    August 1986, who applies  for  judicial  review  of  decisions  of  the
    respondent made on 15 October  2014  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom, to refuse to revoke a deportation order and  to  certify  that
    refusal under Section 96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002. The effect of that certification is that  the  applicant  has  no
    right of appeal against the decision.

2.   The applicant arrived in Britain on 2  October  1998  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter.  On  21  March  2001  he  was  convicted  of
    robbery and, because of his  age,  was  subjected  to  an  action  plan
    imposed by the court.  On 24 June 2004 he was convicted  of  possession
    of a bladed article in a public place, possession of a Class C drug and
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence.  He was  subjected
    to a community order and disqualified from driving  for  three  months.
    On 24 May 2006 he was convicted of possession of a  Class  C  drug  and
    fined and also convicted on that  day  of  driving  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the licence, whilst uninsured and using a vehicle  with
    no test certificate. He was fined  and  banned  from  driving  for  two
    months.

3.   The applicant has a child, DB,  who  was  born  on  20  June  2010.  It
    appears that the applicant's  relationship  with  her  mother,  Sherika
    Taylor, ended shortly after her birth.

4. On 11 April 2011 a no time limit endorsement was placed on his  passport.
    Seven months later he pleaded guilty to three counts of supply of Class
    A drugs having sold crack cocaine  to  undercover  detectives.   On  25
    November 2011 he was sentenced to three  years'  imprisonment  on  each
    count to be served concurrently.

5.   On 14  February  2012  he  was  served  with  notice  of  liability  to
    automatic deportation under the provisions of  Section  32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

6.   On 29 January 2013 the Children's Champion approved a family  split  on
    deportation. A decision was made to make a deportation  order,  against
    which the applicant appealed. His appeal was dismissed  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 10 April 2013.

   7. The applicant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
      The Upper Tribunal  considered  the  appeal  and  dismissed  it  in  a
      determination promulgated on 23 September 2013.  By  10  October  2013
      the applicant had exhausted his appeal rights.


   8. The applicant was placed on reporting conditions  but  absconded  from
      the reporting centre on 8 May 2014,  thereby  obstructing  efforts  to
      deport him on 1 June. On 28 May he again frustrated a removal  attempt
      and on 12 June 2014 absconded when asked to go to the  interview  room
      at the reporting centre.


9.  On 14 June 2014 the police attended his address as he had been  reported
    missing by his mother.

10.  On 19 June 2014 an application to  revoke  the  deportation  order  was
    made. The refusal and certification of that claim  is  the  subject  of
    these proceedings. The application referred to the OASys  report  which
    had not been  before  the  Tribunal  stating  that  it  said  that  the
    likelihood of re-offending was low and also referred to paragraphs 390,
    398  and  399A  of  the  Rules  arguing  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances in this case and that the applicant was not a risk to the
    public. It was emphasised  that  he  was  close  to  his  daughter  and
    reference was  made  to  a  letter  from  Ms  Taylor  setting  out  her
    difficulties in taking  care  of  DB  without  the  assistance  of  the
    applicant. The representations asserted that  deportation  would  cause
    serious harm to the applicant's daughter's emotional wellbeing.

11. Emphasis was placed on the fact that he  suffered  from  depression  and
    had recently been hospitalised. It was said that he had  suffered  from
    depression from a young age and that he  had  received  counselling  in
    2009 and was currently taking anti-depressants and that his  depression
    has increased as a result of the stress and anxiety  of  detention  and
    deportation.

12. The letter asserted that the applicant  had  been  free  from  substance
    abuse for the last three years and referred to  case  law  relating  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.  On 7 August 2014 arrangements were made  to  detain  the  applicant  on
    reporting but he absconded from the reporting centre before he could be
    apprehended.

14.  Arrangements were again made to remove him on 14 August  2014  but  the
    presence of a child alone with him prevented detention.  The  applicant
    said that the child's mother was at that time in Jamaica.

15.  On 2 October  2014  arrangements  were  made  to  detain  him  when  he
    reported but he reported with a child, which prevented detention.  On 9
    October 2014 he was detained, served with  a  decision  to  reject  and
    certify his representations to revoke the deportation order and  on  16
    October 2014 removal directions were served for 6  November  2014.  His
    application for judicial review was lodged on 31 October.

16.  The decision to refuse to revoke referred to the provisions of  Section
    32(5) of the Borders Act 2007 and  the  mandatory  provision  that  the
    Secretary of State must make  a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  a
    foreign national who had been convicted of an offence and who had  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months  unless
    he fell within one of the exceptions set out in Section 33 of that Act.



17.  The Secretary of State considered  that  the  applicant  did  not  fall
    within  one  of  those  exceptions.  Having  set  out  the  applicant's
    immigration history and referred to the determinations  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State set  out
    at some length the submissions which had been made with regard  to  his
    daughter.

18.  In  paragraphs  19  onwards  of  the  letter  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the application and stated that  the  Upper  Tribunal,  when
    considering the applicant's deportation appeal, had properly considered
    all relevant factors including the claim that the applicant was at  low
    risk of offending and stated that full and  anxious  consideration  had
    been given to the best interests of the applicant's daughter  and  that
    it  had  been  found  that  the  removal  of  the  applicant   remained
    proportionate.  Reference was made to the provisions of Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and  it  was  stated
    that the Home Office recognised that the interests of  the  applicant's
    daughter was a primary consideration when making the decision.

19.   Thorough  consideration  was  given  to  the  applicant's  history  of
    depression but it was stated that it was believed  that  the  applicant
    was using his medical issues to frustrate attempts to deport him.

20. When considering the rights of the applicant  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR the letter referred to paragraphs 362  and  398  to  399D  of  the
    Rules.  When considering the position of  DB  it  was  noted  that  the
    applicant had not been in a relationship with his daughter's mother for
    some time and that she was the primary carer for  DB  although  it  was
    accepted that DB had regular visits with the applicant and his extended
    family.

21. The letter considered at length the provisions of paragraph 399A of  the
    Immigration Rules and the exception contained therein.  It  was  stated
    that it was accepted that DB was a British citizen. It was pointed  out
    that the applicant did not  live  with  her  and  it  was  stated  that
    although it was considered that it would be unduly harsh to  expect  DB
    to leave the United Kingdom as she lived here with her mother  who  was
    her primary carer and was attending school here, it was not  considered
    to be unduly harsh for her to remain with her mother when the applicant
    was deported.

22.  The writer of the letter went on to note that the applicant was not  in
    a relationship with DB's mother or anyone else.  In paragraph 44 of the
    letter it was stated that it was not accepted that  the  applicant  had
    been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life.  It
    was pointed out that he had entered Britain on 2 October 1998  aged  12
    with indefinite leave to remain and he was now 27. It was not  accepted
    that the applicant was socially and culturally integrated into  Britain
    - reference was made to his various  offences.  Moreover,  it  was  not
    considered that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Jamaica as he had spent the majority of his youth  and
    formative years there.  The  writer  of  the  letter  quoted  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which stated that:

         "The appellant has visited Jamaica  twice  before  and  his  family
         remains free to visit him in Jamaica whenever they desire.   We  do
         not accept that the appellant has no ties to Jamaica ... It may  be
         that the appellant only had distant relatives but we note  in  that
         balancing exercise that he is an adult and has undertaken a  number
         of courses whilst in custody ... We conclude that the appellant has
         qualifications which will better equip him to  seek  employment  in
         Jamaica."

23.  It was stated that on the  individual  circumstances  relating  to  the
    applicant it was not accepted that  he  met  the  requirements  of  the
    private life exceptions to deportation.

24.  The letter went on to  consider  "very  compelling  circumstances"  and
    stated that there was nothing which had been submitted that would  mean
    that there were very compelling circumstances that the applicant should
    not be deported.  Weight was again placed on the  applicant's  sentence
    for the supply of drugs.

25.  In paragraph 48  it  was  asserted  that  the  representations  offered
    nothing  new  except  for  the  submission  regarding  the  applicant's
    depression and that in any event that could have  been  raised  at  the
    deportation appeal. It was pointed out that anti-depressant drugs  were
    available in Jamaica including the drug which had  been  diagnosed  for
    the applicant.

26. With regard to the certification under Section 96 of the  2002  Act  the
    writer of the letter referred to the judgment in J v SSHD  [2009]  EWHC
    705 (Admin) and the four stage process therein. It was pointed out that
    the applicant had had another right of appeal which he  had  exercised,
    that the matters raised could have been raised at that appeal and  that
    moreover there was no satisfactory reason for  the  matter  not  having
    been raised at appeal. The Secretary of State had, in any  event,  used
    her discretion when deciding that certification was appropriate.

27.  The Judicial review proceedings were served on 31 October  2014.  On  4
    November 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Warr refused the application  for  a
    stay. In refusing the application for a stay Judge Warr wrote:-

         "Attention  is  drawn  to  the  respondent's  assertion  that   the
         applicant had not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
         most  of  his  life.   This  is  criticised  as  being  flawed  and
         surprising. However, the Rules refer to lawful  residence  and  the
         applicant was sentenced to a three year term  of  imprisonment  for
         supply of drugs in 2011 and he absconded from the reporting  centre
         on two occasions in 2014.   Further,  given  these  matters  it  is
         difficult to construct a case that the applicant  is  socially  and
         culturally integrated."

28.  The application for a stay was renewed  orally  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gleeson. She granted a stay on the  basis  that  the  balance  of
    convenience was not  in  favour  of  removal  of  the  applicant  while
    judicial review proceedings were proceeding.

29.  The judicial review proceedings were then considered,  on  the  papers,
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul who granted permission in the following
    terms:

         "It is arguable that for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds,
         matters which the applicant sought to raise  could  not  have  been
         raised under the older formulation of the Immigration  Rules  which
         were superseded on 28 July 2014; it may also be arguable  that  the
         entry into force of Section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 permits additional issues  to  be  raised  that
         could not previously have been raised."

30.  The application referred to the determination of the Tribunal  and  the
    fact that it had been conceded in the  First-tier  that  the  applicant
    could not bring himself within the exceptions  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.  However, it  was  argued  that  paragraphs  399  and  399A  were
    potentially applicable. Reference was made to the representations  made
    by the applicant's solicitors on 19 June 2014 and it  was  pointed  out
    that those had been made before Section 117 of the Immigration Act 2014
    and the new formulation of Immigration Rules 399  and  399A  had  taken
    effect and that these had changed the criteria from those that  applied
    when the deportation  appeal  had  been  considered.   The  application
    referred to the supporting letter from the applicant's  ex-partner  and
    her assertion that  arrangements  had  been  made  between  them  which
    benefited them both as parents in that DB would stay with  Miss  Taylor
    during the week and with the applicant over the weekend.   Miss  Taylor
    emphasised that she did not want her child to grow up without a  father
    and she did not want her to be labelled as another fatherless child.

31.  The grounds referred to the provisions  of  paragraph  390  emphasising
    that a relevant issue was the grounds on which the order had been made.
    The exemptions set out in paragraph 399 and 399A had changed: the  Rule
    now referred to issues as to whether or not it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the child to remain in the UK without the  person  who  was  to  be
    deported and it was emphasised that the requirement that  there  needed
    to be no other family member who was able to care  for  the  child  had
    been dropped from the Rule.

32.  With regard to the provisions of paragraph 399A emphasis was placed  on
    the fact that the rules had changed and now applied a  different  test,
    that of whether or not a person had been lawfully resident  in  Britain
    for most of his life. It was argued that that  was  applicable  in  the
    applicant's case and this contrasted with the previous  requirement  of
    twenty years' residence which had been dropped.  Moreover, referring to
    the provisions of Section 117C of the 2014 Act, reference was  made  to
    Exception 1 which would apply where  the  claimant  had  been  lawfully
    resident for most of his life, was socially and  culturally  integrated
    into Britain and there were significant obstacles  to  his  integration
    into the country to which it was proposed he should be deported.

33.  It was submitted that the decision maker had erred  in  the  assessment
    of whether or not the applicant's relationship with his daughter  meant
    that he was within the terms of the exemption now set out in  paragraph
    399 and had further erred in concluding  that  the  applicant  had  not
    spent more than half his life lawfully in the United Kingdom.   It  was
    also stated that the decision maker had erred in assessing  the  rights
    of the applicant under Article 8 of the ECHR.

34.  The grounds went on to argue that the decision  to  certify  was  wrong
    because the basis of the claim relied on matters which, by  definition,
    could not have been previously raised. The  new  provisions  regulating
    deportation had a different effect from those which had been  in  force
    at the time of the hearing of the applicant's  appeal.  In  particular,
    there were the issues of whether or not there would be undue  harshness
    in the separation of the applicant from his daughter and whether or not
    the applicant was socially and culturally integrated into  Britain  and
    it was argued that therefore it was wrong to certify these  new  issues
    which had not been subject to a previous determination.  It was  stated
    that the decision maker had not properly  considered  the  question  of
    whether or not  there  would  be  undue  harshness  in  separating  the
    applicant from his daughter and that the issue of whether DB lived with
    her mother who was her primary carer was not the determinative issue in
    that assessment.

35.  It was further argued that the questions set out in  paragraph  399  or
    in Section 117C on the issue of undue harshness on both  the  applicant
    and on his daughter for him to  be  deported  and  separated  from  his
    daughter required a high level of justification if it was expected that
    she should go with him. It was stated that the decision that it was not
    unduly harsh for the applicant to be separated from  his  daughter  was
    contrary to the evidence.

36.  The grounds further went on to state that the applicant  had  lived  in
    Britain for more than half his life and therefore it was wrong for  the
    decision maker to state that he had not been lawfully present for  most
    of his life.  It  was  also  argued  that  the  issue  of  whether  the
    applicant was socially and culturally integrated  should  be  separated
    from the fact that he had committed crimes here.  Emphasis  was  placed
    on the fact that he had arrived in Britain as a  child,  spoke  English
    and that his immediate family were all settled here. It was also argued
    that there would be difficulties in the  applicant  reintegrating  into
    Jamaica. It was therefore argued that the claim should  not  have  been
    certified both because reliance was placed on matters which  could  not
    have been previously raised because of the changes in the law but  also
    because the terms of the new provisions could be met.

37.  Before the hearing before me Mr  Haywood  lodged  a  skeleton  argument
    which to a large extent repeated what was in  the  initial  grounds  of
    application but also argued that the criteria set out by Stadlen J in J
    v SSHD [2009] EWHC 705 (Admin) had  not  been  met,  particularly  with
    regard to the second and fourth criteria - the Secretary of  State  had
    not properly used the discretion open to her when the decision had been
    certified.

38.  In his submissions  to  me  Mr  Haywood  emphasised  the  discretionary
    element in certification under Section 96 and referred  to  the  public
    law principles of fairness, he referred to the guidance in the judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Khan [2014] EWCA  Civ  88.  He  accepted  the
    importance of preventing repeat claims and the need  to  stop  argument
    about matters which should have been raised before, but  he  said  that
    there was a distinction in a case like this  where  there  had  been  a
    change in the law which was a fundamental change rather than one at the
    margins.

39.  He accepted that the Rules relating to deportation were intended to  be
    a complete code but said there were clear exceptions and the fact  that
    the applicant might or might not be successful in coming  within  those
    exceptions  was  not  the  relevant  matter  when   certification   was
    considered.  This was not a case where an attempt had  to  be  made  to
    stop the mischief of repeated applications.  He stated that he was  not
    trying to argue in these proceedings matters which might be put forward
    on appeal but only to show that  there  was  a  prima  facie  case  for
    finding that there should have been an in-country right of appeal.   He
    accepted that it could not be  argued  that  the  applicant  was  in  a
    relationship with his former partner but the relevant issue related  to
    his relationship with his daughter.  Again he stated that the Rules had
    changed significantly when they now referred to the issue  of   whether
    or not it was unduly harsh for the child to remain in  Britain  without
    the person who was to be deported.  There had been a fundamental  shift
    in the way in which exceptions to deportation had been set out and this
    was not something that could have been dealt with or indeed foreseen at
    a time when  the  applicant's  appeal  had  been  heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

40.   Moreover,  paragraph  390  refers  to  the  requirement  to   consider
    representations made and indeed all relevant factors.

41.  He emphasised that paragraph  392  referred  to  all  relevant  factors
    which should be considered.  It was his assertion that  the  letter  of
    refusal did not properly consider all issues  and  that  therefore  the
    exercise of discretion had not been completed.

42.  With regard to the merits of the claim, he referred to the letter  from
    Miss Taylor and the important role which the applicant  played  in  his
    daughter's life.  He also argued that the normal meaning of words to be
    used and where the Rule referred to "most of  his  life"  that  clearly
    meant more than half and that was the case of  the  applicant  who  had
    spent fifteen years in Britain and only twelve in Jamaica.

43.  In reply Miss Anderson relied on a detailed skeleton argument in  which
    she argued that what was important was to consider whether or  not  the
    outcome would be the same as it  had  been  in  the  past.   While  the
    statutory prohibition under Section 84 1-3 of the Criminal Justice  and
    Courts Act 2015 on granting  relief  where  it  would  not  change  the
    outcome for an applicant does not apply to cases where applications for
    judicial review were lodged before 13  April  2015,  relief  was  still
    discretionary and should not be granted  where  the  outcome  was  very
    likely to be the same. She stated  that  that  was  the  position  both
    procedurally and substantively.

44.  She referred to the judgment in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192
    which made it clear that the issue of proportionality under  Article  8
    of the ECHR should reach the same answer whether or not the  issue  was
    considered discretely or under the Rules since the Rules did not change
    the basic Article 8 assessment.  She stated that the Upper Tribunal and
    the First-tier Tribunal had considered all the facts  relevant  to  the
    proportionality assessment in relation to  the  applicant's  child  and
    private life and the  pressing  public  interest  in  deportation  when
    finding that deportation was not disproportionate pursuant to Article 8
    of the ECHR.

45.  In any event she argued that deportation remained lawful and  therefore
    mandatory under the automatic deportation  regime.  There  was  nothing
    that had been  omitted  either  in  the  determinations  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal or indeed in the letter of refusal.

46.  She concluded that the codification of Article 8  of  the  ECHR  within
    the Immigration Rules had not been intended to make it possible  for  a
    foreign criminal to obtain a finding that removal was  disproportionate
    where that was not achieved under a "free form" Article 8 assessment or
    indeed under the earlier version of the Rules.  The Court of Appeal  in
    repeated judgments, including that in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550,
    had made it clear that Parliament had emphasised the importance  to  be
    accorded to the deportation of foreign criminals.   She referred to the
    finding of the Upper Tribunal which was:-

         "... that on the basis of the seriousness of the offence alone, the
         panel was entitled to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  did  on
         proportionality of the decision to deport the appellant."

47.  She stated that decision had been reached after a proper  consideration
    of all relevant matters and that the only matter  which  had  not  been
    considered by the Upper Tribunal was that relating to  the  applicant's
    mental health, but she pointed out that clearly that could not meet the
    high test set out in N v UK 2008 ECHR 26565/05  or  Bensaid  2001  ECHR
    44599/98 as applied by the Court of Appeal in GS  (India)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40 - the medical exception could  really  only  apply  to  deathbed
    cases.

48.  Having set out the factual background she stated  that  the  driver  in
    deportation was the public interest as set out in  Section  32  of  the
    2007 Act.

49.  She argued that the application of the exceptions  in  Section  33  did
    not prevent the making of a deportation order.

50.  She referred to Section 117C of the  2002  Act  which  emphasised  that
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.  Subsection
    5 set out exception 2 which applied where a claimant had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the
    effect of his deportation on the  partner  or  child  would  be  unduly
    harsh.

51.   She  asserted  that  it  was  relevant  to  note  that  even  if   the
    certification under Section 96 was quashed, the applicant's claim could
    be certified under Section 94(B) and therefore he would not have an in-
    country right of appeal.

52.  She argued that the fact that the statutory framework had  changed  was
    not a matter within the contemplation of the guidelines set out in J  -
    what was relevant was the substance of the claim.

53.  She stated that the applicant had not attempted  to  argue  that  there
    would be any material change in  the  factual  position  regarding  his
    daughter and that really the only new material related  to  his  mental
    health.  The Secretary of State had gone into all relevant factors.

54.  She referred to the various judgments of the Court of Appeal  including
    that in LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310  regarding the  issue  of  what
    would make deportation "unduly harsh".

55.  With regard to the issue of whether or  not  the  applicant  has  spent
    most of his life here, she stated that had Parliament wished  the  Rule
    to relate to more than half of the applicant's life that it what  would
    have been put into the statute. A period must exclude a time in  prison
    rather than an arithmetical approach.

56.  She argued furthermore that  the  applicant  was  not  integrated  into
    Britain and there was no reason why he could not return to Jamaica  and
    make a life for himself there. No positive obstacles to his return  had
    been put forward.

57.  She went on, in her oral submissions, to emphasise that changes in  law
    could not prevent certification in a repeat appeal. She relied  on  the
    judgment of Lord Neuberger in ZA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  926
    where he had stated that:

         "Immigration and asylum have  been  the  subject  of  a  large  and
         increasing,  almost  bewildering,  volume  of   legislation   (both
         statutory and regulatory) and of litigation (both in tribunals  and
         courts) over the past 40 years. One of the problems that has had to
         be addressed is that of renewed claims, that is claims for  asylum,
         leave to remain and the like, made by people who have  already  had
         their claims rejected.  On the one hand it is only  fair  that  the
         opportunity to make such a renewed claim  should  be  available  to
         those who have good reason for making them - normally because of  a
         significant unforeseen change in  circumstances  since  a  previous
         claim was made and rejected. On the other hand it must be right  to
         shut out renewed reported factual claims which either raise no  new
         grounds or are hopeless."

58.  She referred to the importance of legal certainty  and  the  importance
    that legal proceedings should not lead to multiple claims on  the  same
    facts. Certification was a support mechanism to stop that happening.

59.  She emphasised that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  in  their  determination
    considered all  relevant  factors  and  that  the  primary  issue  when
    considering undue harshness was the taking away of  a  child  from  the
    primary carer.  Such was clearly not the case here.

60.  In reply Mr Haywood emphasised that the certification power should  not
    be exercised routinely because it was one of a range  of  powers  which
    should be considered and where discretion should be applied.

Discussion
61. I consider that it is of use to set out the legal framework in this
    appeal. Section 96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    states:

    "96 Earlier right of appeal
    (1) A person may not  bring  an  appeal  under  section  82  against  a
    decision ("the new decision")
    if the Secretary of State or an immigration officer certifies-
    (a) that the person was notified  of  a  right  of  appeal  under  that
    section against another decision ("the old decision") (whether  or  not
    an appeal was brought and whether or not any appeal  brought  has  been
    determined),
    (b) that the claim or application to which  the  new  decision  relates
    relies on a  ground that could have been raised in  an  appeal  against
    the old decision, and
    (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or  the  immigration
    officer, there is no satisfactory reason for that   ground  not  having
    been raised in an appeal against the old decision.
    (2) A person may not bring an appeal under section 82 if the  Secretary
    of State or an immigration officer certifies-
    (a) that the person has received a notice under section 120(2),
    (b) that the appeal relies on a ground that should have been,  but  has
    not been, raised in a statement made under section 120(2) or (5), and
    (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or  the  immigration
    officer, there is no satisfactory reason for  that  ground  not  having
    been raised in a statement under section 120(2) or (5).
    (4) In subsection (1) "notified"  means  notified  in  accordance  with
    regulations under section 105.
    (5) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to prevent a person's right of appeal
    whether or not he has been outside the United Kingdom since an  earlier
    right of appeal arose or since a  requirement  under  section  120  was
    imposed.
    (6) In this section a  reference  to  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)
    includes a reference to an  appeal  under  section  2  of  the  Special
    Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) which is  or  could  be
    brought by reference to an appeal under section 82(1).
    (7) A certificate under subsection (1) or (2) shall have no  effect  in
    relation to an appeal instituted
    before the certificate is issued. Notes


62.  It is accepted that the appropriate legal framework is that set out  in
    the judgement of Stadlen J in J v  SSHD  [2009]  EWHC  704  (Admin)  as
    follows:


    "Under Section 96 (1)  and  (2)  before  the  Secretary  of  State  can
    lawfully decide to certify, she has to go though a four stage  process.
    First she must be satisfied that the person was notified of a right  of
    appeal under Section 82 against another immigration  decision  (Section
    96(1)) or that the person received a notice under Section 120 by virtue
    of an application other than that to which the new decision relates  or
    by virtue of a decision other than the new  decision  (Section  96(2)).
    Second she must conclude that the claim or application to which the new
    decision relates relies on a matter that could have been raised  in  an
    appeal against the old decision (Section  96(1)(b))  or  that  the  new
    decision relates to an application or claim which relies  on  a  matter
    that should have been but has not been raised in a  statement  made  in
    response to that notice (Section 96(2)(b)). Third  she  must  form  the
    opinion that there is no satisfactory reason for that matter not having
    been raised in an appeal against the old decision (Section 96 (1)  (c))
    or that there is no satisfactory reason for that matter not having been
    raised in a statement made in  response  to  that  notice  (Section  96
    (2)(c)). Fourth she must address her mind to whether, having regard  to
    all relevant factors, she should exercise her discretion to certify and
    conclude that it is appropriate to exercise the discretion in favour of
    certification.

63.  It is also useful to set out the changes in the rules and to the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    Section 117(C) of that
    act states:



    117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals
    (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
    (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
    (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
    (4) Exception 1 applies where-
    (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  C's
    life,
    (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and
    (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration  into
    the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
    (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying  partner,or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
    (6) In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires    deportation    unless    there    are    very    compelling
    circumstances,over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
    (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

64.  Finally I set out the changes to the rules - I have  used  the  tracked
    changes as they assist in showing what the changes actually  were.  The
    relevant rules are paragraphs 390, 398 and 399A. They state:

      "Revocation of deportation order
      390. An application for revocation of  a  deportation  order  will  be
      considered in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
      following:
      the grounds on which the order was made;
      any representations made in support of revocation;
      the interests of  the  community,  including  the  maintenance  of  an
      effective immigration control;
      the  interests  of  the   applicant,   including   any   compassionate
      circumstances.
      390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the  Secretary  of  State  or  Entry
      Clearance  Officer  assessing  the   application   DELETED   (HC   760
      13.12.2012) will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
      if it does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
      public  interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation  order   will   be
      outweighed by other factors.




      Deportation and Article 8 (HC 760 13.12.2012)
      398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
      the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
      and
           (a)the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest(28.07.2014 HC 532) because they
      have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
           (b)the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest(28.07.2014 HC 532) because they
      have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of less than  4  years  but  at  least  12
      months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
      the public good and in the public interest(28.07.2014 HC 532) because,
      in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has  caused
      serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
      disregard for the law,
        the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
      paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be  in
      exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
      be outweighed by other factors. DELETED (28.07.2014 HC 532) the public
      interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
      there are very compelling circumstances over and above those described
      in paragraphs 399 and 399A. (28.07.2014 HC 532)
      399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies  if
      -
      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
      child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
      the child is a British Citizen; or
      the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least  the  7  years
      immediately preceding the date of the  immigration  decision;  and  in
      either case        (a)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the UK; and DELETED (28.07.2014 HC 532) it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for the child to live in the country to which the person  is  to
      be deported (28.07.2014 HC 532)
           there is no other family member who is  able  to  care  for  the
           child in the UK DELETED (28.07.2014 HC 532) it would  be  unduly
           harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the  person  who
           is to be deported (28.07.2014 HC 532)
      399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies  if
      -
      the person has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20  years
      immediately  preceding  the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including
      social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to
      go if required to leave the UK; or
      the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half  of  his
      life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the  date  of
      the immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and
      he has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
      to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the  UK.  DELETED
      (28.07.2014 HC 532)
      (a)
      the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life;
      and


      (b)
      he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


      (c)
      there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into  the
      country to which it is proposed he is deported. (28.07.2014 HC 532)
      399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be granted
      for  a  period  DELETED  (HC  760  13.12.2012)  for  periods  (HC  760
      13.12.2012) not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be given subject
      to such conditions  as  the  Secretary  of  State  deems  appropriate.
      (09.07.2012 HC 194)Where a person who has previously  been  granted  a
      period of leave under paragraph 399B would not fall for refusal  under
      paragraph 322(1C), indefinite leave to remain may be granted. (HC  760
      13.12.2012) DELETED (28.07.2014 HC 532)


65.  I have considered this application  in  the  light  of  the  structured
    approach set out in J.  Clearly the first condition is met in that  the
    applicant was given, and exercised a right of appeal. I note  that  the
    determination of the appeal dealt with the likelihood of  re-offending.
    This second issue - whether or not the new decision relates to a matter
    which could have been raised in the appeal and  the  third  question  -
    whether or not there is any satisfactory  reason  for  the  matter  not
    being raised are, I consider, the focus of this application.

66. These issues relate to the increasing involvement of the applicant  with
    his daughter and the change in the rules  which  have  brought  in  the
    issue of whether or not the deportation of the  applicant would lead to
    unduly harsh consequences for his daughter, and also to the  change  in
    section 117C relating to the applicant's own circumstances in  that  he
    has now lived in Britain for more than half of his life as well as  the
    fact that he suffers from depression. However, the issue before  me  is
    whether or not there is any substance in these changes which would mean
    that it was inappropriate to certify this application.

67. Whilst it was the case put forward by Mr Haywood that the writer of  the
    letter of refusal had not properly engaged with the submissions made, I
    consider that that argument is clearly flawed.  The letter setting  out
    the  reasons  for  refusing  the  application  for  revocation  of  the
    deportation order and further giving reasons for the  certification  of
    the claim under Section 96 was clear and thorough. It simply cannot  be
    said that it did not deal  with  all  relevant  factors  including  the
    applicant's criminality, the determination in the First-tier  and  that
    in the Upper Tribunal and the relationship of  the  applicant  and  his
    daughter.  The letter also dealt with the one new  matter  which  arose
    which related to  the  applicant's  hospitalisation  after  a  bout  of
    depression but the decision of the respondent  thereon  was  clear  and
    logical.  A proper  enquiry  had  been  made  as  to  what  drugs  were
    available  in  Jamaica  and  furthermore  the  reality  is   that   the
    applicant's claim that his mental health was such as  to  amount  to  a
    claim under the ECHR was simply unarguable, particularly given the high
    threshold in such cases.


68.  While it was argued that the changes in the Rules and statue were  such
    that there had been a change of circumstances which would mean that the
    claim should not have been certified I accept Miss Anderson's  argument
    that it is  clear  that  the  overriding  intention  of  Parliament  in
    enacting Sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act and in setting out relevant
    factors to be considered in Article 8 claims of deportees in the  Rules
    and  finally  in  statute  are,  in  effect,  all  of  a  piece  -  the
    codification of the weight to be placed on the public interest  in  the
    deportation of criminals and furthermore how the approach to an Article
    8 claim made by a foreign  criminal  to  avoid  deportation  should  be
    considered.

69.  I cannot see that these change in the rules and in  statute  could,  of
    themselves, lead to a situation where the  discretionary  powers  under
    Section 96 of the 2002 Act could not be exercised by the respondent  in
    deciding to certify a claim when the  purpose  of  the  changes  is  so
    evident.

70.  I am fortified in that conclusion when I  consider  the  changes  there
    have been to the Rules and the issue of whether or not  the  Rules  and
    the coming into force of Section 117 have led to such a change that new
    issues have arisen which require further litigation.  I place weight on
    the decision of Lord Neuberger in ZN where he emphasised the  necessity
    of reaching finality in immigration appeals.

71.  It would, of course, be  a  nonsense  if  by  changing  the  Rules  and
    bringing the provisions of Section 117C on to the statue book it  could
    be argued that the Secretary  of  State  was  attempting  to  assist  a
    foreign criminal to remain.

72.  When I consider the changes in the Rules I note the  changes  on  which
    Mr Haywood relied.   Firstly,  he  referred  to  the  position  of  the
    applicant's daughter. His argument was two fold. Firstly, there  was  a
    change of circumstances regarding the applicant's relationship with his
    daughter in that he is now much more involved with his daughter.  I  do
    not consider that that is a matter which could lead to the decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal being unseated.   The  reality  is  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal did properly consider the applicant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter and no change of substance has taken place. It  is  still  the
    case that the applicant's daughter is aged 4 and for much of  her  life
    the applicant was in prison. He does not live with  her  and  does  not
    have a relationship with her mother who is her primary carer. Secondly,
    Mr Haywood relied on the change in the rules and the issue  of  whether
    or not it would be unduly harsh for her should the applicant be removed
    - the change being where  a  British  child  could  not  be  reasonably
    expected to leave Britain and there was no other family member who  was
    able to care for the child (as in the original Rules) and the  position
    under the Rules which came into force in 2014  which  referred  to  the
    test of unduly harshness for the child to live in the country to  which
    the person is to be deported and where it would be unduly harsh for the
    child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

73.  While I accept the requirement for there to be no other  carer  in  the
    United Kingdom has gone, the reality is that the test of whether or not
    it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain without the person who
    is to be deported is a very high test, and the fact that the  child  in
    this case lives with her mother and has never lived  with  her  father,
    albeit she now spends weekends with him, could  not  possibly  reach  a
    threshold of being unduly harsh. Importing into  that  threshold  there
    must be  a  proportionality  exercise  which  takes  into  account  the
    father's conduct.

74.  Mr Haywood also referred  to  Exception  2  set  out  in  Section  117C
    regarding relevant private life factors  which  should  be  taken  into
    account. The Rule does now refer to an applicant living in Britain  for
    most of his life. I agree however, with Miss Anderson that that must be
    a qualitative decision rather than a mathematical one and that the fact
    that the applicant has spent time in prison should be discounted. Even,
    however, if I am  wrong  in  that  regard,  the  reality  is  that  the
    applicant cannot meet the other requirements of that exception.

75.  It is simply unarguable to  state  that  a  man  who  has  produced  no
    evidence of working here, has no extant relationship  here  other  than
    the fact that he has a daughter in Britain and other relatives, can  be
    said to have integrated  into  British  society  when  one  takes  into
    account the series of crimes which he  has  committed  -  crimes  which
    clearly militate against his integration into this  society  and  place
    him outside society here.  Moreover, the reality is that there has been
    nothing put forward to indicate that he would not be able to  integrate
    into Jamaica where he speaks the language and where he has some  skills
    which he can use, where he has visited in the past and indeed where his
    former partner was visiting when attempts were made to detain  him.  He
    does have a father there, although he states  that  his  father  is  an
    alcoholic, but there is nothing  to  indicate  that  he  has  no  other
    relatives in Jamaica. It simply  cannot  be  said  that  he  meets  the
    requirements to qualify under that exception.

76.  There is therefore nothing of  substance  which  would  mean  that  any
    appeal now would succeed and  I  conclude  that  there  is  nothing  of
    substance which indicates that the second and third requirements of the
    judgment in J are not met.

77.  I also consider that, taking into account,  the  applicant's  behaviour
    when released from prison and his repeated attempts to  abscond  or  to
    defeat being removed mitigates any argument that the respondent  should
    have used her discretionary powers to grant  the  applicant  a  further
    right of appeal.   The reason that he was not deported after his appeal
    was unsuccessful in the Upper Tribunal was because he evaded detention.
    There is nothing to show that  the  respondent  should  have  used  her
    discretion differently. The fourth condition in J is therefore met.

78.  Taking all these factors into account I conclude  that  the  conclusion
    of the Secretary of State to refuse  the  application  and  further  to
    certify the claim under Section 96 was one which was unarguably open to
    her - there is nothing which would  mean  that  certification  was  not
    appropriate.

79.  I therefore dismiss this application for judicial review. ~~~~0~~~~
