

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of JM) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(Statelessness: Part 14 of HC 395) IJR [2015] UKUT 00676 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                           22 September 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE aLLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARKUS QC
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARFON-JONES

                                   Between

                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF jM)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Berry, instructed by Turpin Miller, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

The child, born in the United Kingdom, of a foreign national, who  seeks  to
be recognised as stateless, but who  can  under  the  law  of  the  parent's
nationality, obtain citizenship of that country by  descent  by  registering
their birth, may properly be regarded as admissible to  that  country  ,  as
set out at paragraph 403(c) of  HC  395.   Though  a  greater  intensity  of
scrutiny is appropriate in a case such as this, it  remains  the  case  that
the decision that an individual is not stateless can  only  be  impugned  on
public law principles.





                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE ALLEN: This is an application for judicial review of the  Respondent's
    decision of 27 May 2014  refusing  to  recognise  the  applicant  as  a
    stateless person.  Permission was refused on the papers but was granted
    by Judges Allen and Arfon-Jones on oral renewal.


2.   The applicant is a child, born on 20 March 2013 in the United  Kingdom.
     His mother is a Zimbabwean  national.   His  father  is  a  Portuguese
    citizen, a Mr F.  When Mr F learnt  that  the  applicant's  mother  was
    pregnant with the applicant he wished the pregnancy  to  be  terminated
    but she did not agree and this led to a breakdown in the  relationship.
    He is said to have made it clear that he does not wish to  be  involved
    in his son's life and will not assist in obtaining his registration  as
    a Portuguese citizen.


3.   The application under paragraph 403 of HC 395 was made under  cover  of
    a letter of 6 December 2013.  Reference was made to the  terms  of  the
    Zimbabwean Constitution, noting that  a  child  born  to  a  Zimbabwean
    parent outside Zimbabwe was required to  register  in  order  to  be  a
    Zimbabwean citizen by descent.  The writer of the letter said that they
    had contacted the Zimbabwean High Commission to request confirmation of
    the terms of the Constitution but had received  no  response.   It  was
    said that it  was  clear  that  the  applicant  was  not  a  Zimbabwean
    national, and nor did he have any right to  Portuguese  nationality  as
    under the Portuguese Constitution registration was  a  requirement  for
    nationality and as set out above the father refused to assist in making
    any application to the Portuguese authorities and without  his  consent
    the applicant could not register as a Portuguese national.  It was said
    that as the applicant was not entitled to any nationality there was  no
    prospect that he would be admitted to another country if  removed  from
    the United Kingdom.


4.   In her decision letter the Respondent set out the  relevant  provisions
    (paragraphs 401 and 403 of HC 395), and briefly rehearsed  the  history
    set out above.  She noted that there were  no  valid  reasons  why  the
    applicant's mother could not register his birth as required  under  the
    Constitution and said that at the time she had no basis  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and there were no valid reasons why  she  could  not
    return to Zimbabwe with the applicant and the fact that she had  chosen
    to remain in the United Kingdom with no status instead of returning  to
    Zimbabwe did not render him stateless.  It was said that the  applicant
    was entitled to make an application to be registered  as  a  Zimbabwean
    national and though his mother's Zimbabwean passport had  expired  this
    could  be  renewed  at  the  Zimbabwean  Embassy  in  London.   It  was
    considered that he was clearly a Zimbabwean citizen and  was  therefore
    not considered to be stateless.


5.   The Respondent then reminded herself of the  terms  of  paragraphs  401
    and 403 of HC 395 and concluded that in light of all the evidence above
    the applicant did not qualify for leave to remain as a stateless person
    under paragraph 403 of HC 395 as he was not considered to be stateless.
     He had failed to  demonstrate  that  he  was  a  person  who  was  not
    considered as a national by any state under the operation  of  its  law
    and had failed to satisfy the requirements of Article 1(1) of the  1954
    United Nations Convention relating to the Status of  Stateless  Persons
    and paragraphs 403(b), (c) and (d) of HC 395.  It was not accepted that
    he was a stateless person as defined within the Rules and  he  had  not
    met the requirements to  be  granted  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
    stateless person.


6.   In the grounds, in essence, it  was  argued  that  the  Respondent  was
    wrong as a matter of law to hold that the applicant was not a stateless
    person on  the  basis  that  he  was  a  Zimbabwean  national,  drawing
    attention to the terms of the Zimbabwean Constitution and also what had
    been said by the Supreme Court in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Al-Jedda [2013] UKSC 62 (hereafter Al-Jedda).


7.   Mr Berry developed the points made in the grounds and the  points  also
    that had previously been made in oral  submissions  at  the  permission
    stage.   He  reminded  us  of  the  legal   framework   including   the
    relationship between the 1954 United Nations Convention relating to the
    Status of Stateless Persons ("the Stateless  Persons  Convention")  and
    the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of  Refugees  ("the  Refugee
    Convention").  The Stateless  Persons  Convention  did  not  provide  a
    regularisation mechanism but this could be done by states and this  had
    been done in Part 14 of the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Berry  referred  to
    the UNHCR's Handbook on Protection of Stateless Persons at paragraph 50
    which said the following:


         "An individual's nationality is to be assessed as at  the  time  of
         determination of eligibility under  the  1954  Convention.   It  is
         neither a historic nor a predictive exercise.  The question  to  be
         answered is whether,  at  the  point  of  making  an  Article  1(1)
         determination, an individual  is  a  national  of  the  country  or
         countries in question.  Therefore,  if  an  individual  is  partway
         through a process for acquiring nationality  but  those  procedures
         are yet to be completed, he  or  she  cannot  be  considered  as  a
         national for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the  1954  Convention.
         Similarly, where requirements or procedures for  loss,  deprivation
         or renunciation of nationality have only been  partially  fulfilled
         or completed, the individual is still a national for  the  purposes
         of the stateless person definition."


8.   This guidance had been incorporated,  word  for  word,  into  the  Home
    Office guidance on "Applications for Leave to  Remain  as  a  Stateless
    Person" dated 1 May 2013, which was also quoted at paragraph 34 of  Al-
    Jedda.  It was therefore the case that as  a  matter  of  domestic  and
    international law the question arose for determination at the moment of
    decision.  The argument on behalf of  the  Respondent  that  it  was  a
    question of taking a valid step was hopeless  as  it  was  inconsistent
    with the Home Office's own guidance.  The requirement that the birth be
    registered was a  Zimbabwean  constitutional  requirement  and  not  an
    evidential rule.  Mr Berry accepted that the expert  report  which  had
    been provided was postdecision and did not go to the Respondent's error
    of law.  It was, however, he argued, relevant to relief in the exercise
    of discretion.


9.   As regards the wording of the particular  Rule,  and  the  use  of  the
    words "is recognised" at paragraph 403(b), it should be noted  that  it
    was a question of  recognition  rather  than  making  the  applicant  a
    stateless person, and the same approach existed in  asylum  cases.   It
    was a question of recognition that the person fell within Article 1  of
    the Stateless Persons Convention.  It was not subjective and was to  be
    interpreted consistently and in  good  faith  in  accordance  with  the
    ordinary meaning of the words.


10.  Mr Berry referred also to the question of the standard  of  review  and
    argued that, as set out in Pham v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKSC 19 and also in R (Lord Carlile) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] UKSC 40, a  greater  intensity  of
    review was appropriate in a case such  as  this  where  the  court  had
    institutional expertise and the constitutional  proprieties  concerning
    the separation of  powers  between  the  branches  of  government  were
    respected.  It was important to bear in mind that there was  no  longer
    insistence on uniform application of the rigid test of rationality  but
    it depended very much on the context.  It was appropriate to impose  an
    exacting and intense standard of review in a case such as this where it
    involved a question of whether the United Kingdom  was  complying  with
    its international obligations, particularly where that  obligation  was
    provided for in domestic law and policy and involved  an  extension  of
    surrogate protection for a person subject to the  UK  jurisdiction  who
    lacked any country to call  his  own  and  was  part  of  a  corpus  of
    international human  rights  treaties,  not  just  governing  relations
    between states but providing rights upon which individuals might  rely.
    There was no need for deference to the executive, and the Tribunal  had
    extensive institutional expertise.  The Supreme Court had  relied  upon
    the UNHCR interpretation of the treaty without demur.


11.  Mr Berry argued that nothing material turned on the use  of  subjective
    language in  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  point  was  made  both  at
    paragraph 30 in Al-Jedda and in Secretary of State  for  Education  and
    Science v Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council [1977] AC 1014 at  1047
    that it was necessary for the court to enquire as to whether the  facts
    to be evaluated by the Secretary of State existed and  had  been  taken
    into account, and whether the judgment had been made upon a proper self-
    direction as to those facts.  The Secretary of State could  not  simply
    apply her own view to the situation.  She could not say that it was the
    applicant's fault because he had not  taken  a  step  as  a  matter  of
    recognition.


12.  It was the case that section 40(4A)(c) of the British  Nationality  Act
    1981 had been put in place to address the outcome of  Al-Jedda  but  no
    change correspondingly had been made in the Immigration Rules.  The use
    of the  term  "admissible"  at  paragraph  403(c)  was  not  about  the
    acquisition of nationality but whether the person was  returnable,  for
    example if they were not a national but had a visa  or  leave  of  some
    kind.  An example might be a Kuwaiti Bidoon who if  documented,  albeit
    not a national, would potentially be returnable to Kuwait.  There was a
    need for an evidential basis  for  a  person  to  be  concluded  to  be
    admissible otherwise it would amount to a judicial black hole.


13.  As regards the point that the Secretary of State would  make  that  the
    child had a constitutional right to be a  Zimbabwean  citizen  and  his
    mother could register the birth, it was a question of whether he  would
    get an immigration document and it was not a given  that  he  would  be
    admitted simply as a child of a Zimbabwean national.  The same was true
    in the United Kingdom.  For example a person had a right to join  their
    spouse but there were also financial requirements.  At the  moment  the
    mother was undocumented and there was no evidence of  how  registration
    of birth operated in  Zimbabwe.   This  tied  in  also  with  paragraph
    403(d).  The relevant question was whether the applicant was  stateless
    today and not whether he should  be  granted  citizenship.   It  was  a
    question of temporary relief.  It was not a predictive exercise, as was
    clear from the UNHCR guidelines on statelessness and  the  Respondent's
    guidance.  There had been no response to the enquiries  made  with  the
    Zimbabwean Embassy, so the  matter  did  not  fall  foul  of  paragraph
    403(d).


14.  If the person were stateless then the extra limb  added  by  the  Rules
    added nothing.  They could not sit on their hands,  but  that  had  not
    been done, as the constitutional provision had been provided  and  also
    an expert opinion.  The UNHCR guidelines  and  Al-Jedda  could  not  be
    reversed.  Admissibility could not be conflated with statelessness.


15.  In his submissions Mr Malik focused on four particular points.


16.  The first  was  that  the  Respondent's  decision  as  to  whether  the
    applicant qualified under paragraph 403 could  be  challenged  only  on
    Wednesbury grounds, and hence the applicant in a judicial review  claim
    could not rely on evidence not before the decision-maker at the time of
    decision.  This was not controversial in general terms,  but  Mr  Malik
    argued that what was relied on in Pham and Lord Carlile was refuted  by
    what had been said by the Court of Appeal in Giri [2015] EWCA  Civ  784
    where the court made it clear that it was a Wednesbury challenge  only.
    It was clear that there was a contrast to  be  made  in  respect  of  a
    decision under the Rules and one under a statute.   The  approach  with
    regard to section 40 adopted  in  Al-Jedda  could  not  be  adopted  in
    respect of a decision under the Rules because of  the  distinction  set
    out at paragraphs 19 and 20 in Giri.  In addition Mr Malik relied  upon
    what was said at paragraph 32 in Giri about the proper  approach  in  a
    rationality challenge.  There Richards LJ had  said  that  he  did  not
    accept that the relevant question was anything other  than  whether  it
    was reasonably open to the decision-maker on the material before him to
    find  that  deception  had  been  used.   It  was  not  a  question  of
    proportionality but a question  as  to  whether  it  was  open  to  the
    Secretary of State on the material before her to conclude as  she  did.
    There was nothing in the Lord Carlile case that  undermined  that.   It
    concerned a Convention right and it was concluded that it was  for  the
    reviewing court to decide whether there was  a  breach  and  issues  of
    proportionality but that was not the instant case.  That had involved a
    statutory discretion to exclude from the United Kingdom, not a decision
    under the Immigration Rules.


17.  Mr Malik's second point was that on a proper construction of  paragraph
    403(b) the applicant had to satisfy the Secretary  of  State  not  only
    that he was stateless but also that there were good reasons for him  to
    be recognised as such for the purposes of a grant of leave  to  remain.
    The proper  approach  was  set  out  in  Mahad  [2009]  UKSC  16.   The
    Immigration Rules were not to be construed  strictly  but  sensibly  in
    accordance with the normal meaning of the words used.  The question was
    what the Secretary of State must have intended when she formulated  the
    Rules.  IDIs were not usually to be used to construe  the  words  of  a
    particular Rule.  Mr Berry's argument would lead to  an  abuse  of  the
    Rules and it could not be assumed that the Secretary of State would  so
    intend.  There had to be a reason why the word "recognised"  was  used.
    It was not simply a matter of saying a person was stateless.  It should
    be contrasted with the section of  the  Rules  at  Part  11  concerning
    asylum.  The reference  there  at  paragraph  334(ii)  was:  "he  is  a
    refugee" and it did not say that he was recognised as a refugee by  the
    Secretary of State.  If Mr Berry's construction was correct then anyone
    could come to the United Kingdom, have a child, fail  to  register  the
    birth and claim entitlement under the Rules referring to statelessness.
     It was potentially applicable to any child born in the United  Kingdom
    to a foreign national and could not be right.  It was  not  being  said
    that the applicant was stateless in general terms but that he could not
    be recognised as stateless under paragraph 403.   Mr  Berry's  argument
    was geared to whether the applicant was stateless as opposed to whether
    he should be recognised as stateless.  This  was  an  argument  in  the
    alternative.  The Secretary of State would contend that  the  applicant
    was not stateless  but  even  if  he  was  he  was  not  recognised  as
    stateless.


18.  The third point concerned paragraph 403(c).  It was the case  that  all
    the requirements of paragraph 403 were required to be met.  But even if
    the Secretary of State recognised  a  person  as  stateless  she  could
    refuse the application  if  not  satisfied  that  the  person  was  not
    admissible  to  another  country.   There  was  a  purpose   to   these
    provisions.  The Bidoon example did not assist  the  applicant  as  the
    scenario was completely different.  He was admissible to Zimbabwe  once
    his birth was registered.   There  was  no  reason  to  read  the  word
    "admissible" restrictively.


19.  Mr Malik's  final  point  concerned  paragraph  403(d).   This  was  an
    unusual provision and not to be found repeated elsewhere in the  Rules.
    It put an obligation on the applicant to gather and submit all relevant
    evidence because in such cases the Respondent  would  have  to  form  a
    view, for example as to the Zimbabwean domestic laws and  Constitution.
    If an application were put in without the relevant evidence that  alone
    could be a reason to  refuse.   The  decision  letter  addressed  this.
    There was nothing in the application to say why the applicant  was  not
    admissible to Zimbabwe and the refusal was correct.  It was too late to
    rely on the expert report as it had not been before the decision-maker.
     On the information before her the Respondent was clearly  entitled  to
    conclude that the applicant was not stateless.  It was not for a single
    reason but by reference to all of the provisions to which Mr Malik  had
    referred.


20.  By way of reply Mr Berry argued with regard to Mr Malik's  first  point
    that Giri was a post-study work  case,  not  a  human  rights  case  on
    statelessness and what was said in paragraph 32 might  be  relevant  in
    deception cases but was not the issue here.


21.  With regard to  the  second  point,  it  was  not  a  question  of  the
    applicant  being  a  migrant  but  he  was  a  child  born  within  the
    jurisdiction and it was a question of the protection of a  child.   The
    Respondent had a discretion as could be  seen  from  paragraph  405  to
    grant 30 months' leave as a maximum, so there was some flexibility  and
    it was a question of how the child could be protected where they had no
    status and were born in the United Kingdom.  He could be given leave up
    to the point when his mother could be removed as an unlawfully  present
    person and he could be removed in line and would therefore be protected
    and the Rules were sufficiently flexible.  There was no actual vice  in
    this case therefore.  The question was whether there was evidence  that
    the person was admissible at the moment.  There was also  the  question
    of what other basis  they  were  admissible  on  if  they  were  not  a
    national.   The  question  of  whether  the  appeal  arose  under   the
    Immigration Rules or under statute was  irrelevant.   If  there  was  a
    sound evidential basis for finding the applicant was stateless then  he
    was entitled to succeed.  The notion of "recognised" argued by Mr Malik
    could not be right and would introduce an element outside the Rules and
    the  guidance.   With  regard  to  paragraph  334,  although  the  word
    "recognised" was  not  used,  the  header  of  the  Rule  required  the
    Secretary of State to be satisfied and the  rest  followed  from  that.
    The language was similarly subjective.


22.  Otherwise on the "admissibility" point, the Tribunal  was  referred  to
    what was said in the Secretary of State's guidance.   It  was  accepted
    that this was not necessarily authoritative but it showed what  was  in
    the Respondent's mind.  There was an element of sweeping up at the  end
    of the letter with regard to what was said about subparagraphs (c)  and
    (d) of paragraph 403.  Entitlement to citizenship was not enough.


DISCUSSION


23.  We begin by setting out the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules,  the  Stateless   Persons   Convention,   and   the   Zimbabwean
    Constitution.


    (1)  HC 395
                                  "Part 14
                              Stateless Persons
         Definition of a stateless person
         401. For the purposes of this Part a stateless person is  a  person
                who:


                (a)    satisfies the requirements of  Article  1(1)  of  the
                    1954 United Nations Convention relating to the Status of
                    Stateless Persons, as a person who is not considered  as
                    a national by any State under the operation of its law;


                (b)    is in the United Kingdom; and


                (c)    is not  excluded  from  recognition  as  a  Stateless
                    person under paragraph 402.


         Requirements for limited leave to remain as a stateless person


         403. The requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
                a stateless person are that the applicant:


                (a)    has made a valid  application  to  the  Secretary  of
                    State for limited leave to remain as a stateless person;


                (b)    is recognised as a stateless person by the  Secretary
                    of State in accordance with paragraph 401;


                (c)    is not admissible to their country of former habitual
                    residence or any other country; and


                (d)    has obtained and submitted all  reasonably  available
                    evidence to enable the Secretary of State  to  determine
                    whether they are stateless.


         Refusal of limited leave to remain as a stateless person


         404. An applicant will be refused leave to  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom as a stateless person if:






                (a)    they do not meet the requirements of paragraph 403;


                (b)    there are reasonable  grounds  for  considering  that
                    they are:


                    (i)    a danger to the security of the United Kingdom;


                    (ii)   a danger  to  the  public  order  of  the  United
                           Kingdom; or


                (c)    their application would fall to be refused under  any
                    of the grounds set out in paragraph 322 of these Rules.


         Grant of limited leave to remain to a stateless person


         405. Where an applicant meets the  requirements  of  paragraph  403
                they may be granted limited leave to remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom for a period not exceeding 30 months."

    (2)  Stateless Persons Convention

           "Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons
                                  Chapter I
                             General Provisions

         Article 1 Definition of the term 'Stateless Person'


         1.   For the  purpose  of  this  Convention,  the  term  'stateless
             person' means a person who is not considered as a national  by
             any State under the operation of its law.


         2.   This Convention shall not apply:


             (i)  To persons who are at present receiving  from  organs  or
                    agencies of the United Nations  other  than  the  United
                    Nations High Commissioner  for  Refugees  protection  or
                    assistance so long as they are receiving such protection
                    or assistance;


             (ii)  To  persons  who  are  recognized   by   the   competent
                    authorities of the country  in  which  they  have  taken
                    residence as having the rights and obligations which are
                    attached to the possession of the  nationality  of  that
                    country;


             (iii)    To persons with respect to  whom  there  are  serious
                    reasons for considering that:


                    (a)    They have committed a crime against peace, a  war
                        crime, or a crime against humanity, as  defined  in
                        the international  instruments  drawn  up  to  make
                        provisions in respect of such crimes;


                    (b)    They have committed a serious non-political crime
                        outside the country of  their  residence  prior  to
                        their admission to that country;


                    (c)    They have been guilty of  acts  contrary  to  the
                        purposes and principles of the United Nations."


    (3)  Constitution of Zimbabwe

                "Constitution of Zimbabwe Amendment (No. 20)

         36   Citizenship by birth


             (1)  Persons are Zimbabwean citizens by  birth  if  they  were
                  born in Zimbabwe and, when they were born -


                  (a)  either their mother or their father was a  Zimbabwean
                      citizen; or


                  (b)  any of their grandparents was a Zimbabwean citizen by
                      birth or descent.


             (2)  Persons born outside Zimbabwe are Zimbabwean citizens  by
                  birth if, when they were born, either of their parents was
                  a Zimbabwean citizen and -


                  (a)  ordinarily resident in Zimbabwe; or


                  (b)   working  outside  Zimbabwe  for  the  State  or   an
                      international organisation.


             (3)  A child found in Zimbabwe who is, or appears to be,  less
                  than fifteen years  of  age,  and  whose  nationality  and
                  parents are not known, is  presumed  to  be  a  Zimbabwean
                  citizen by birth.


         37   Citizenship by descent


             Subject to section 36(2), persons born  outside  Zimbabwe  are
             Zimbabwean citizens by descent if, when they were born -


             (a)  either of their parents or any of their grandparents  was
                  a Zimbabwean citizen by birth or descent; or


             (b)  either of their  parents  was  a  Zimbabwean  citizen  by
                  registration;


             and the birth is registered in Zimbabwe in accordance with the
             law relating to the registration of births."


24.  The 1954 United Nations Convention relating to the Status of  Stateless
    Persons (hereafter the Stateless Persons Convention) was signed by  the
    United Kingdom on 28 September 1954 and ratified on 16 April 1959.  For
    people  who  qualify  as  stateless  persons  the  Convention  provides
    important minimum  standards  of  treatment,  upholds  their  right  to
    freedom of movement, requires states  to  provide  them  with  identity
    papers and travel documents and prohibits their  expulsion  where  they
    are lawfully on the territory of a State Party.  Provision is  made  in
    Part 14 of the Immigration Rules for the grant of leave  to  remain  to
    certain stateless persons and also the Respondent has  issued  guidance
    to decision-makers concerning the  determination  of  applications  for
    leave to remain made under this provision.


25.  The background to the Convention is set out at paragraphs 12 to  16  of
    the judgment of the Supreme Court in Al-Jedda.  That case was concerned
    with  a  deprivation  of  citizenship.   Section  40  of  the   British
    Nationality Act 1981 empowers the Secretary of  State  by  order  under
    subsection (2) to deprive a person of a citizenship status  if  she  is
    satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public  good.   However,
    by subparagraph (4) the Secretary of State may not make an order  under
    subsection (2) if she is satisfied that the order would make  a  person
    stateless.


26.  The claimant in Al-Jedda was born in Iraq in 1957 and  inherited  Iraqi
    nationality.  He came to the United Kingdom and sought asylum  and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain initially and then  subsequently  in
    2000 British nationality which meant that  he  automatically  lost  his
    Iraqi  nationality  under  Iraqi  nationality  law.   Subsequently  the
    Secretary of State made an order depriving him of  British  citizenship
    and it was  concluded  in  2008  by  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission that the claimant had not shown that  he  had  not  regained
    Iraqi nationality under the Law of Administration for the State of Iraq
    for the Transitional  Period.   The  Court  of  Appeal  set  aside  the
    Commission's conclusion, and its decision was  upheld  by  the  Supreme
    Court.


27.  At paragraph 26 the court identified the issue before it:


         "Namely whether an order for deprivation made against a person who,
         at its date, can immediately, by means only of formal  application,
         regain his other, former,  nationality  is  invalid  under  section
         40(4) of the [British Nationality] Act."


    Among other things, on behalf of the Secretary of State, it was  argued
    that the law should not allow the claimant to complain of  a  state  of
    affairs of his own making in failing to secure immediate restoration of
    his Iraqi nationality.  This argument was rejected.   At  paragraph  32
    Lord Wilson, with whom the other four Justices agreed, said:


         "But a facility for the Secretary of State to make  an  alternative
         assertion that, albeit not holding another nationality at the  date
         of the order, the person could, with whatever degree  of  ease  and
         speed, re-acquire another nationality would mire the application of
         the subsection in deeper complexity."


    He noted at paragraph 33 that it would have been open to the  Secretary
    of State to add the words "in circumstances in which he  has  no  right
    immediately to acquire the nationality of another state" to  the  words
    in section 40(4) but this had not been done and the Secretary of  State
    was regarded as inviting the court to place a gloss, as substantial  as
    it was unwarranted, upon the words of the subsection.  The court  noted
    the UNHCR "Guidelines on Statelessness No 1", adopted verbatim  in  the
    Home Office guidance, and set out at paragraph 7 above.


28.  It is of course necessary to recognise the statutory context  in  which
    the appeal in Al-Jedda arose, as contrasting with the  judicial  review
    context within which we are operating.  It is also the  case  that  Al-
    Jedda was concerned  with  interpretation  of  a  particular  statutory
    provision albeit within the context of Article 1(1)  of  the  Stateless
    Persons Convention, whereas we have to consider the proper approach  to
    a decision challenged by way of judicial review in the context of  Part
    14 of the Immigration Rules.


29.  The former point is of particular significance.  As Mr Berry  accepted,
    section 40(4A) was introduced into the British Nationality Act 1981  as
    a response to the decision of the Supreme Court in Al-Jedda, and  there
    is no suggestion that that amendment to the legislation  goes  contrary
    to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Stateless  Persons
    Convention.  Section 40(4A)(c) in effect enables the Secretary of State
    to make an order depriving a person of a citizenship status  where  she
    has reasonable grounds for believing that the person is able, under the
    law of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, to  become  a
    national of such a country or territory.  Likewise, it is entirely open
    to the Respondent in Immigration Rules  to  establish  a  mechanism  by
    which statelessness applications are to be  addressed,  the  Convention
    being silent on such matters.  The question in this  regard,  which  we
    shall address below, is whether the decision made in the context of the
    language employed in the Rules is lawful.


30.  As regards the issue of the standard of review, we note the  submission
    of Mr Berry that Pham and Lord Carlile suggest the appropriateness of a
    greater intensity of review in a case where as here  the  Tribunal  has
    institutional expertise and there are no reasons for deference  to  the
    views of the government.  In Giri, the authority upon  which  Mr  Malik
    relied in this regard, the observations of Lord Sumption  at  paragraph
    109 in Pham were noted, and the court  accepted  that  a  finding  that
    deception had been used as in that  case  should  be  scrutinised  very
    carefully but did not accept that the relevant  question  was  anything
    other than whether it was reasonably open to the decision-maker on  the
    material before him to find that deception had been  used.   That  does
    not seem to us to detract from the force of  what  was  said  by  Lords
    Carnwath, Mance and Sumption in Pham and also what Lord  Sumption  said
    in Lord Carlile, for the reasons essentially argued by Mr Berry and  as
    set out in our summary of his submissions  above.   It  is  appropriate
    also to bear in mind the fact that,  as  was  said  by  Lord  Mance  in
    Kennedy v The Charity Commission [2014] UKSC 20 at  paragraph  51,  the
    nature of judicial review in every case depends on the context and that
    in this particular context a greater intensity of scrutiny  than  might
    otherwise be the case may be appropriate.


31.  Mr Malik also relied on Giri with regard to the proper  approach  of  a
    judicial review  court  to  challenges  to  decisions  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular at paragraphs 19 and 20.


32.  There the Court of Appeal contrasted the  proper  approach  to  a  case
    involving the exercise of  the  power  under  section  3  of  the  1971
    Immigration Act to grant leave and a decision to remove a person  under
    section 10 of the 1999 Act on the grounds that they had used  deception
    in seeking leave to remain.  In the former case it was  said  that  the
    key point was that statute conferred the  power  on  the  Secretary  of
    State or the immigration officers on her behalf to  make  the  decision
    whether to grant or refuse leave to remain and it was said that it  was
    for the Secretary of State or her officials in  the  exercise  of  that
    power in reaching their decision to determine which provisions  of  the
    Rules would apply  and  whether  relevant  conditions  were  satisfied,
    including the determination of relevant questions  of  fact.   However,
    with regard to  a  section  10  decision,  as  a  matter  of  statutory
    construction the very existence of the power to remove would depend  on
    deception  having  been  used  and  in  judicial   review   proceedings
    challenging the decision to remove the question whether  deception  had
    been used would be a precedent fact for determination by the court,  in
    accordance with what had been held in Khawaja v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [1984] AC 74.


33.  It is relevant also to refer to Mahad [2009] UKSC 16 where it was  said
    by Lord Brown that the proper approach to the construction of the Rules
    like any other question of construction depends upon  the  language  of
    the Rule construed against the relevant background,  which  involves  a
    consideration of the Immigration Rules as  a  whole  and  the  function
    which they serve in the  administration  of  immigration  policy.   The
    Rules are not to be construed with all the strictness applicable to the
    construction of a statute  or  a  statutory  instrument  but,  instead,
    sensibly according to the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  words
    used, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of  State's
    administrative policy.


34.  Bringing these matters together, we agree with Mr  Berry  that  a  more
    intense level of review of the Respondent's  decision  is  appropriate,
    but it is necessary to bear in  mind  that  that  scrutiny  is  in  the
    context of a  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  not  under
    statute.


35.  This is of relevance to Mr Berry's  response  to  Mr  Malik's  argument
    that his approach is to put form over substance.  We do  not  think  we
    can simply take the remarks quoted above from Al-Jedda and  apply  them
    to the particular context with which we are  concerned  of  a  decision
    under the Immigration Rules.  Article 1(1)  of  the  Stateless  Persons
    Convention, as Mr Berry accepted, contains the terse definition set out
    at paragraph  23  above,  and  the  mechanism  by  which  statelessness
    applications are to  be  addressed  is,  as  we  have  observed  above,
    essentially a matter for signatories to the  Convention  and  this  has
    been done by the Respondent in Part 14 of the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    interpreting the Immigration Rules it is relevant also to bear in  mind
    that IDIs are not usually to  be  used  to  construe  the  words  of  a
    particular Rule.


36.  In this regard, it is relevant to consider why  the  word  "recognised"
    is employed in paragraph 403(b).  There is,  as  Mr  Malik  argued,  no
    parallel to this in the Rules concerning refugees.  No doubt the  broad
    context is that of status determination.  It is relevant also  to  note
    that paragraph 403(b) is tied in with the definition in  paragraph  401
    of a stateless person as a person who  satisfies  the  requirements  of
    Article 1(1) of the Stateless Persons Convention.  The point is  not  a
    straightforward one.   It  cannot  be  right  that  the  Respondent  is
    entitled at whim to decide whether or not  to  recognise  a  person  as
    stateless, which might be seen to  be  an  implication  of  Mr  Malik's
    argument.  His argument, as we understand it, is rather that there is a
    proper basis for non-recognition, in that, as set out at  paragraph  23
    of his skeleton argument building on the decision letter, there  is  no
    reason  why  the  applicant's  mother  cannot  register  his  birth  in
    accordance with the requirements of  the  Zimbabwean  Constitution;  he
    would be recognised as a citizen of Zimbabwe as soon as  his  birth  is
    registered; and his mother has no basis for  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has taken a deliberate decision to continue to reside  here
    instead of registering his birth.


37.  A difficulty with this  argument  is  that  the  wording  of  paragraph
    403(b) strongly suggests that, in effect, choice is taken away from the
    Secretary of State where it is clear that,  under  paragraph  401,  the
    person in question is a person who is not considered as a  national  by
    any state under the operation of its law, which, it  may  be  said,  as
    matters stand is the position of the  applicant.   Where  that  is  the
    case, it is difficult to see a basis  on  which  the  Respondent  could
    decline to recognise the person.  Paragraph  403(b)  essentially  takes
    its tone from paragraph 401.


38.  It is however clear in our  view  that  the  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph 403 are cumulative and hence, even if the Secretary of  State
    recognises a person as stateless, he will still have to  show  that  he
    meets the criteria set out in paragraph 403(c).  This very  much  turns
    on the meaning of the word "admissible" in that  provision.   We  agree
    with Mr Malik that it is proper to interpret this  as  meaning  that  a
    person is either a national of the country or entitled to be a national
    of the country rather than reading the  word  "admissible"  as  meaning
    that it could apply only to nationals of the state in question.  On the
    applicant's own case he is  entitled  to  be  a  national  of  Zimbabwe
    subject to  fulfilling  the  registration  requirement.   The  fact  of
    recognition of a person as being stateless can  be  distinguished  from
    the situation of a person who is recognised as  stateless  and  is  not
    admissible to any other country.  Hence it is open to the Respondent in
    our view to recognise a person to be stateless but to  refuse  them  as
    she is not satisfied that the  person  is  not  admissible  to  another
    country, in this case Zimbabwe.  The Kuwaiti Bidoon example given by Mr
    Berry as illustrative in his view of what this provision is intended to
    address is no more than an example and is not determinative of the kind
    of case which we consider would fall within paragraph 403(c).   In  our
    view, even bearing in mind the need for particularly close scrutiny  of
    the Respondent's decision, it was open to  her  to  conclude  that  the
    applicant cannot satisfy subparagraph (c) of paragraph 403  because  it
    was open to her to conclude that he is admissible to Zimbabwe.


39.  As regards paragraph 403(d) we see some force in  Mr  Malik's  argument
    that this places an obligation on the applicant to  gather  and  submit
    all relevant evidence, because the Secretary of State needs it in order
    to enable her to form a view as to his ability  to  satisfy  Zimbabwean
    domestic laws as well as  the  Zimbabwean  Constitution.   However  the
    better view, we consider, is  that  in  this  case  the  applicant  has
    fulfilled  the  requirements  of  (d)  in  approaching  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities and ascertaining the position under the  Constitution.   If
    he satisfies (b), as we have found above, it is difficult to see how he
    can properly be refused under (d).


40.  Bringing these matters together therefore, we conclude that  even  with
    the more rigorous scrutiny with which it is appropriate to address  the
    decision in this case, there  is  a  material  difference  between  the
    statutory appeal context of Al-Jedda and  the  decision  in  this  case
    under the Immigration Rules, (as well as between the wording of the Act
    as amended and the Rules), which the Respondent  has  properly  put  in
    place to enable her to make a decision on the statelessness application
    of the applicant.  We consider that she was entitled to  conclude  that
    he has not satisfied the requirements of paragraph 403(c)  of  HC  395.
    Accordingly the application for judicial review is refused.


41.  We will hear the parties on costs and any other ancillary matters  when
    this judgment is handed down. ~~~~0~~~~

