
 IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


R (on the application of Masalskas)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Regulations 24AA and 29AA EEA Regs) IJR [2015] UKUT 00677 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                   Heard on: 14 October 2015
                                               Handed down: 26 November 2015



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                 (ON THE APPLICATION OF VIDMANTIS MASALSKAS)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

1. A decision to certify a person's (P's) removal under regulation  24AA  of
the European Economic Area Regulations 2006 operates as a temporary  measure
that can be applied only for so long as there is a  statutory  appeal  which
could be brought in time or which is pending.

2. Regulation 24AA  is  a  discretionary  measure  whose  implementation  is
currently  subject  to  Home  Office  guidance  entitled  "Regulation   24AA
Certification Guidance for European Economic Area deportation cases".

3. EEA decisions to remove or deport taken  against  EEA  nationals  do  not
have automatic suspensive effect. No removal can take place, however,  until
an applicant has had a decision on  any  application  made  for  an  interim
order to suspend removal.

4. As with the very  similar  power  in  section  94B  to  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  when  deciding  whether  to  certify  the
removal of a person under regulation  24AA  the  avoidance  of  "serious  or
irreversible harm" is not the sole or overriding test. It is also  necessary
for the decision-maker to assess whether removal  of  P  would  be  unlawful
under section 6  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (HRA):  see  Kiarie,  R  (on  the
application of) and Another v  Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
[2015] EWCA Civ 1020.

5.  Whilst  the  assessment  pursuant  to   section   6   HRA   requires   a
proportionality  assessment,  it   is   one   that   is   limited   to   the
proportionality of removal for the period during which  any  appeal  can  be
brought in time or is pending.

6. P's right under regulation 29AA to be temporarily admitted to the  UK  in
order to make submissions in person at the appeal:

(a) is qualified by regulation 29AA(3)  ("except  when  P's  appearance  may
cause serious troubles to public policy or public security"); and

(b) does not extend to the pre-hearing stages of the appeal.



Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Salamons Solicitors appeared on behalf
of the applicant.

Ms J Smyth, Counsel, instructed by the G.L.D. appeared on behalf of the
respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE STOREY:

 1. This application for judicial review concerns regulations 24AA and 29AA
    of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006
    (hereinafter  "the  2006  Regulations").   These  regulations   are   a
    relatively recent addition to the ever-expanding panoply  of  the  2006
    Regulations, having been inserted with effect from  28  July  2014  (SI
    2014/1976). As far as we are aware, ours is  one  of  the  first  cases
    which seeks to deal in any depth with their proper scope  and  meaning.
    It has assisted our task that the day before our the hearing the  Court
    of Appeal gave judgment in the case of Kiarie, R  (On  the  Application
    Of) and Another v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1020 (13 October 2015) (hereafter "Kiarie and Byndloss") which
    concerned a very similar provision to regulation 24AA set  out  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  (as
    amended), namely section 94B[1].  In order to  set  the  scene,  it  is
    useful first of all to set out  the  relevant  legislative  and  policy
    framework of which regulations 24AA and 29AA form a part.

    The legislative and policy framework

    The 2004 Citizens Directive

 2. Chapter V1 of the Directive 2004/38/EC ("the  Citizens  Directive")  is
    concerned with 'Restrictions on the right of entry  and  the  right  of
    residence on grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
    health'. Articles 27 and 28 deal with the substantive  conditions  that
    must be satisfied before a Member State may  restrict  the  freedom  of
    movement and residence of EU citizens and their family members  falling
    within the scope of the Directive.  In summary, they  permit  a  Member
    State to expel EU citizens and  their  family  members  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public  health,  subject  to  certain
    restrictions. So far as material, Articles 27 and 28 provide:

         Article 27

      General principles

        1.    Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States  may
        restrict the freedom of movement and residence of Union citizens and
        their family members, irrespective of  nationality,  on  grounds  of
        public policy, public security or public health. These grounds shall
        not be invoked to serve economic ends.

        2.    Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
        shall comply with the principle  of  proportionality  and  shall  be
        based  exclusively  on  the  personal  conduct  of  the   individual
        concerned.  Previous criminal convictions shall  not  in  themselves
        constitute grounds for taking such measures. The personal conduct of
        the individual concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
        sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the   fundamental
        interests of society. Justifications  that  are  isolated  from  the
        particulars of the case or that rely on  considerations  of  general
        prevention shall not be accepted.

       3. ...

       4. ...

          Article 28

         Protection against expulsion

         1.   Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security, the host Member State shall take account
         of considerations such as how long  the  individual  concerned  has
         resided on its territory, his/her age, state of health, family  and
         economic situation, social and cultural integration into  the  host
         Member State and the extent of his/her links with  the  country  of
         origin.

         2.   The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
         against Union citizens or their  family  members,  irrespective  of
         nationality, who have the  right  of  permanent  residence  on  its
         territory, except on serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
         security.

         3.   An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
         except if the decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of  public
         security, as defined by Member States, if they:

             (a)  have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous
             ten years; or

             (b) ...

      Article 31

 3. Article 31, which is also part of  Chapter  V1  to  the  Directive,  is
    entitled 'procedural safeguards'.  It provides:


         Procedural safeguards


         1.   The persons concerned shall have access to judicial and, where
         appropriate, administrative redress procedures in the  host  Member
         State to appeal against  or  seek  review  of  any  decision  taken
         against them on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
         public health.



         2.   Where the application for appeal against or judicial review of
         the expulsion decision is accompanied  by  an  application  for  an
         interim order to  suspend  enforcement  of  that  decision,  actual
         removal from the territory may not take place until  such  time  as
         the decision on the interim order has been taken, except:

         -    where the expulsion decision is based on a  previous  judicial
         decision; or

          -   where the  persons  concerned  have  had  previous  access  to
        judicial review; or

         -    where the expulsion decision is based on imperative grounds of
         public security under Article 28(3).

         3.   The redress procedures shall allow for an examination  of  the
         legality of the decision, as well as of the facts and circumstances
         on which the proposed measure is based. They shall ensure that  the
         decision is not  disproportionate,  particularly  in  view  of  the
         requirements laid down in Article 28.

        4.    Member States may exclude the individual concerned from their
        territory pending the redress procedure, but they may  not  prevent
        the individual from submitting his/her defence  in  person,  except
        when his/her appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy
        or public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a
        denial of entry to the territory.

    The 2006 EEA Regulations

    Regulations 24AA and 29A) state as follows:

             24AA


             Human rights considerations  and  interim  orders  to  suspend
             removal


             (1)  This regulation applies  where  the  Secretary  of  State
             intends to give directions for the removal of a  person  ("P")
             to whom regulation 24(3) applies, in circumstances where-


                 (a)   P has not appealed against the EEA decision to  which
                 regulation  24(3)  applies,  but  would  be  entitled,  and
                 remains within time,  to  do  so  from  within  the  United
                 Kingdom (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of  time
                 with permission); or


                 (b)   P has so appealed but the appeal has not been finally
                 determined.


             (2)  The Secretary of State may only give directions  for  P's
             removal if the Secretary of State certifies that, despite  the
             appeals process not having  been  begun  or  not  having  been
             finally determined, removal of P to the country  or  territory
             to which P is proposed to be removed, pending the  outcome  of
             P's appeal, would not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human
             Rights Convention).


             (3)  The grounds upon which the Secretary of State may certify
             a removal under paragraph (2) include (in particular)  that  P
             would not, before the appeal is  finally  determined,  face  a
             real risk of serious  irreversible  harm  if  removed  to  the
             country or territory to which P is proposed to be removed.


             (4)  If  P  applies  to  the  appropriate  court  or  tribunal
             (whether by means of judicial  review  or  otherwise)  for  an
             interim order to suspend enforcement of the removal  decision,
             P may not be removed from the United Kingdom until  such  time
             as the decision on the interim order has been taken, except-


                 (a)   where the expulsion decision is based on  a  previous
                 judicial decision;


                 (b)   where P has had previous access to  judicial  review;
                 or


                 (c)   where the removal decision  is  based  on  imperative
                 grounds of public security.


             (5)  In this regulation, "finally  determined"  has  the  same
             meaning as in Part 6.




             29AA


             Temporary admission in order to submit case in person


             (1)  This regulation applies where -


                 (a)   a person ("P") was removed from  the  United  Kingdom
                 pursuant to regulation 19(3)(b);


                 (b)   P has appealed against the decision  referred  to  in
                 sub-paragraph (a);


                 (c)   a date for P's appeal has been set by the First  tier
                 Tribunal or Upper Tribunal; and


                 (d)   P wants to make submissions  before  the  First  tier
                 Tribunal or Upper Tribunal in person.


             (2)  P may apply to the Secretary of State for  permission  to
             be temporarily admitted (within the meaning of  paragraphs  21
             to 24 of Schedule 2 to  the  1971  Act,  as  applied  by  this
             regulation) to the United Kingdom in order to make submissions
             in person.


             (3)  The Secretary of State must grant  P  permission,  except
             when P's appearance  may  cause  serious  troubles  to  public
             policy or public security.


             (4)   When  determining  when  P  is  entitled  to  be   given
             permission, and the duration of P's temporary admission should
             permission be granted, the Secretary of State must have regard
             to the dates upon which P will be required to make submissions
             in person.


             (5)  Where-


                  (a)  P is  temporarily  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom
                  pursuant to this regulation;


                  (b)  a hearing of P's appeal has taken place; and


                  (c)  the appeal is not finally determined,


                  P may be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  pending  the
                  remaining stages of the redress procedure (but P may apply
                  to return to the United Kingdom  to  make  submissions  in
                  person  during  the  remaining  stages  of   the   redress
                  procedure in accordance with this regulation).


             (6)  Where the Secretary of State grants P  permission  to  be
             temporarily  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom   under   this
             regulation, upon such admission P is to be  treated  as  if  P
             were a person refused leave to enter under the  1971  Act  for
             the purposes of paragraphs 8, 10, 10A, 11, 16 to 18 and 21  to
             24 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.


             (7)  Where Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act  so  applies,  it  has
             effect as if-


                      (a)  the reference in  paragraph  8(1)  to  leave  to
                      enter were a reference to  admission  to  the  United
                      Kingdom under these Regulations; and


                      (b)  the reference in paragraph  16(1)  to  detention
                      pending a decision regarding leave to enter or remain
                      in the  United  Kingdom  were  to  detention  pending
                      submission of P's case in person in  accordance  with
                      this regulation.


             (8)  P will be deemed not to have been admitted to the  United
             Kingdom during any time during which P is temporarily admitted
             pursuant to this regulation.



 4. Also relevant is regulation 26(1), which provides that "Subject to  the
    following paragraphs of this regulation,  a  person  may  appeal  under
    these Regulations against an EEA decision",  and  regulation  29  which
    prescribes the effect of appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal  or  Upper
    Tribunal. Regulation 29(3)  provides that:

         "If a person in the United Kingdom appeals against an EEA  decision
         to remove him from the United Kingdom (other than a decision  under
         regulation 19(1(3)(b)), any directions given under  section  10  of
         the 1999 Act or Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act for his removal from the
         United Kingdom are to have no effect, except in so far as they have
         already been carried out, while the appeal is pending."

    The words in italics were inserted with effect from 28 July 2014.

 5. It is as well to mention also regulation 19(3)  which   specifies  that
    subject to two exceptions:

          "an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom or the  family
         member of such a national who has entered the United Kingdom may be
         removed if-

        a) that person does not have or ceases to have a  right  to  reside
           under these Regulations;

        b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal  is
           justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public
           health in accordance with regulation 21"; or

        c) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal  is
           justified on grounds of  abuse  of  rights  in  accordance  with
           regulation 21B(2).



    Home Office Guidance


 6. To accompany the insertion of  regulations  24AA  and  29AA   the  Home
    Office also issued a document entitled "Regulation  24AA  Certification
    Guidance for European Economic Area deportation cases", which  we  have
    annexed in its Version 2.0, 20 October 2014  form.   It  explains  that
    when the regulations came into force it  was  with  an  initial  cohort
    limited to persons aged 18 or over  who  do  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a dependent  child  or  children.
    That first phase ended on 17 October 2014. Section 2 deals  with  cases
    not suitable for regulation 24AA  certification.  Section  3  addresses
    when to certify a human rights claim under regulation 24AA and at  3.3.
    (real  risk  of  serous  irreversible  harm)  and   3.4.   (timing   of
    certification) the caseworker is instructed to  see  for  guidance  the
    section 94B certification guidance for  non-EEA  nationals.  Section  4
    deals with interim orders.  Section  5  concerns  re-entry  to  present
    appeal in person.


    The application

 7. The applicant is a citizen of Lithuania and seeks  judicial  review  of
    the decision made by the respondent to certify  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom under regulation 24AA of  the  2006  Regulations.   That
    decision was originally made on 10 December 2014, at the same  time  as
    he was served a reasons for deportation letter and a deportation order.
     On 17 March 2015  the  respondent  issued  him  with  a  supplementary
    decision to certify his removal under regulation 24AA, together with  a
    new notice of decision to  make  a  deportation  order.   His  judicial
    review claim form lodged on the same day identifies the decision  being
    challenged as a decision of 12 March to set removal directions  for  18
    March 2015, but it is common ground that it is the underlying  decision
    to certify that is in issue in these proceedings  (we  return  to  this
    matter in a moment). On the same day the applicant applied for judicial
    review he also applied for an interim injunction  to  prevent  removal.
    This was granted on the specific basis that the position regarding  the
    applicant's appeal 'should be clarified before any  further  steps  are
    taken to remove the applicant". It was ordered that the respondent  was
    not to remove the applicant until determination of this application  or
    further order.

    The statutory appeal

8.   The applicant had earlier (in January 2015) lodged a  statutory  appeal
    against the EEA decision to make a deportation order against  him.   At
    the date he brought his judicial review proceedings (17 March 2015) his
    statutory appeal was still pending.  When permission was granted on  20
    August 2015 to bring this judicial review,  it  was  assumed  that  the
    applicant had not yet had a hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  of
    his statutory appeal.  In point of fact we now know that  by  then  his
    appeal had been heard by the First-tier Tribunal and  dismissed  on  27
    May 2015.  However, he has applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, which means that, albeit it is at  a  different  stage,
    his statutory appeal is still one which is pending.

9.   The reason why the applicant has found himself subject to adverse  Home
    Office measures is that on 13 November 2013 he was arrested and  on  22
    January 2014 he was convicted of possession of a controlled drug  class
    A - with intent to supply.  For this offence he  was  sentenced  to  28
    months' imprisonment (with forfeiture  and  destruction  of  drugs  and
    paraphernalia) and ordered to pay a  victim  surcharge.   He  was  also
    sentenced to four months' consecutive imprisonment (with forfeiture and
    destruction of 440 counterfeit �10 bank notes) for an offence of having
    counterfeit banknotes.

    The decision under challenge

10.  It is common case that the challenge brought in  this  judicial  review
    is to the decision  to  certify  under  regulation  24AA  taken  on  10
    December 2014.  The further decision to certify taken on 17 March  2015
    was specifically described as being supplementary and we entirely agree
    that this was all it was.  The gravamen of the applicant's challenge in
    December 2014 was that the decision to certify was unlawful because  it
    prevented him from being present at his statutory appeal  and  to  that
    end the interim relief he sought was an interim order  prohibiting  his
    removal.

11.  As already noted, the applicant has had since  then  a  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, at which he was able to attend and present his
    case and he has also had a decision on his appeal: on 27 May  2015  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal against the deportation  order
    against him under regulation 19(3).

12.  Two things flow from this.  First, even if the applicant is  successful
    in his judicial review application, he cannot expect  relief  aimed  at
    securing his attendance at his statutory appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  as  he  has  already  achieved  this.   Second,  if   he   is
    unsuccessful in this judicial review and the respondent acts to  remove
    him by way of directions, he will still  be  entitled  to  apply  under
    regulation 29AA to return to be  present  in  person  at  any  relevant
    hearing for as long as his appeal is still pending.

13.  Nevertheless, particularly because his appeal remains  pending,  we  do
    not consider that his application has been rendered academic.   Success
    in this application would have inevitable consequences for any  further
    decision to certify in respect of what regulation 29(5)  refers  to  as
    "the remaining stages of the redress procedure in accordance with  this
    regulation".  Given the wide-ranging nature of the  submissions  before
    us in this case, our decision may additionally assist in clarifying the
    proper ambit of regulations 24AA and 29AA in other cases.

    The grant of permission

14.  In the grant of permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings  made
    on 20 August 2015 reference  was  made  to  the  case  of  Macastena  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWHC 1141 (Admin),  a
    renewed  permission  hearing  and  the  question  was   posed   whether
    observations  by  Collins  J  in  that  case  disclosed   grounds   for
    considering that regulation 24AA was consistent with Article 31.

    The grounds

15.  In presenting the grounds Mr Malik before us cast  his  submissions  in
    the following terms.  First  he  submitted  that  the  regulation  24AA
    decision made against the applicant was unlawful in public law terms by
    dint of having four defects:

    (a)  failure to appreciate that there was a discretion;

    (b)  failure to take into account material considerations;

    (c)  failure to balance competing considerations  against  each  other;
         and

    (d)  failure to make a decision that was reasonable.

    Second, he submitted that the respondent had  erred  in  law  in  using
    "real risk of serious irreversible harm" as  the  sole  or  overarching
    test for certifying under regulation 24AA.  He submitted that the  test
    set out in regulation 24AA also had to establish that the  decision  to
    certify was compliant with s.6 Human Rights Act 1998 ("HRA  1998")  and
    thus entailed a test of  proportionality.  Third  he  argued  that  the
    decision of Collins J in the Macastena case reinforced  his  underlying
    arguments.

16.  Ms Smyth first asked us to rule as a preliminary point  that  in  order
    to advance these grounds, which Mr  Malik  had  only  drafted  the  day
    before, he would need to apply formally for leave to amend his  grounds
    as they differed significantly from  those  set  out  in  the  original
    pleadings.  We disagree.  Given that the day before  the  hearing,  the
    Court of Appeal had given judgment  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss,  it  was
    inevitable - and indeed only good sense - that Mr Malik should reorient
    his submissions, but they still bore  a  sufficient  correspondence  to
    those originally pleaded.  We would accept that  the  original  grounds
    make no mention of the discretion  ground  and  that  certain  passages
    betoken a misunderstanding of what was being  certified,  but  one  can
    still see an express contention that the decision  to  certify  wrongly
    failed to consider s.6 of the HRA1998 and we discern that paragraph  48
    did at least seek  to  identify  factors  that  were  relevant  to  the
    legality  of  the  decision   both   in   terms   of   discretion   and
    proportionality.

17.  Even had we decided that Mr Malik needed to apply to amend his  grounds
    formally, he helpfully stated that if needed, he wished to apply to  do
    so and on that basis we would have acceded to his request. In the event
    Ms Smyth was content to  respond  to  Mr  Malik's  submissions  without
    needing to ask for more time.  As Ms Smyth herself emphasised, the fact
    that both parties had invested  considerable  time  in  addressing  the
    three key issues identified by Mr Malik, coupled with  the  plain  need
    for their submissions before us to deal with the implications of Kiarie
    & Byndloss, are strong pointers in favour  of  our  taking  a  holistic
    view.

18.  Ms Smyth asked us to note that  no  challenge  has  been  made  to  the
    legality of regulation 24AA; and that in the  light  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal analysis in Kiarie & Byndloss of the very similar  provision  at
    section 94B of the 2002 Act,  no  such  challenge  could  succeed.   As
    regards ground 1, she urged us to find that just as the Court of Appeal
    had found the discretion point in Kiarie & Byndloss to  fall  away,  so
    should we in this case.  Even if  discretion  had  not  been  exercised
    perfectly in the applicant's case, any shortcoming  was  not  material.
    There was an  additional  reason  in  this  case  why  any  defect  was
    immaterial, in that the applicant had simply not identified evidence of
    material or competing considerations.   Further,  to  the  extent  that
    Collins J in Macastena appeared to query the  public  policy  rationale
    for this power, that overlooked that  it  had  been  given  legislative
    endorsement by the EU  legislature  in  Article  31  of  (the  Citizens
    Directive (which clearly  contemplates  that  removal  can  take  place
    whilst an appeal is pending) and UK Parliamentary  endorsement  by  the
    insertion into  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  of  regulation  24AA.  The
    provisions enacted by both legislatures reflected a balancing of public
    policy  and  individual  considerations.  She  urged  us  to  find  the
    Macastena decision as affording no help to the applicant.

19.  In relation to Mr Malik's ground 2, Ms  Smyth  said  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that "serious irreversible harm" in regulation 24AA  was
    not the sole or overarching test and that in order to certify  lawfully
    the respondent had also to be satisfied there was no breach of  section
    6 of the HRA 1998.  She accepted that  the  latter  test  required  the
    respondent to assess whether a decision to certify  was  proportionate,
    but urged us to find that the proportionality assessment was limited to
    the period of the pending appeal, which could be presumed to be  short-
    term.

ANALYSIS

    We shall deal first with general matters raised by this application.

    The relevance and import of Article 31

    Judicial redress


20.  It is not in dispute that UK law faithfully  transposes  Article  31(1)
    and 31(3).  The requirements  of  Article  31(3)  are  for  a  form  of
    judicial redress that  extends  to  an  examination  not  just  of  the
    "legality of the decision", but also of "the facts and circumstances on
    which the proposed measure is based". These requirements are met in the
    UK by  provisions  in  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,  in  particular  by
    regulation 26 which affords a statutory right  of  appeal  against  EEA
    decisions and by provisions in Schedule 1 which apply certain  sections
    of the 2002 Act that ensure the appeal deals with the merits, not  just
    with the legality of the EEA decision. The statutory appeal under these
    Regulations also provides at regulation 21 for an assessment of whether
    decisions taken on public policy,  public  health  or  public  security
    grounds are disproportionate in relation to the  safeguards  guaranteed
    by Articles 27 and 28 of the Directive.

21.  It is also not in dispute that Article 31(2) is  faithfully  transposed
    by regulation 24AA(4).  Both Counsel agreed that these judicial  review
    proceedings provided for  an  application  for  "an  interim  order  to
    suspend enforcement of [the expulsion decision] ...until such  time  as
    the decision on the interim  order  has  been  taken."   The  applicant
    sought such an order and was granted it so that the position  regarding
    his appeal could be clarified. This injunction has  remained  in  place
    pending the handing down of this judgment.

     Suspensive effect
22.  Likewise it was common  ground  that  regulation  29AA  seeks  to  give
    effect to the provisions of Article 31(4).  Whilst  Mr  Malik  disputed
    that it fully achieved this, we consider Ms Smyth is entirely right  in
    her submission that  Article  31  is  predicated  on  recognition  that
    expulsion decisions against Union citizens  do  not  attract  automatic
    suspensive effect. As we have just explained, the article does  require
    that no removal can take place until an applicant has had a decision on
    an application for an interim order  to  suspend  enforcement  of  that
    decision (Article 31(2)). It also stipulates that Member States may not
    prevent the  individual  from  submitting  his/her  defence  in  person
    (except in two  specified  circumstances).  But  it  does  not  prevent
    removal prior to the hearing of his statutory appeal - subject only  to
    a right to a decision on an application for an interim order to suspend
    enforcement of that decision (Article 31(2) and (4)).

23.  Consistent with the terms of Article 31, the new wording of  regulation
    29(3) provides that a statutory  appeal  against  an  EEA  decision  to
    remove an EEA national from the United Kingdom  has  suspensive  effect
    except where that decision is made under regulation 19(3)(b) (which  is
    the provision under which the decision to deport was made  against  the
    applicant in this case).

     The regulation 24AA test

24.  As now clarified by Kiarie & Byndloss in respect of  identical  wording
    in section 94B  of  the  2002  Act,  the  statutory  test  set  out  in
    regulation 24AA is two-pronged and cannot be reduced to a mere question
    of  whether  an  affected  person  faces  a  "real  risk   of   serious
    irreversible harm if removed...".  The latter is  not  the  overarching
    test.  Mirroring s.94B of the 2002  Act,  regulation  24AA  contains  a
    first requirement (at regulation 24AA(2)) that the Secretary  of  State
    may only give directions for P's removal if she certifies that  removal
    pending the outcome of P's appeal would not be unlawful under section 6
    of the HRA 1998. The "real risk of serious irreversible  harm..."  test
    arises only as a "ground" on which the Secretary of State "may" certify
    a removal under paragraph (2) (emphasis added).

25.  In Kiarie & Byndloss at [35] Richards LJ stated:

         "By subsection (3) a ground for certification is  that  the  person
         would not, before the appeals process is exhausted,  face  'a  real
         risk of serious irreversible harm' if removed  to  the  country  or
         territory to which he or she is proposed to be removed. That ground
         does not, however, displace the statutory condition  in  subsection
         (2), nor does it constitute a surrogate for that condition. Even if
         the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied   that   removal   pending
         determination of an appeal would not give rise to a  real  risk  of
         serious irreversible harm, that  is  not  a  sufficient  basis  for
         certification. She cannot certify in any case unless she considers,
         in  accordance  with   subsection   (2),   that   removal   pending
         determination of any appeal would not be unlawful under  section  6
         of the Human Rights Act. That the risk of serious irreversible harm
         is not the overarching test was rightly accepted by  Lord  Keen  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State at the hearing of the appeal."


     Regulation 24AA as a discretionary power

26.  It is clear that regulation 24AA does  not  mandate  the  Secretary  of
    State to certify a removal in every case in which she considers the two-
    pronged statutory test is made out.   The  language  of  the  provision
    clearly imports discretion: as already noted,  it  provides  only  that
    "The Secretary of State may certify a removal ..."

27.  Mr Malik sought to submit that it was a discretionary power that  could
    only be lawfully exercised if the decision-maker undertook a  balancing
    of  competing  considerations  and  reached  a  decision  as   to   its
    proportionality.  We shall address that submission  when  dealing  with
    the applicant's particular case.

     Regulation 24AA as a temporary measure tied to the appeals process

28.  Regulation 24AA is not a free-standing power to  certify  removal.   It
    is parasitic on there being an "appeals process" (24AA(2)). Thereby its
    scope is  limited  jurisdictionally  and  temporally.   It  is  limited
    jurisdictionally by being tied to the actuality or  possibility  of  an
    appeal: regulation 24AA (2) provides that directions  for  removal  may
    only be given if the Secretary of State  certifies  that  "despite  the
    appeal process not  having  been  begun  or  not  having  been  finally
    determined, removal of P pending the outcome of the  appeal  ..."   The
    temporal limits to its scope are that there must be the possibility  of
    an in-time appeal: "P has not appealed against  the  EEA  decision  but
    would be entitled, and remains within time, to do so  from  within  the
    United Kingdom (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time, with
    permission)"(24AA(1)(a))  or  an  appeal  which   is   still    pending
    (24AA(1)(b)).

     The proportionality issue

29.   Mr  Malik  submitted  that  any  decision  to  certify  removal  under
    regulation 24AA could not lawfully be  made  unless  the  Secretary  of
    State was satisfied it would be proportionate in  human  rights  terms.
    He submitted that a proportionality test could not be  diminished  just
    because the context was removal/deportation in the context of a pending
    appeal.  With both of these propositions we agree.  If  there  was  any
    doubt about their efficacy it has been settled by the Court  of  Appeal
    analysis of s.94B in Kiarie and Byndloss.  Ms Smyth was quick to accept
    as much.

30.   Nevertheless,  as  Mr  Malik  was  equally  quick   to   accept,   the
    proportionality assessment cannot be the same wide-ranging one that the
    decision-maker must conduct when deciding  the  substantive  matter  of
    whether there are grounds of public policy, security or health for  the
    deportation or removal under regulation 21/Articles 27 and  28  in  the
    context of a statutory appeal.  It can only be one that confines itself
    to the context of an appeals process which is not  yet  exhausted.   By
    regulation 29(3) read together with regulation 29AA, the respondent  is
    obliged to afford a person who is the subject of  an  EEA  decision  to
    deport or remove a right to attend his hearing in person.  The decision
    is to certify removal until such time  as  such  a  person  (P)  has  a
    hearing of his statutory appeal which  is  still  pending.   Ordinarily
    this entails that what will be at issue in any  attempt  to  obtain  an
    interim order suspending enforcement is the  impact  on  P  and/or  his
    family members of short-term separation limited to  the  period  up  to
    final determination of an appeal.   Furthermore,  the  decision  arises
    within a legal framework which guarantees that even if removed a person
    can apply to come back to the UK to attend his or her statutory  appeal
    hearing.

31.  We derive  from  the  above  that  the  assessment  to  be  made  under
    regulation 24AA requires  the  decision-maker  to  focus  not  just  on
    whether removal would cause serious and irreversible harm, but whether,
    for the period  while  the  appeal  process  remains  unexhausted,  P's
    removal would have an unduly harsh impact  on  him  and/or  his  family
    members.  One possible example, to borrow from the Home Office document
    "Section 94Bthe Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002",  Version
    5, 30 October 2015, at 3.18, concerns the situation where  "the  person
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  partner  or  parental
    relationship with a child who is seriously ill and  requires  full-time
    care, and there is credible evidence that no  one  else  could  provide
    that care".  But, going by the Court of Appeal's analysis in  Kiarie  &
    Byndloss and the guidance given in the aforementioned document  on  the
    similar provision, section 94B, such cases are likely to be  relatively
    rare.

     The right of "defence" in person and regulation 29AA

32.  Article  31(4)  prohibits  a  Member  State  excluding  the  individual
    concerned from their  territory  pending  the  redress  procedure  from
    preventing the individual "from submitting his/her defence  in  person"
    (subject to two limited exceptions). (We do not need to explore why the
    word "defence" is used, although we posit that it may be linked to  the
    fact that in  some  Member  States  expulsion  decisions  are  made  by
    criminal courts.) Reflecting that prohibition, regulation 29AA provides
    for "temporary admission to submit a case in person".  It provides that
    if a person who has been removed wants to make submissions  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal in person, "P may  apply  to  the
    Secretary of State to be temporarily admitted".  Indeed, there is  even
    provision for a person who has (i) been removed,  (ii)  has  then  been
    admitted back  into  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing; (iii) who has then pursued onward appeal, (iv) is then removed
    again, to then (v) apply under regulation 29AA(5)  "to return  to  make
    submissions in person  during  the  remaining  stages  of  the  redress
    procedure" (regulation 29AA(5)).

     Meaning of Exclusion

33.  Mr Malik voices two objections to any reading of either provision  that
    confines the right to return under regulation 29AA to attendance at the
    hearing of the statutory appeal. First he argues that the  use  of  the
    verb "exclude" limits the scope of Article 31(4) to cases  in  which  a
    person has not yet been admitted to/entered the United Kingdom. (If  he
    were right in this submission, that would of course raise an  issue  as
    to whether regulation 29AA is a lawful transposition of Article 31). We
    can dispose of this objection summarily, it being entirely  clear  from
    the wording of Article 31(4) that  exclusion  is  used  to  denote  the
    expulsion of persons. That is also the primary sense  of  the  word  as
    used in Article 32 (Duration of exclusion orders). Indeed,  in  Article
    31(4) exclusion is juxtaposed with cases when there  is  an  appeal  or
    judicial review concerning  a  "denial  of  entry  to  the  territory".
    Whether recourse is had to a literal, contextual or purposive  meaning,
    exclusion exists within Article 31 as a procedural safeguard for  those
    who have been removed or expelled "pending the redress procedure".

     Right to be heard

  34.    Mr Malik's second objection is that to delimit the  prohibition  to
    prevention of return to attend a hearing would improperly  circumscribe
    the "right to be heard" which must be understood to encompass not  just
    the hearing itself but pre-hearing stages, including preparation  of  a
    case and  oral  conferencing  with  legal  advisors.  We  are  no  more
    persuaded by this objection than we are by the first. If Mr Malik  were
    right, then since pre-hearing preparation can  both  theoretically  and
    sometimes in reality begin on  the  very  day  the  deportation/removal
    decision is made, there would never be any lawful basis  for  exclusion
    "pending the redress procedure". We do not exclude that  the  Secretary
    of State  may  decide  to  temporarily  admit  an  individual  to  make
    submissions in person for some period of days before an actual hearing;
    for her to do so would be an  entirely  lawful  step  under  regulation
    29AA. However, there is plainly no right of an individual to be present
    in the United Kingdom in advance of an actual hearing.  Insofar  as  Mr
    Malik seeks in raising this objection to invoke the "right to be heard"
    under Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, we would  repeat
    a point made by this panel in  Ahmed,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  (EEA/s  10  appeal  rights:
    effect) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 436 (IAC) at [50]-[51] in  commenting  on  Ms
    Smyth's submission in that case (she having also been Counsel  for  the
    G.L.D on that occasion) that Article 47 was context-specific :

         "50.   We agree with that last submission.  As  was  noted  by  the
             Court of Justice of the European Union in Case C-249/13 Khaled
             Boudjlida at [43]:


                 "... it is... in accordance with the Court's settled  case
                 law that ... fundamental rights, such as respect  for  the
                 rights  of  the  defence,  do  not  constitute  unfettered
                 prerogatives and may  be  restricted,  provided  that  the
                 restrictions in fact correspond to objectives  of  general
                 interest pursued by the measure in question and that  they
                 do not involve, with regard to the objectives  pursued,  a
                 disproportionate  and   intolerable   interference   which
                 infringes upon the very substance of the rights guaranteed
                 (the judgments in Alassini  and  Others,  C-317/08  to  C-
                 320/08,   EU:C2010:146,   paragraph   63;   G    and    R,
                 EU:C:2013:533, paragraph  33;  and  Texdata  Software,  C-
                 418/11, EU:C:2013:588, paragraph 84)".


         51.    In order to see where the balance is to be struck  in  cases
             of this kind, one looks to the provisions  of  the  Directive.
             There, as we have noted, the relevant appeal rights  are  non-
             suspensive. However, in cases covered by Article 31 (which, we
             emphasise, does  not  include  the  applicant's  type  of  EEA
             appeal), the persons concerned have a qualified right  of  re-
             entering in order to submit a "defence in person". The  scheme
             of the Directive is, we find, entirely compatible with Article
             47 of  the  Charter.  Article  47  does  not  necessitate  the
             wholesale conferring of suspensive rights  of  appeal  against
             any EEA decision."

35.  It is fair to  say  that  there  is  an  important  difference  between
    regulation 24AA and section 94B.  Whereas the latter envisages that the
    appeal itself will be heard whilst the appellant is out of country, the
    different scheme under  the  Directive  and  Regulations  recognises  a
    "right to be heard" for the purposes of being present at the hearing of
    the appeal.

36.  That difference might be said to suggest that it  would  be  proper  to
    restrict the proper ambit of regulation 24AA to cases where there was a
    particularly strong reason to certify notwithstanding that an  affected
    person would in any event have a right to return to be present at their
    hearing. It seems to us that there are  two  responses  fatal  to  that
    suggestion.  The first is one  we  have  highlighted  already.  The  EU
    legislature  has  expressly  permitted  states,  subject  to   judicial
    supervision, to have the power to remove persons pending their  appeal.
    Article 31(1) makes that clear, as does  the  Commission's  Explanatory
    Memorandum, Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on
    the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and
    reside freely within the territory of the Member States,  COM/2001/0257
    Final - COD 2001/0111*.  In commenting on Article 29 of  this  document
    states:

         "Giving appeals automatic suspensory effect would not be a suitable
         solution, since it would lay the arrangements open to  abuse.   The
         judgment of national courts can be relied on  to  ensure  that  the
         interests of both the individual concerned and  the  Member  States
         are adequately protected."

37.   We  accept  Ms  Smyth's  submission  that  in  this  respect  the   EU
    institutions were concerned to give legislative effect to the  judgment
    of the Court of Justice in Case C 98/79 Pecastaing v Belgium, in  which
    the applicant challenged an order  that  she  leave  Belgian  territory
    whilst she had a pending action against  the  Belgian  authorities  for
    refusing her a residence permit.  At [9] the Court set out the text  of
    Article 8 of Directive 64/221 which states:

         "9.  According to Article 8:  The person concerned shall  have  the
             same legal remedies in  respect  of  any  decision  concerning
             entry, or refusing the issue or renewal of a residence permit,
             or ordering expulsion from the territory, as are available  to
             nationals of the State concerned in respect  of  acts  of  the
             administration."

38.  At [12]-[13] it concluded:

         "12. On the other hand Article 8 contains  no  specific  obligation
             concerning any suspensory effect of applications available  to
             persons covered by the directive.  If that provision  requires
             that the person concerned should be able to appeal against the
             measure affecting him it must be inferred, as the Court stated
             in its judgment  in  the  Royer  case  (paragraph  60  of  the
             decision), that the decision ordering  expulsion  may  not  be
             executed - save  in  cases  of  urgency  -  before  the  party
             concerned is able to complete  the  formalities  necessary  to
             avail himself of the remedy.  However, it cannot  be  inferred
             from that provision that the person concerned is  entitled  to
             remain on the territory of the State concerned throughout  the
             proceedings initiated by him.  Such an  interpretation,  which
             would enable the person concerned unilaterally, by lodging  an
             application,  to  suspend  the  measure  affecting   him,   is
             incompatible with the objective of the directive which  is  to
             reconcile the requirements of public policy,  public  security
             and public health with the guarantees which must  be  provided
             for the persons affected by such measures.

         13.  Accordingly, the reply to be given to the questions  submitted
             must be that Article 8 covers all the remedies available in  a
             Member State in respect of acts of the  administration  within
             the framework of the  judicial  system  and  the  division  of
             jurisdiction between judicial bodies in the State in question.
              Article 8 imposes on the  Member  States  the  obligation  to
             provide for the persons covered by the directive protection by
             the courts which  is  not  less  than  that  which  they  make
             available to their own nationals as  regards  appeals  against
             acts of the  administration  including,  if  appropriate,  the
             suspension of the acts appealed against.  On  the  other  hand
             there may not be inferred from Article 8 an obligation for the
             Member States to permit an alien to remain in their  territory
             for the duration of the proceedings, so long  as  he  is  able
             nevertheless to obtain a  fair  hearing  and  to  present  his
             defence in full."

39.  The second response, which was also adumbrated  earlier,  is  that  the
    2006 EEA Regulations at regulations 24AA and  29AA  reflect  a  similar
    resolve of the  United  Kingdom  legislature  to  make  removal  lawful
    pending  the  redress  procedure,  without  any  caveat  save  for  the
    guarantee of a right to return to make  submissions  before  the  First
    tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal in person except  when  P's  appearance
    may cause serious troubles to public policy or public security".

Significance of the Macastena case

40.  It is in the above context that we must consider Mr Malik's  submission
    that the applicant should also succeed because the decision to  certify
    his removal was contrary to the observations of Collins J in Macastena.



41.  In Macastena Collins J was considering whether to grant  permission  in
    the case of a claimant from Kosovo  who  had  been  the  subject  of  a
    decision to certify removal under regulation 24AA pending his appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision to remove him  in  light  of
    his convictions and two year sentence.  Having  noted  that  regulation
    24AA had  two  aspects  (what  we  have  called  "prongs"),  Collins  J
    addressed a submission made by Mr Manjit Gill QC  that  the  regulation
    failed to take account of the need for proportionality  within  Article
    27 of the Citizens Directive.  Collins J drew a distinction between the
    statutory appeal where Article 27 would be central and the challenge to
    a decision to certify under regulation 24AA by way  of  an  application
    for an interim order to suspend enforcement of removal:

         "16. However, it  is  not  at  the  interim  stage  for  a  further
             consideration to be given to the factual basis.   Only  if  it
             would be unlawful for interim removal, as I shall call it,  to
             take place would it be appropriate to seek to come to court to
             prevent it.  Such  cases,  I  would  have  thought,  would  be
             comparatively rare.  But one can  see  situations  where,  for
             example, a very damaging effect upon a  child  of  the  family
             might be such as to require such removal not to take place.

         17.  I am bound to say that,  unless  a  very  lengthy  period  was
             likely  between  appeal  being  lodged  and  hearing  or   the
             individual is in custody, it is difficult to see the point  of
             exercising this power.  It is particularly  pointless  if  the
             individual is in work and providing  for  his  or  her  family
             whilst in this country, because that will be removed  and  the
             likelihood is recourse to public  funds  by  the  family  left
             there.

         18.  However, for some reason best known to the Secretary of State,
             that power has been required.  In my judgment,  it  cannot  be
             said that it is at all arguable  that  the  regulation  as  it
             stands is itself unlawful.  Equally, it would only be  if  the
             interim decision were  unlawful  and  could  be  shown  to  be
             unlawful that it should not be permitted to be made.

         19.  I would have thought it is  necessary  for  the  Secretary  of
             State to use this power with the greatest of care because  one
             wants to avoid any satellite litigation which might  otherwise
             result.  Surely, it should only be in a case where it  can  be
             seen to be desirable and  really  desirable  that  such  power
             should be exercised.  It may depend on the view taken  of  the
             strength of the case which the  Secretary  of  State  has  for
             removal in due course, because it may be obvious that there is
             little point in removing someone if  it  transpires  that  the
             appeal in due course is allowed."

42.  We would underline the following points. First, this decision being  on
    whether to grant permission, was not  intended  to  give  authoritative
    guidance; the observations made in it are obiter.   Second,  Collins  J
    makes quite clear at [18] that regulation 24AA is  an  entirely  lawful
    provision. Third, Collins J emphasises at  [16]  that  cases  in  which
    there would be unlawfulness in the operation of regulation  24AA  would
    be "comparatively rare". Third, insofar  as  Collins  J  addresses  the
    public policy dimension of the operation of regulation 24AA, we  cannot
    ignore the fact, highlighted earlier, that this  regulation  (like  the
    corresponding provision of the Citizens Directive which it transposes),
    represents a  decision  of  the  EU  legislature  not  to  provide  for
    automatic suspensive effect in EEA removal cases. Fourth, it  seems  to
    us that at most Collins  J  was  here  venturing  suggestions  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider when adopting policy guidance as to  the
    application of regulation 24AA. They are suppositions which may or  may
    not find their way into future  versions  of  the  respondent's  policy
    guidance to caseworkers. His decision is no foundation for  identifying
    public law error in the applicant's case.

THE APPLICANT'S CASE

43.  In light of our analysis of the general issues the only remaining  live
    issue in the applicant's case is the discretion issue.

    The discretion issue

44.  Mr Malik has submitted that the certification of the  applicant's  case
    under regulation 24AA was unlawful because  it  failed  to  demonstrate
    either that   the respondent had grasped that  a  decision  under  this
    provision was a matter of discretion or that  it  was  a  matter  which
    required a weighing-up of competing considerations and a decision as to
    proportionality.

45.  We think it beyond  doubt  that  the  respondent  understood  that  her
    decision on certification involved the exercise of  a  discretion.   At
    paragraph 84  of  her  December  2014  decision  letter  she  correctly
    referred to the fact that under regulation 24AA the Secretary of  State
    "may" certify removal and that the grounds on which she  "may"  certify
    included absence of serious irreversible harm.   At  paragraph  85  she
    commenced by noting that "[c]onsideration has  been  given  to  whether
    your case "should" be certified..."

46.   We  also  consider  that  this  decision  letter  together  with   the
    supplementary decision letter of 17 March 2015 shows  that  regard  was
    given to section 6 HRA1998 matters separate from the issue of  serious,
    irreversible harm.  However, in much  the  same  way  as  the  decision
    letters in the Kiarie  and  Byndloss  cases  were  found  wanting,  the
    wording of  the  decision  letters  with  which  we  are  concerned  is
    defective,  in  that  it  wrongly  framed  the  Secretary  of   State's
    consideration solely in terms of whether  there  was  a  real  risk  of
    serious, irreversible harm.  It was stated that "such a risk"  did  not
    exist even having regard to family and private life factors, but it did
    not separately consider whether the applicant's  family,  private  life
    circumstances might constitute a breach of Article 8.

47.  Nevertheless, for very much the same reasons as  Richards  LJ  gave  in
    Kiarie and Byndloss in respect of the decision  letters  in  those  two
    cases, we find the defects in decision letters in the applicant's  case
    to be immaterial.  There are essentially two reasons for this.   First,
    the applicant had simply failed to produce evidence to  show  that  the
    decision would breach his  human  rights.   He  had  not  provided  any
    evidence of any subsisting  relationship  with  any  persons  who  were
    dependent on him: he had not shown that he had very significant private
    life in the UK.  The respondent could  only  respond  to  the  evidence
    placed before her and what was produced in this  regard  was  nugatory.
    Second, even on the basis of his own claim, he failed to  particularise
    how his human rights were considered to  be  adversely  affected  by  a
    temporary absence.  Further,  the  decision  under  challenge  did  not
    purport to remove him unconditionally.  It simply  had  the  effect  of
    overriding what would otherwise be potential  suspensive  effect  of  a
    pending appeal.  If he were successful in his statutory appeal he would
    no longer be subject to exclusion or threat of such whilst still here.

48.  Mr Malik sought to advance his  submissions  based  on  the  discretion
    point by reference  to  the  decision  of  Stadlen  J  in  JR  (in  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWHC 705 (Admin) and that by the Upper Tribunal  in  Ukus  (discretion;
    when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).

49.  We are not persuaded that either of these decisions assists  his  case.



50.  As regards JR, the certification power in issue in that case  was  that
    under s.96(1) of the 2002 Act which applies when a person has relied on
    a matter that could have been raised  in  an  appeal  against  the  old
    decision and in the opinion of the Secretary  of  State  there  was  no
    satisfactory reason for the matter not having  been  so  raised  in  an
    appeal against the old decision.  On Stadlen J's analysis,  before  the
    Secretary of State can lawfully  decide  to  certify,  she  has  to  go
    through a four-stage process.  The first two relate to notification and
    reliance.  The third is that the  Secretary  of  State  must  form  the
    opinion that there is no satisfactory reason for the matter not  having
    been raised in a previous appeal  or  previous  s.120  statement.   The
    fourth is stated at [106] as being:  "she  must  address  her  mind  to
    whether, having regard to all relevant factors she should exercise  her
    discretion to certify and conclude that it is appropriate  to  exercise
    the discretion in her favour".  Stadlen J also considered this exercise
    had to be informed by anxious scrutiny (e.g. [124]).

51.  This brief synopsis suffices to point up  obvious  differences  between
    the ambit and context of the process to certify under s.96 on  the  one
    hand and that relating to process to certify under regulation  24AA  on
    the other. The former has the effect of negating a right of  appeal  of
    any kind completely; whereas the latter only means it is non-suspensive
    since it does not even prevent the appeal against the EEA  decision  to
    remove/deport being in-country for the purposes of an actual hearing.

52.  As  regards  Ukus,  this  case  concerned  discretion  required  to  be
    exercised by statute in the context of a statutory appeal. It concerned
    a ground of challenge to an immigration decision under section 84(1)(f)
    of the 2002 Act, that "the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
    exercised differently a discretion  conferred  by  immigration  rules".
    That is not the case here.  Further, insofar as the  Tribunal  adverted
    to the context of judicial review, it made clear that it did  not  seek
    to enunciate any criteria of its  own.  The  Tribunal  confined  itself
    simply to saying that one of the ways of assessing whether  a  decision
    was "in accordance with the law" under s.84 was "by  reference  to  the
    criteria by which a decision can be approached..."

53.  Even if we regarded Mr Malik as being right to say that the  principles
    enunciated in these two cases had direct or even analogous  application
    to regulation 24AA, it is clear from Kiarie and  Byndloss  that  unless
    their breach could be shown to have a material bearing on  the  outcome
    of the case, it would not give rise to a public law error.

54.  For completeness we record that we reject also the applicant's  grounds
    as originally pleaded.

55.  For the above reasons, we conclude that this application  for  judicial
    review must fail.

56.  The interim injunction granted to the applicant at an earlier stage  of
    this case (see [21] above) hereby ceases to have effect.

57.  If agreement cannot be reached as to costs the parties are directed  to
    make any submissions regarding costs in writing within 14 days of  this
    judgment being handed down.



Signed



Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal



                                   Annex A














Regulation 24AA certification guidance for European Economic Area
deportation cases

Version 2.0

20 October 2014

Contents

Section 1: Introduction    page 3
Section 2: Cases not suitable for regulation 24AA certification    page 6
Section 3: When to certify an EEA deportation decision under regulation
24AA
                                                              page 7
Section 4: Interim orders  page 8
Section 5: Re-entry to present appeal in person  page 9
Section 6: Successful appeals   page 11
Section 7: Change Record   page 12






















































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 2 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 1: Introduction

Purpose

   1. This guidance explains how case owners consider certifying a human
      rights claim, made by an EEA national in the context of deportation,
      under regulation 24AA of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2006. This guidance applies to any EEA national or non-EEA
      national with enforceable EU law rights who falls to be deported under
      regulation 19(3)(b) of the EEA Regulations.

Legislation

   2. Regulation 24AA of the EEA Regulations came  into  force  on  28  July
      2014. It reads:

      Human rights considerations and interim orders to suspend removal

      24AA. (1) This regulation applies where the Secretary of State intends
      to give  directions  for  the  removal  of  a  person  ("P")  to  whom
      regulation 24(3) applies, in circumstances where-

      a) P has not appealed against the EEA decision to which regulation
         24(3) applies, but would be entitled, and remains within time, to
         do so from within the United Kingdom (ignoring any possibility of
         an appeal out of time with permission); or

        b)  P  has  so  appealed  but  the  appeal  has  not  been  finally
           determined.

      1) The Secretary of State may only give directions for P's removal  if
         the Secretary of

      State certifies that, despite the  appeals  process  not  having  been
      begun or not having been finally  determined,  removal  of  P  to  the
      country or territory to which P is proposed to be removed, pending the
      outcome of P's appeal, would not be unlawful under section

      6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to  act  contrary
      to Human Rights Convention).

   2) The grounds upon which the Secretary of State may  certify  a  removal
      under paragraph (2) include (in particular) that P would  not,  before
      the appeal  is  finally  determined,  face  a  real  risk  of  serious
      irreversible harm if removed to the country or territory to which P is
      proposed to be removed.

   3) If P applies to the appropriate court or tribunal (whether by means of
      judicial  review  or  otherwise)  for  an  interim  order  to  suspend
      enforcement of the removal decision, P may not  be  removed  from  the
      United Kingdom until such time as the decision on  the  interim  order
      has been taken, except-

        a) where the expulsion decision is based  on  a  previous  judicial
           decision;

        b) where P has had previous access to judicial review; or

         (a) where the removal decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of
         public security.

      5) In this regulation, "finally determined" has the same meaning as in
         Part 6.".



                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 3 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Background

   3. The Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment) (No.2)
      Regulations 2014 amended the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2006 so that an appeal against a deportation decision
      under regulation 19(3)(b) of the EEA Regulations no longer suspends
      removal proceedings, except where:

       . the Secretary of State has not certified that the person would not
         face a real risk of serious irreversible harm if removed to the
         country of return before the appeal is finally determined.

       . the person has made an application to the courts for an interim
         order to suspend removal proceedings (e.g. judicial review) and
         that application has not yet been determined, or a court has made
         an interim order to suspend removal.

   4. The application of a regulation 24AA certificate does not prevent a
      person from lodging an appeal from within the UK, rather, by amending
      regulation 29 of the EEA Regulations, it removes the suspensive effect
      of that appeal. So, whilst a person may lodge their appeal in-country,
      the lodging of such an appeal does not suspend their removal from the
      UK. The new Regulations also do not impact on the period allowed for
      voluntary departure, and a person liable to deportation pursuant to
      the EEA Regulations still has 30 days in which to leave the UK
      voluntarily before their removal is enforced, save in duly urgent
      cases.

   5. Therefore, regulation 24AA applies to:

       . a person who appeals in time against an EEA  deportation  decision,
         where that appeal has not been finally determined;

       . a person who has not appealed against an EEA  deportation  decision
         but would be entitled to do so from within the UK  (this  does  not
         include out of time appeals).

   6. The amended EEA Regulations also allow a person who was deported under
      regulation 19(3)(b) before their appeal is finally determined, to
      apply from out of country for permission to re-enter the UK solely in
      order to make submissions in person at their appeal hearing.

Initial Cohort

   6. Regulations 24AA and 29AA came into force on 28 July 2014.  They  were
      initially rolled out to a limited cohort of cases where:

       . the person was aged 18 or over  at  the  time  of  the  deportation
         decision; and

       .  the  person  did  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a dependent child or children.

   7. That first phase came to an end on 17 October 2014.

Section 55 duty



                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 4 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
   8. The duty in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
      2009 to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare
      of children who are in the UK means that a child's best interests are
      a primary consideration in deportation cases.

   9. Case owners must carefully consider all of the information and
      evidence provided concerning the best interests of a child in the UK,
      in relation to the application of the regulations 24AA and 29AA of the
      EEA Regulations. Case owners must carefully assess the quality of any
      evidence provided. Original, documentary evidence from official or
      independent sources will be given more weight in the decision-making
      process than unsubstantiated assertions about a child's best
      interests.

  10. For further guidance in relation to the section 55 duty, see:

       . Section 55 children's duty guidance;
       . Introduction to children and family cases; and
       . Criminality guidance for Article 8 ECHR cases.




















































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 5 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 2: Cases not suitable for regulation 24AA certification

   1. Where the following certificates can be applied  in  relation  to  all
      grounds which may be brought in an appeal, there will be  no  need  to
      apply a regulation 24AA certificate:

       . regulation 26(5) of the EEA Regulations, which states, "The
         Secretary of State or an immigration officer may certify a ground
         for the purposes of paragraph (4) if it has been considered in a
         previous appeal brought under these Regulations or under section
         82(1) of the 2002 Act";

       . paragraph 4(5) of Schedule 2 (regulation 30) to the EEA
         Regulations, which requires the Secretary of State to certify a
         protection claim from an EEA national unless the claim is not
         clearly unfounded.

   2. Decisions to deport pursuant to the EEA Regulations where the person
      is serving a determinate-length sentence where release is at the
      discretion of the Parole Board will not normally be suitable for
      regulation 24AA certification. This includes those who were:

       . sentenced in accordance with the Discretionary Conditional  Release
         Scheme (DCR) under the Criminal Justice Act 1991;
       . given an Extended Sentence for Public Protection (EPP); and
       . given an Extended Determinate Sentence (EDS).

   3. Decisions to deport pursuant to the EEA Regulations where  the  person
      is  a  minor  will  not  normally  be  suitable  for  regulation  24AA
      certification.

   4. Decisions to deport pursuant to the EEA Regulations where the person
      has been resident in the UK and exercising Treaty rights for a
      continuous period of at least five years and the person has not been
      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years will not
      normally be suitable for regulation 24AA certification.

   5. Cases to which the scenarios at 2.3 and 2.4 apply will not usually be
      suitable for section 94B certification for practical operational
      reasons, not because there will necessarily be a real risk of serious
      irreversible harm. Consideration must be given to all cases on an
      individual basis about whether or not it is appropriate to certify.






















                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 6 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 3: When to certify a human rights claim under regulation 24AA

   1. Regulation 24AA certification must be considered in all deportation
      decisions made pursuant to the EEA Regulations unless it is a case to
      which section 2 of this guidance applies. The "test" phase where
      regulation 24AA was rolled out to a limited cohort of cases ended on
      17 October 2014 and no longer applies.

   2. The Government's policy is that the deportation process should be as
      efficient and effective as possible. Case owners should therefore seek
      to apply regulation 24AA certification in all applicable cases where
      doing so would not result in serious irreversible harm.

Real risk of serious irreversible harm

   3. For guidance on serious irreversible harm, please see the section  94B
      certification guidance for Non-EEA deportation cases which is here.

Timing of certification

   4. For guidance on when a regulation 24AA  certificate  can  be  applied,
      please see paragraphs 3.10 to 3.13 of the  section  94B  certification
      guidance for Non-EEA deportation cases which is here.






































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 7 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 4: Interim orders

   1. Regulation 24AA establishes that removal may not be enforced if:

       . the person has made an application for an interim order to  suspend
         removal proceedings (for example, through judicial review); and

       .  that  application  has  not  yet  been  determined,  or  has  been
         determined in favour of the applicant.

   2. Regulation 24AA lists certain exemptions where an application for an
      interim order will not suspend removal proceedings (as established by
      Article 31(2) of the Free Movement Directive (2004/38/EC)). An
      application for an interim order will not suspend removal proceedings
      if:

       . the notice of a decision to make a deportation order is based on  a
         previous judicial decision; or
       . the person has had previous access to judicial review; or
       . the removal decision is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
         security.

   3. If the person is deported from the UK pursuant to regulation  19(3)(b)
      at any stage after the person has lodged an appeal then the case owner
      must notify the Tribunal.

   4. Where a court or tribunal makes an interim order suspending removal,
      removal will not be possible even if one of the criteria outlined in
      paragraph 4.2 are met. In these circumstances, contact Litigation
      Operations (Criminality, Detention & International) to arrange making
      an application to the court which granted the interim relief to apply
      to have the effect of the interim order lifted.



































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 8 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 5: Re-entry to present appeal in person

   1. Regulation 29AA reflects the requirements of Article 31(4) of the Free
      Movement Directive (2004/38/EC). Article 31(4) states that, "Member
      States may exclude the individual concerned from their territory
      pending the redress procedure, but they may not prevent the individual
      from submitting his/her defence in person, except when his/her
      appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy or public
      security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a denial of
      entry to the territory".

   2. Accordingly, regulation 29AA establishes a process  whereby  a  person
      who has lodged an appeal against a deportation decision  and  who  has
      been deported from the UK may apply from outside the UK for permission
      to be temporarily admitted to the UK solely for the purpose of  making
      submissions in person at their appeal hearing.

   3. Caseworkers must ensure that the person is notified of  the  means  by
      which they can make such an application using the  following  standard
      paragraphs in the decision to make a deportation order:

      "Pursuant to regulation 29AA of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area)

      Regulations 2006 (as amended) you may apply from outside  the  UK  for
      permission to re-enter the UK in order to make submissions  in  person
      at your appeal hearing, if you meet the following conditions:

       . you appealed within time against the notice of a decision to make a
         deportation order;

       . you were deported from the UK pursuant to regulation 19(3)(b) of
         the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 before
         your appeal was finally determined;

       . a date for your appeal has been set; and

       . you want to make submissions before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  or
         Upper Tribunal in person.

      You should not apply for permission to re-enter unless you  have  been
      given a date for your appeal hearing by  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Tribunal, and you should provide us with evidence of the date of  your
      appeal hearing.

      It is your responsibility to notify the relevant Tribunal of your
      location and contact details and to update the Tribunal in the event
      of any changes to your location and contact details.

      If you meet these criteria then you may apply for permission to re-
      enter the UK. You can make this application by contacting Immigration
      Enforcement at [insert email address].

      Permission will not be granted if the Secretary of State considers
      that your presence would cause serious troubles to public policy or
      public security.

      You must apply for permission in advance of attempting to re-enter the
      UK or you will be refused admission at the UK Border.


                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 9 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
      If permission is granted, it will be a temporary admission pursuant to
      Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971. If you were deported under the
      Early Removal Scheme then you will be recalled to prison if you are
      admitted to the UK before the expiry of your sentence. In any other
      case you are liable to be held in immigration detention for the
      duration of your stay.

      You must leave the UK immediately after your appeal hearing or you
      will be enforcedly removed.

      In the case of any subsequent hearing at which you wish to submit your
      case in person, you must apply again for permission to re-enter.

      Any return to the United Kingdom is entirely at your own cost."

   4. Under regulation 29AA the Secretary of State must grant such
      permission, except where the person's re-admission for the purpose of
      appearing and making submissions at their appeal hearing may cause
      serious troubles to public policy or public security.

















































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 10 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 6: Successful appeals

   1. For guidance on successful appeals where the deportation decision was
      certified under regulation 24AA, please see the section 94B
      certification guidance for Non-EEA deportation cases which is here.


































































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 11 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 7: Change Record

 |Version | | |Author(s) | | |Date | | |Change References | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |1.0 | | |LS (CPT) | |
|28/07/2012 | | |First draft. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |Added section 1: introduction;; added
section 2: when | | | | |2.0 | | |LC (CPT) | | |20/10/2014 | | |not to
certify; added section 5: re-entry to present | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | |appeal in person; added section 6: successful
appeals; | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |added
section 7: change record. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |














































                      IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8
                      ECHR Cases

                             V5.0 (28 July 2014) Page 12 of 12

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed


-----------------------
[1] This section applies to appeals from within the United Kingdom  where  a
human rights claim has been made by a person who is liable for  deportation.
Subsection (2) provides: "The Secretary of State may certify  the  claim  if
the Secretary of State considers  that,  despite  the  appeals  process  not
having been begun or not having been exhausted, removal of P to the  country
or territory to which P is proposed to be removed, pending  the  outcome  of
an appeal in relation to P's claim, wold not be unlawful under section 6  of
the Human Rights Act 1998...". Subsection (3) states that "The grounds  upon
which the Secretary of State  may  certify  a  claim  under  subsection  (2)
include (in particular) that P would not,  before  the  appeals  process  is
exhausted, face a real risk of serious irreversible harm if removed  to  the
country or territory to which P is proposed to be removed."

