
Heard at FIELD HOUSE
On 11th December 2002
By Video link with Leeds
TC (Teacher-Failed Asylum Seeker-Returns) Zimbabwe CG [2002] UKIAT 07342

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date Determination notified

                                                ..20./.03./ 2003............

                                   Before:
                         Mr.D. J. Parkes (Chairman)
                      Mrs. A. J. F. Cross de Chavannes
                              Mrs. S. I. Hewitt

      BETWEEN

                            MISS TUMIRAI CHIBANDA

                                                                   Appellant

                                   - and -

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.     She  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs. M. L. Reeds, promulgated on  8th
      June 2002, dismissing her appeal against the refusal of the Respondent
      on 18th January 2002 to grant her leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.
       The Appellant had applied for asylum but had  been  refused  and  she
      appealed to the Adjudicator upon both asylum and human rights grounds.



2.    The Appellant was represented before us by Mr. M. Schwenk  of  Counsel
      instructed by Messrs. Alison McDonald, Solicitors and the Secretary of
      State by Senior Presenting Officer, Mrs. M. Walton.

3.    The issue in the appeal  is  whether  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
      Refugee or Human Rights Convention for  the  Appellant,  as  a  failed
      asylum seeker, to be returned to Zimbabwe.     It  is  submitted  that
      the position of the Secretary of State is illogical in refusing asylum
      because of his policy of not  returning  for  the  time  being  failed
      asylum seekers to the country on the basis that it is unsafe so to do.
          The argument is that the only  logical  reason  why  it  could  be
      unsafe is because of the perception of  the  authorities  that  asylum
      seekers, failed or not, must have a political opinion antagonistic  to
      that of President Mugabe.

4.    We should say a little of the facts.   Miss Chibanda claimed to  be  a
      schoolteacher in a country area.    Her mother is similarly a teacher.
         Both of them, it is claimed, sufficiently supported the  M.D.C.  to
      have voted for the local  candidate  at  the  last  election  but  the
      Appellant was, apart from  that,  entirely  inactive  in  her  support
      because, among  other  things,  open  political  allegience  would  be
      regarded as incompatible with her occupation as a  schoolteacher.   It
      was said that members of Zanu P.F. had had a meeting at the school and
      in spite of the entreaties of the Appellant in an effort to stop  them
      doing  so  the  children  had  chanted  pro  M.D.C.  slogans.      The
      Appellant and other teachers had been blamed and a few  days  later  a
      group whom the Appellant took to  be  Zanu  P.F.  members  had  thrown
      stones at her home.    The only  indication,  apart  from  perception,
      that the Appellant had any interest in the M.D.C.  was  that  she  had
      obtained a membership card when she joined and so  that  document  was
      destroyed and the Appellant obtained or manufactured what purported to
      be a letter from a company called Tripple X Computers giving the  name
      of three companies in the United Kingdom  and  purporting  to  confirm
      that she worked as a buyer for that organization and was visiting  the
      United Kingdom on company business.   That letter  was  used  both  on
      exit from Zimbabwe and also, apparently, upon entry  into  the  United
      Kingdom.   The Appellant concedes that it is a false document.

5.    The Adjudicator did not find the Appellant to be a  credible  witness.
       Her mother, also a schoolteacher, remained at the family home.    The
      Appellant had not left Zimbabwe until a month after  the  incident  of
      which she complained, she had no real evidence  that  Zanu  P.F.  were
      involved with the group who threw stones.    In spite of the fact that
      the issue was raised in the Secretary of State's letter of refusal the
      Appellant had taken no steps to obtain from her mother any documentary
      evidence of her membership of the M.D.C. or of  her  occupation  as  a
      schoolteacher.     Her credibility was not assisted by the  production
      of the letter now accepted to be false.    Whilst  a  reason  for  the
      production of it to enable departure from Zimbabwe had been given that
      did not constitute good reason for any deception with the  use  of  it
      upon arrival in the United Kingdom.

6.    There was strong reason not to  suppose  that  the  Appellant  was  as
      knowledgeable about the M.D.C. as would be the case if what  she  said
      was genuine.   She claimed to have voted for a particular candidate in
      a particular constituency at the most recent elections and yet she was
      mistaken both as to the name of the candidate  and  the  constituency.
      The Appellant  said  that  she  had  never  attended  any  rallies  or
      demonstrations or even meetings, held any post in the  party  or  done
      anything remotely involved with the party  except  for  voting.    She
      claimed to have made efforts actively to discourage the children  from
      chanting M.D.C. slogans.

7.    It is not clear why but the Adjudicator did accept or at least  assume
      to be correct the Appellant's account of an incident on  1st  December
      2001 that she had been harassed and assaulted on that one occasion  by
      being hit on the back with a stick and fondled but she found  that  to
      be an isolated, random incident not connected with membership  of  the
      M.D.C.

8.    The Adjudicator carefully considered the  totality  of  the  evidence,
      including the objective evidence, before reaching her  conclusions  as
      to what she believed and did not believe and  it  is  clear  that  the
      conclusions to which she came were open to her upon the basis  of  the
      evidence.

9.    Upon the real issue before us the Adjudicator noted that attacks  have
      taken place upon members of the teaching profession and that  on  15th
      January 2002  the  Home  Secretary  had  announced  that  removals  to
      Zimbabwe of failed asylum seekers would be suspended until  after  the
      Presidential election in  March  2002.     He  confirmed  that  asylum
      claims from Zimbabwe would continue to be judged on  their  respective
      merits.     Refugee  Status  has  been  granted  to  M.D.C.  activists
      including teachers, nurses and journalists.

10.   The Adjudicator took the view  that  each  case  must  be  judged  not
      simply upon the objective  evidence  but  upon  the  totality  of  the
      evidence taking account of its own  particular  facts  and  individual
      merits.    We see no way in which it could  be  argued  that  she  was
      mistaken in that view.

11.   It is argued before us that weight should be attached to the  contents
      of a letter written to the Secretary of State on 15th January 2002  by
      the United Nations Association in the United  Kingdom.     The  letter
      expressed concern that Zimbabwean asylum seekers were not  only  being
      refused refugee status in the United  Kingdom  but  being  immediately
      deported back to Zimbabwe.    The letter referred to  alarming reports
      of infiltration of immigration centres by  President  Mugabe's  agents
      who report back on who is seeking asylum  here.     The  writer  fully
      supported the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  not  to  return
      forcibly any genuine asylum seekers until the  Presidential  elections
      had been held and urged further  sympathetic  consideration  of  their
      situation if, as  the  United  Nations  feared,  the  election  proved
      basically fraudulent  and  Mr.  Mugabe's  thuggery  against  opponents
      continues.

12.   There was produced on behalf of the Secretary of State three  Tribunal
      decisions all of them dating from the latter  part  of  2002,  two  of
      which dismissed appeals by unsuccessful asylum seekers  from  Zimbabwe
      and the third of which allowed an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State
      against an Adjudicator who had  allowed  an  asylum  seeker's  appeal.
      On behalf of the Appellant there was produced  two  determinations  of
      the Tribunal allowing appeals by Zimbabwe asylum seekers.    They were
      heard  in  September  and  October  of  2002  respectively.    Nothing
      confirms more accurately, to our mind, the wisdom of  the  Adjudicator
      in her conclusion that each of these cases depends very much upon  its
      own facts.     One of those before us was  particularly  mentioned  as
      exhibiting facts very similar indeed to those  in  the  present  case.
      That would certainly be so had the Adjudicator found the Appellant  in
      this case  to  be  entirely  credible.   Each  of  the  determinations
      produced bore similarities to the present case.    The  production  of
      past determinations of the Tribunal  in  this  fashion  is  not  as  a
      general rule particularly helpful even where apparent  consistency  is
      shown, because so often there are other decisions,  not  disclosed  or
      discovered which would in any event suggest a  contrary  view  but  on
      examination again would  depend  upon  the  assessment  of  the  facts
      concerned.

13.   Mrs. Walton suggests that an important feature of this appeal is  that
      the Appellant obtained exit from Zimbabwe with the aid of the business
      letter which was not suspected and would return having, on the face of
      it, simply carried out the duties for  which  she  had  come  to  this
      country.   She, therefore, would not be presenting herself as a failed
      asylum seeker or as one perceived to be an opponent to the regime.

14.   We do not accept the submission that a decision by  the  Secretary  of
      State to suspend for the  time  being  the  return  of  failed  asylum
      seekers to Zimbabwe equates with any kind of admission that to  return
      them would be  in  breach  of  either  the  Refugee  or  Human  Rights
      Convention.   There is nothing, so far as we can see, to  prevent  the
      Secretary of State from observing  the  situation  in  any  particular
      country and deciding that for the time being, as a  matter  of  policy
      this country should not return people  to  it,  for  whatever  reason,
      without coming to any conclusion that if  he  did  so  they  would  be
      persecuted or  alternatively  that  the  treatment  which  they  would
      receive would reach a certain level of severity.    In any event  even
      if the Secretary of State did so consider his view could  be  open  to
      challenge.    If it were not so the appeal system, among other things,
      would be moribund.

15.   We do not find it to be established that the Adjudicator  ignored  the
      situation if the Appellant was returned to Zimbabwe having  failed  in
      her  asylum  claim  in  this  country.     At  paragraph  44  of   her
      determination the Adjudicator considered the situation at some  length
      including what would be, or might be, perceived of the Appellant  upon
      her return and the fact that the business letter which  she  had  used
      and her apparent purpose in coming to the United Kingdom.

16.   Cases relating to Zimbabwe are undoubtedly difficult.     This  is  an
      appeal, however, in which, so it seems to  us,  the  Adjudicator  took
      great care and considered the totality of the evidence including  that
      relating to the issue  upon  which  this  appeal  is  brought  to  the
      Tribunal.    Having heard the submissions of both parties we  consider
      that the conclusions of the Adjudicator were  open  to  her  upon  the
      totality of the evidence and that cause has not  been  shown  for  the
      Tribunal to interfere.    This appeal is therefore dismissed.









                                                                D. J. Parkes
                                                       Acting Vice-President
