
Heard at Field House                                        Appeal No
HX/20621/2002
On 12 February 2003               FT (Fair Trail-Adultery) Iran CG  [2002  ]
UKIAT 07576



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified



03/04/2003

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                              Mr C A N Edinboro
                                Mr R Hamilton


                                FATEMA TORABI

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran,  appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R G Handley, dismissing her  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 23 September  2001  to  issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Before us, Mr K McDonald, instructed by  the  Castlemilk  Law  &  Money
     Advice Centre, represented the Appellant and Mr A Mullin, a Home Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims she was a low level supporter  of  Nehzat-e-Azadi,
     and in 1999 had been detained and lost her job as  a  consequence.  The
     Adjudicator concluded, on the evidence, that the authorities would have
     no continuing adverse interest in her now and Mr McDonald  acknowledged
     at the outset of the hearing that this was not the reason she left Iran
     some two years later, and he did not base his submissions to us  as  to
     current risk upon this.

  4. The  factual  basis  of  the  appeal  is  that  the  Appellant  had  an
     unsuccessful marriage, which ended in divorce in April 2001.  There was
     a dispute between the Appellant and her husband  over  the  custody  of
     their child, which  was  awarded  to  the  Appellant.   She  was  later
     summonsed to court and on arrival learned from the court that  she  had
     been accused of adultery.  This accusation is entirely untrue  and  the
     Appellant believes it was made by her husband in order to  re-open  the
     question of custody of their child. However, instead  of  remaining  in
     Teheran, where she lived, and fighting the accusation in the court, the
     Appellant decided to flee  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Adjudicator
     dismissed her appeal because he concluded that she should have remained
     and defended herself in court against the false charge.

  5. Mr McDonald submits on her behalf that the  Adjudicator  was  is  error
     because the penalty for conviction for adultery  is  so  severe,  being
     death by stoning or  lashes,  that  even  the  risk  of  conviction  is
     sufficient to engage the protection  of  Article  3.   Accordingly  the
     Adjudicator was in error in finding  that  the  Appellant  should  have
     waited in Tehran and defended the accusation.

  6. The task before the Tribunal, as argued by both representatives, is  to
     assess whether there is a real risk on the objective evidence that  the
     Appellant would on return face a  trial and a perverse  conviction  for
     adultery, and consequently suffer a sentence of such severity as to  be
     in breach of Article 3.

  7. Mr McDonald referred to the decision of the European Court  of  Justice
     in Jabari, Appeal No 40035-98, which concluded that  the  return  of  a
     woman who had  admittedly  committed  adultery  would  be  contrary  to
     Article 3, because of the severity of the sentence she would face.   Be
     this as it may, this present appeal is  quite  different  in  that  the
     Appellant has never committed adultery. She maintains that  the  charge
     against her is false and malicious.

  8. Mr McDonald relied upon a passage in the US State Department report  to
     the effect that:
           "It is difficult for a woman to obtain legal redress.  A woman's
           testimony in court is worth only half that of a man's, making it
           difficult for a woman to prove a case against a male defendant."
     However this passage  is  of  limited  value  in  this  appeal  as  the
     Appellant is not seeking to bring an action against  her  husband,  but
     would be defending herself against a criminal charge of adultery. There
     is some force in Mr McDonald's submission that it shows that a  woman's
     testimony is only worth half that of a man, but it is  not  clear  from
     this passage whether the reference is to proceedings against a man by a
     woman only or if it relates also  to  criminal  proceedings  against  a
     woman.

  9. He also referred to the CIPU report of October 2001 which stated that:
           "Since May 1994, judges have been responsible for prosecution in
           public and  revolutionary  courts.   Amnesty  International  has
           reported that trial hearings are often heard in camera."


     However the value of this passage is also somewhat  undermined  by  the
     fact that it has not been repeated in the more recent October 2002 CIPU
     report.

 10. Mr Mullin referred us to the recent CIPU report and  in  particular  to
     passages dealing with the high evidential  requirement  in  trials  for
     adultery. They showed that:
           "Under the Islamic Penal Code adopted in  November  1995,  those
           found guilty of adultery, witnessed by at  least  three  others,
           are subject to execution  by  stoning  ......  There  have  been
           several reports of execution for adultery in recent  years.  One
           IRB report has qualified  understanding  of  the  law  regarding
           adultery, stating that the  standard  of  proof  and  punishment
           concerning adultery reflects  the  contradictory  practices  and
           decisions of the Iranian Islamic  courts.   In  essence,  rural,
           small town courts are more likely to inflict  harsher  sentences
           and perverse judgments than courts in Tehran."


     There is also an Amnesty International Report, confirmed  in  the  CIPU
     report that a death by stoning did take place in Teheran in June 2001.


 11. We also had regard to the decision in Fazilat [2002] UKIAT 00973  where
     a Tribunal chaired by Collins  J.  restated  the  now  well-established
     principle that the purpose of the 1950  Convention  is  not  to  impose
     western  European  standards  of  court  procedure  and  indeed  prison
     conditions upon the rest of the world, whilst  recognising  that  there
     are nevertheless minimum acceptable standards.  In  this  context  that
     Tribunal considered, after careful analysis of the objective  material,
     that the court procedures in Iran in criminal trials would  not  be  in
     breach of Article 6, and on the evidence before us we come to a similar
     conclusion. That is not to say that perverse decisions  cannot  happen.
     Of course they can in any country. But that however is not the  correct
     test.  We have to assess whether there  is  a  real  risk  of   to  the
     Appellant  of a perverse decision on the facts of this appeal with  the
     heavy consequence that might follow and consequently whether  the  need
     for international protection is engaged under Article 3

 12. We note in assessing the evidence as described  by  the  Adjudicator  a
     number of relevant material factors. Most important, the Appellant  has
     never committed adultery  and  there  would  therefore  be  no  genuine
     evidence against her. Also it would appear that the Appellant  and  her
     husband are  already  divorced  and  that  the  Appellant  has  already
     persuaded a court to award her custody of  their  child.  There  is  no
     evidence that any accusation of adultery was made by her husband in any
     divorce or custody proceedings, or otherwise the Appellant  would  have
     been aware of it and would not have  been  taken  by  surprise  by  the
     accusation when she went court in response to the summons. We also note
     that  although  she  was  summoned  to  court  on  charges  that  could
     potentially carry the death penalty, she was  allowed  to  leave  court
     without any hindrance.

 13. This evidence shows that  the  courts  have  responded  fairly  to  the
     Appellant in the past in the contested custody proceedings. They do not
     operate in a vacuum and would be aware that her husband  has  a  strong
     motive for making his malicious accusation, in that he  is  seeking  to
     challenge the award of custody. The marriage is  now  over  and  so  an
     allegation of adultery would have to relate to past conduct.  In  those
     circumstances the husband would have difficulty explaining  why  if  he
     had three witnesses to adultery, they had not come forward  earlier  in
     the custody proceedings as the Appellant's conduct would  have  been  a
     relevant matter to the court in deciding whether  she  was  a  suitable
     person to be granted custody.  We also note that the Appellant lived in
     Teheran, which is a place to which she will be returned.  The courts in
     Teheran, as the objective material shows, are much less likely to reach
     perverse decisions or impose harsher penalties

 14. For all these reasons we conclude, as did  the  Adjudicator,  that  the
     Appellant should have remained in Teheran  to  defend  the  proceedings
     against her and could now be returned and do so, without any real  risk
     of a perverse decision being reached by the court. There is no error in
     the Adjudicator's determination.

 15. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
