
                                                                   Appeal
No:   HX 21414-02
 VF (Risk-Article3 _Rape) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2002] UKIAT 07225
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                          Date of Hearing: 16th January 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  14/03/2003

                                   Before:

                       Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                             Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                Mr M L James

Between:




                                 VUADI FIONA


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  who
     appealed to the Adjudicator, Ms P Lingam,  against  the  Secretary  of
     State's refusal of her asylum claim.  She also argued that her  return
     to DRC would breach her rights under Article 8 and Article  3  of  the
     ECHR in this country.  The Adjudicator dismissed her appeal under both
     Conventions.  Leave to appeal was granted on a variety of grounds.

  2. The Appellant's  case,  as  summarised  by  the  Adjudicator,  was  as
     follows.  The Appellant had said  that  her  husband,  who,  like  his
     family, had ethnic Rwandan  features,  had  joined  the  DRC  Security
     Service, the ANR, when Laurent Kabila came to power.  After Kabila had
     been assassinated on 16th January 2001, he had been  targeted  because
     he  was  suspected  of  having  links  with  the  rebels  through  his
     relatives, a suspicion heightened by his Rwandan  ethnicity.   He  had
     nonetheless stayed working with the ANR until 10th April 2001.

  3. The Appellant claimed that her husband was arrested on 10th April 2001
     and was accused of communicating with the  rebels.   Her  husband  was
     taken straight to prison and tortured but released one month later  on
     payment of a  50,000  franc  bail.   This,  she  said,  was  a  normal
     procedure.

  4. After his release, her husband had experienced  no  further  problems,
     although he had no job at the ANR  and  had  to  report  back  to  the
     authorities twice a month.  She herself had had  no  problems  at  all
     until 15th December 2001 when their home was raided, her  husband  was
     arrested and communication equipment consisting of a mobile phone  and
     fax machine was found.  She was raped by security forces in  front  of
     her husband and children.  The next day the security  forces  searched
     her house again, but she was not further sexually abused although  she
     was slapped twice.

  5. Her husband's colleague brought her a message from him telling her  to
     leave the country.  The evidence as to how the colleague was  able  to
     obtain that message was in issue before the Tribunal.   She  made  her
     way alone to the United Kingdom, arriving on 31st December  2001  when
     she applied for asylum.  She left her children behind with her mother.
      She does not know where her husband is.  Since  she  arrived  in  the
     United Kingdom she has been living with her brother, and that  is  the
     basis of her claim to family life in the United Kingdom.

  6. The Adjudicator rejected her asylum  claim,  essentially  because  she
     rejected the credibility of the Appellant's evidence that her  husband
     had been arrested on either the first or  the  second  occasion  about
     which she had given evidence, though the Adjudicator did  accept  that
     he may  have  worked  for  the  ANR.   The  Adjudicator  rejected  the
     Appellant's allegation that her husband had been  targeted  on  ethnic
     grounds in view of the lack  of  evidence  of  any  targeting  of  his
     relatives of a similar ethnicity  which  the  Adjudicator  would  have
     expected the Appellant to be able to  provide.   The  Adjudicator  was
     willing to accept that the Appellant had  been  sexually  abused,  but
     because of the background evidence did not accept that it  was  for  a
     Convention reason.  She refused the Article 8  claim,  accepting  that
     the Appellant had some family life with  her  brother  in  the  United
     Kingdom, but pointing out that her children,  mother  and  indeed  her
     husband were in the DRC and that any interference with family life  in
     the United Kingdom was not disproportionate to the  aim  of  effective
     immigration control.

  7. The Appellant's first ground of appeal was that in paragraph 43 of the
     Adjudicator's determination, the Adjudicator had wrongly  declined  to
     attach any weight to a document  in  French  recording  her  husband's
     release on  bail  in  May  2001,  when  the  Adjudicator  reached  her
     conclusion on whether he had in fact been arrested  at  all  in  April
     2001.  The Adjudicator gave it no weight because she said that she had
     no translation of it.  This, however, was  a  misapprehension  on  her
     part;  she did have a translation which she must have overlooked.  Had
     she had regard to it and treated it as genuine  she  might  well  have
     concluded that the husband had been arrested and detained between mid-
     April and mid-May 2001.  The document is in a name other  than  Fiona,
     but that is because the Appellant is using her maiden name rather than
     her  married  name.   The  document  is  from   the   General   Public
     Prosecutor's Office of the Court of Appeal in Kinshasa Gombe.   It  is
     an order to release on bail dated 15th May 2001 and it says that:

           "Considering that the accused acknowledged all the charges  that
           have been made against him:
           Considering that the accused is a first offender:
           Considering  that  the  accused  has  been  in  detention  since
           10/04/2001 ... Considering that [his] release  on  bail  is  not
           likely to disturb law and order, nor to impede  the  preliminary
           investigation:
           ON THESE GROUNDS
           We order  the  release  on  bail  of  the  accused  under  these
           following conditions: ..."


      And there are conditions which include the payment  of  a  deposit  of
      10,000 Congolese Francs, to remain in the  town  of  Kinshasa  and  to
      present himself twice a week in front of the Examining Magistrate.


  8. Mr Deller, for the Home Officer, recognised that the  Adjudicator  had
     been in error in paragraph 43 of her determination.

  9. The Appellant's contentions need to be considered in the light of  the
     fourth and  fifth  grounds  of  appeal.   Part  of  the  Adjudicator's
     reasoning for her rejection of what the Appellant had said  about  the
     second arrest of her husband, in paragraph 45  of  her  determination,
     was that because the first arrest was  made  on  the  grounds  of  the
     authority's suspicion that the husband was in contact with  the  rebel
     forces, it was incredible that his house had not searched and that  he
     had not disposed of his mobile phone and fax machine, the items  which
     the security forces found on  the  second  arrest,  and  thought  were
     incriminating.  Ms Oliso, for  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  those
     items should be regarded as costly items which no-one would  willingly
     destroy especially if he had been  released  from  detention  with  no
     search having been undertaken of his accommodation to find  them.   Mr
     Deller readily accepted that the Adjudicator had probably attached too
     much weight to that factor.

 10. The fifth ground of appeal was  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred  in
     paragraph 46 of  her  determination  in  stating  that  there  was  no
     evidence as to how the Appellant's husband's colleague knew about  his
     alleged arrest.  Ms Oliso pointed the Tribunal to the passage  in  the
     interview where, at question 48, which asked how her husband's  friend
     had received the message for her from her husband, she had  given  the
     answer that the friend was one of his work colleagues  and  that  when
     they knew the husband had been arrested, they had gone  to  visit  him
     and he had passed them the message for her.  At question 49,  she  was
     further asked about when that had happened.   She  replied  that  when
     they had arrested her husband they had taken him to his office  before
     taking him to detention and so the next day her husband's friends  had
     gone to visit him, bringing that message back from him for her.   She,
     herself, agreed that she had not visited her husband on 16th  December
     because she was afraid to go there and did not  know  where  they  had
     taken him.  The evidence which the Adjudicator recorded the  Appellant
     as having given in  cross-examination  was  that  when  her  husband's
     friend told her of her husband's message she was in a hurry  to  leave
     because she was scared, did not know where her husband  was  and  that
     the work colleague had been in communication with the husband  to  see
     him in prison. She did not have time to think the problem over.

 11. Mr Deller accepted that there had been a further  error  made  by  the
     Adjudicator in paragraph 46 because there had been evidence as to  how
     the work colleague knew of  her  husband's  arrest,  but  overall  the
     evidence was not clear.  Mr Deller's submission,  however,  was  that,
     viewed in  the  context  of  all  the  evidence,  the  errors  of  the
     Adjudicator did not significantly detract from the obvious  conclusion
     that the Appellant's story was  just  not  credible  largely  for  the
     reasons which the Adjudicator had given.

 12. Ms Oliso submitted that if the  Adjudicator  had  concluded  that  the
     first arrest might well have taken place followed by  release  in  the
     middle of May, that could have caused a different  appraisal  to  have
     been made of the evidence of the second arrest and in particular  with
     less weight being given to the fact that the Appellant's  husband  had
     not  destroyed  the  communication   equipment.    The   Adjudicator's
     acceptance that the Appellant had been sexually abused would then more
     readily be seen as supportive of the Appellant's  credibility  in  the
     light of the background evidence as to the behaviour of  the  security
     forces, recorded in the determination at paragraph  26.   Although  we
     accept that in two instances the Adjudicator has  overlooked  evidence
     that was before her, and arguably  at  least  has  attached  too  much
     weight to one other factor, we accept Mr Deller's  submissions  as  to
     the impact which those errors have on the overall conclusions  of  the
     Adjudicator.  That is to say in the context of the evidence as a whole
     they are not significant.

 13. In paragraphs 38 to 41, and in the first part of paragraph 42  of  her
     determination, the Adjudicator gives cogent reasons for rejecting  the
     Appellant's contention that, if her husband had been arrested in April
     it was for reasons of ethnicity or in circumstances in which she would
     be persecuted for a Convention reason.  Although paragraph 38,  unlike
     paragraph 39, is not expressly prefaced with the contingent acceptance
     of the fact of the first arrest, nonetheless it is clearly directed to
     the question of whether the reason for any arrest  was  her  husband's
     position and because  he  was  suspected  of  passing  information  to
     rebels.

 14. First, the Adjudicator realistically points out that if the background
     evidence is relied on, after the assassination of Laurent  Kabila  and
     with her husband under suspicion  of  being  in  contact  with  rebels
     through his relatives, he and the Appellant, because she was his wife,
     and his relatives would have been arrested.  They would all have  been
     under suspicion.

 15. Second, if the husband had been arrested because he had been suspected
     of being in contact with the rebels as a member  of  the  ANR,  it  is
     highly unlikely that he would have been released after one month on  a
     form which granted him bail and said that he had, as a first offender,
     admitted the offence.  The form itself, if taken as showing arrest and
     release on bail, which is the way in which the Appellant asks that  it
     be approached, contradicts the Appellant's story as to the reason  for
     the arrest.  It is difficult to envisage her husband being released in
     the circumstances in which he was released if he had been arrested  in
     the circumstances in which she says he had been arrested.  Thereafter,
     he was required to sign on, not twice a month as she said in evidence,
     but twice a week, and he experienced no problems for  several  months.
     She experienced no problems until December 2001.

 16. Third, it is also incredible that if he  had  been  arrested  for  the
     reason described, his home had  not  been  searched  at  all  and  the
     equipment found, which might have been thought to have been a means of
     communicating with the rebels directly or indirectly.

 17. Fourth, the Adjudicator's point in paragraph  40  about  the  lack  of
     information  regarding  the  well-being  of  her  in-laws  is  also  a
     legitimate adverse conclusion on the Appellant's credibility.

 18. If the Adjudicator had concluded that the Appellant's husband had been
     or may have been arrested, it is  plain  that  she  would  still  have
     concluded that the Appellant's evidence  as  to  the  reason  for  the
     arrest, and it is the reason for the arrest which  matters  here,  was
     not credible in the light of her  own  other  evidence  including  the
     document  which  the  Adjudicator   had,   in   effect,   disregarded.
     Accordingly, it is clear in our judgment that the Adjudicator's  error
     in that respect would have made no difference to the key components of
     her appraisal of the Appellant's credibility.

 19. It is clear when the Appellant's statement,  the  interview  questions
     and the cross-examination are read together, that the Appellant's case
     was that no search of her house took place  on  the  occasion  of  her
     husband's first arrest and that it was not until the second arrest  in
     December that the  house  was  searched  for  the  first  time.   That
     position is not quite so clear from  the  Adjudicator's  determination
     because in paragraphs 9 to 18, she records simply the  evidence  given
     in  cross-examination.   It  is  only  later  that   the   Adjudicator
     introduces to her appraisal of the evidence and her  conclusions  what
     emerges from the Appellant's statement and interview.

 20. Even accepting that the Adjudicator attached overmuch significance  to
     the  fact  that  the  husband  had  not  destroyed  the  communication
     equipment following his first arrest, if the first arrest had been for
     the reasons asserted by the Appellant, the  Adjudicator  gives  cogent
     reasons  in  paragraphs  44  to  46  of  her  determination  for   her
     conclusions, adverse to  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  the  second
     arrest.  The reference to the  non-destruction  of  the  communication
     equipment is but one of those reasons.  The Adjudicator first  pointed
     to the fact that the Appellant had said that the security forces  were
     saying that her husband had been communicating with the rebels through
     his relatives;  however, no relatives had been arrested or questioned.
      Second, the security forces had never searched the  house  until  the
     moment of the second arrest which was surprising  given  the  asserted
     basis of the first arrest.  It is not  entirely  irrelevant  that  the
     husband had not destroyed equipment in order to avoid appearing  above
     suspicion with all the problems which suspicion might  be  thought  to
     entail for him.

 21. Third, the Appellant said she failed to enquire as  to  her  husband's
     whereabouts from his colleague when he  brought  the  message  to  her
     because she was anxious to get away, although it  is  plain  from  the
     interview  answers  that  she  knew  that  the  colleague   knew   his
     whereabouts because he had visited her husband  in  prison.   This  is
     very odd.   Further,  there  had  been  no  real  trouble  to  herself
     personally either before the moment of her husband's second arrest  or
     indeed on the next day when the security forces came  again.   Indeed,
     the husband's colleague had not been detained either.

 22. Although the Adjudicator made the error which was the subject  of  the
     fifth ground of appeal, the  true  position  is  far  from  clear  and
     justifies real doubts as to the Appellant's credibility.   Not  merely
     did she not know where her husband was, although  his  colleague  knew
     when he came to visit her, but also if the husband had  been  arrested
     in the circumstances in which the Appellant says he was on the  second
     occasion, it is odd that he should have  been  taken  via  the  office
     where he worked and that a colleague should then have been able to  go
     and visit him in prison and communicate messages from him to his wife.

 23. We accept that rape by the security forces of the wives of  those  who
     are  apprehended  does  take  place  and  this  is  recorded  by   the
     Adjudicator in paragraph 26 of her determination.  The Adjudicator was
     willing to accept that the Appellant would have been sexually  abused.
     The issue was whether that would have been for  a  Convention  reason.
     The background material does not suggest  that  she  would  have  been
     raped on account of her imputed political opinions.  She  herself  was
     not of Rwandan ethnicity.  The background evidence rather  shows  that
     rape by the security forces is a random, rather than a targeted event,
     except in very unusual circumstances.

 24. Overall, we are quite satisfied that the  errors  of  the  Adjudicator
     could have made no significant difference  to  her  appraisal  of  the
     Appellant's evidence as essentially incredible and  untruthful.   Some
     of the events may have  happened,  but  they  did  not  happen  for  a
     Convention reason or in the circumstances which have been described by
     the Appellant.  The background evidence in relation  to  rape  and  in
     particular the passage from the United States State Department  Report
     relied on in the grounds of  appeal,  which  is  echoed  in  the  CIPU
     Report, shows rape to be a common problem  in  certain  neighbourhoods
     and at times of night.  It does not support  a  more  general  finding
     such as would enable the Tribunal to conclude that the event  of  rape
     was specifically supportive of the Appellant's evidence.

 25. The third ground of appeal was that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
     attach significance to the fact that only the Appellant's husband  had
     been employed by the ANR and therefore that only he would have been of
     interest to the authorities.  The significance of that was that it was
     said to explain why the Appellant herself and her husband's  relatives
     would not have been questioned following the  husband's  arrest.   The
     Adjudicator made no such error.  The basis of the Appellant's evidence
     was that the husband was of interest to the authorities because of his
     ethnicity and because he had been suspected of communicating with  the
     rebels through his relatives.  In that context, what happened  to  his
     relatives, who would have  shared  his  ethnicity  and  had  been  the
     suspected conduits through which information was passed, was obviously
     highly relevant.  On the Appellant's  own  evidence,  the  authorities
     would have been most interested in them.  The absence of  evidence  of
     any problems for them, or indeed for her as his wife, shows the  basis
     of the claim to have been false.

 26. On a self-contradictory note, the grounds of  appeal  also  sought  to
     rely on an additional statement dated 10th July 2002 but put in before
     us in which the Appellant says, in paragraph 14, that she  has  called
     her mother and children and that her mother  has  told  her  that  her
     husband's brothers "have had problems and have left Kinshasa, but I do
     not know what kind of problems they have had".  This is far too  vague
     to show that there are any relevant problems which  the  brothers  may
     have suffered in consequence of being relatives of the husband.

 27. The Appellant also submitted that her return to DRC would be a  breach
     of her Article 3 ECHR rights because of the incidence  of  rape.   She
     emphasised what was said in the United States State Department Report:

           "The  significant  risk  of  rape,  sometimes   perpetrated   by
           uniformed men, restricted freedom of movement at night for women
           in  some  neighbourhoods.   Groups   of   citizens   implemented
           neighbourhood watch programmes,  but  women  in  some  parts  of
           Kinshasa and Lumbumbashi did not leave their homes at night  due
           to fear of attack."


      Similar passages can be found in  the  October  2002  CIPU  Report  at
      paragraph 5.32, the high incidence of rape is referred to in paragraph
      5.43.  But this untargeted and  random  rape,  which  restricts  night
      movement and requires women to be particularly  careful  in  parts  of
      Kinshasa, does not support the conclusion that the Appellant would  be
      subjected to treatment remotely approaching a  breach  of  Article  3.
      There is no evidence that she would be targeted in  that  way  by  the
      security forces were she to be returned.


 28. In this context, Ms Oliso also relied on a medical report to show  not
     merely that the  Appellant  had  been  raped,  which  the  Adjudicator
     appears to have accepted at least in significant part because she  was
     willing to accept that the Appellant had suffered  sexual  abuse,  but
     also that the Appellant  was  suffering  from  post  traumatic  stress
     disorder and her return to  DRC  in  those  circumstances  would  also
     breach her Article 3 rights.  The report from Dr Shehadeh was referred
     to by the Adjudicator but not in the context of post traumatic  stress
     disorder.  Dr Shehadeh is not a psychiatrist;  he is  a  primary  care
     consultant who has  had  eighteen  months  unspecified  experience  in
     psychiatry.   His  conclusions  in  relation  to  PTSD   are   briefly
     expressed,  with  little  explanation  or  analysis.    He   proceeds,
     understandably, on the factual basis that what the Appellant has  told
     him is entirely correct and his analysis of her alleged  PTSD  depends
     in part at least upon events surrounding her husband, other  than  her
     rape.  These are events which the Adjudicator has rejected as  untrue.
     The Appellant explained that she had not sought medical assistance for
     her condition when she was interviewed in February 2002.  Even in  May
     2002 she had not registered with a GP because it was difficult  to  do
     so and even though by July 2002 she had found a GP, she had  not  told
     him of her history and sought the therapy recommended for  her  by  Dr
     Shehadeh in his report  in  respect  of  her  alleged  PTSD.   He  had
     recommended in particular that the Appellant seek treatment  from  her
     GP for depression and PTSD, including a sedating anti  depressant  and
     counselling.

 29. The report is wholly inadequate to support  a  contention  that  there
     would be a real risk of treatment which  reached  the  high  threshold
     required for a breach of Article 3 upon return  of  the  Appellant  to
     DRC.  Had the Adjudicator dealt more fully with the medical  evidence,
     we cannot  help  but  feel  that  it  would  have  consisted  of  more
     substantial criticisms of its usefulness.

 30.  For  those  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  errors  in   the
     Adjudicator's determination make no real difference to  the  appraisal
     of the Appellant's version of events as implausible and incredible  in
     its essential features.  We are satisfied that she is not at  risk  of
     persecution, or persecution for a Convention  reason  upon  return  to
     DRC.

 31. This appeal is dismissed.









                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

