
Heard at FIELD HOUSE
On 6th January 2003

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                 Date Determination notified
                                                                  19/03/2003


                                   Before:
                         Mr. D. J. Parkes (Chairman)
                               Mr. R. G. Care

      BETWEEN

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                   - and -

                              MR. SULAIMAN BAH

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mrs. P. H. Drummond-Farrall, promulgated  on  8th  August
      2002, allowing the appeal of Mr.  Bah,  a  citizen  of  Sierra  Leone,
      against directions made by the Secretary of State on 14th  March  2002
      for his removal from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    The Secetary of State was represented before us by  Senior  Presenting
      Officer, Mr. J. McGirr and the  Respondent,  Mr.  Bah,  by  Mr.  Shaji
      Revindran of The Refugee Legal Centre.

3.    When called to give evidence before  the  Adjudicator  the  Respondent
      adopted the contents of his written  statement.    He  was  not  cross
      examined  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State   and   in   those
      circumstances there was  clearly  no  challenge  to  his  credibility.
      The parties based  their  submissions  upon  the  objective  evidence.
      That seems to us to place the  Tribunal  in  as  good  a  position  to
      consider the merits of this appeal as was  the  Adjudicator  at  first
      instance.

4.    The Respondent, who came to the United Kingdom on  6th  February  2002
      and claimed asylum two days later, was  born  in  Freetown  in  Sierra
      Leone on 14th February 1984 and lived  there  until  1997.     He  was
      then,  at  the  age  of  13  years  abducted  by  the  rebels  of  the
      Revolutionary United Front and forced to join them.   His  father  has
      since been killed.   He has a sister who was captured by the rebels in
      1998 and he does not know where she is.    He has another sister  whom
      he last saw in 1997 at the house of his mother and he  does  not  know
      her whereabouts.      He last saw his mother in the village  of  Baidu
      which is her home village in 1997 and knows nothing more of her.

5.    The armed forces Revolutionary Council took  over  government  on  the
      25th May 1997 in a coup and called  upon  the  R.U.F.  to  join  them.
      There was  widespread  use  of  torture  and  ill-treatment  and  many
      civilians were killed or injured in the fighting but  a  Nigerian  led
      West African Peacekeeping Force based in  Liberia,  ECOMOG  intervened
      and in mid February 1998 liberated Freetown and went on to secure most
      major towns and roads in the country.      On 10th March of that  year
      President Kabbah returned to the country and  announced  a  new  broad
      based government.

6.    The Respondent did not make it with those of the R.U.F.  who  went  to
      Freetown, he got  no  further  than  Wellington  where  former  school
      friends saw the Appellant with  the  rebels  and  he  attributes  that
      recognition  to  the  burning  down  of  the  family   home.       The
      Respondent's family had two houses one in Wellington and the other  in
      Calab town and his father died when the Calab town house was burned in
      February 1998.    The rebels of the R.U.F. were forced to retire  into
      the bush.

7.    In July 1998 the R.U.F. rebel leader Foday Sankoh returned  to  Sierra
      Leone from detention in Nigeria three months later he was sentenced to
      death for treason.   He had been seen  as  willing  to  sign  a  peace
      accord, however, and those of the faction of the R.U.F. in  which  was
      the Respondent ran to the border with  Liberia  where  the  Respondent
      went to a refugee camp to register but was recognized by  people  from
      Kailahun and almost beaten to death.    He was taken  to  hospital  in
      Monrovia.

8.    In Sierra Leone on 6th January 1999 rebels entered parts  of  Freetown
      but a few days later ECOMOG troops launched an offensive and they  had
      to retreat to the east.    By 31st January ECOMOG had retaken  all  of
      Freetown.     On February 2nd President Kabbah announced his  plan  to
      build a new army and national  militia.    On  May  18th  a  ceasefire
      agreement was signed by the government of Sierra Leone and the  R.U.F.
      The Lome Peace Agreement was signed on 7th July of  that  year.     In
      November the United Nations began employing peacekeeping troops and in
      January 2000 ECOMOG began to withdraw its own forces.     In  February
      2000 the United  Nations  Security  Council  agreed  to  increase  its
      peacekeeping force from 6,000 to 11,100.     In November 2000 the Lome
      Peace Accord was revisited, a ceasefire  agreement  was  signed  again
      between the government and the R.U.F.  a task  force  of  500  British
      Royal marines arrived in Freetown to  re-enforce  British  troops  who
      were already training the Sierra  Leonean  military.      In  February
      2001 Parliament approved the Truth and Reconciliation Commission  Bill
      and the R.U.F. set up a political council to explore ways of advancing
      Sierra Leones stalled peace process.    Matters  progressed  until  in
      January 2002 a disarmament process was  completed  and  the  following
      month the registration of voters was  also  completed.     It  was  at
      about that time that the Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom.

9.    Whilst the Appellant was at the refugee camp he had been  captured  by
      Liberian rebels and constrained to carry goods,  guns  and  ammunition
      for the "rebel movement for the reconstruction  of  Liberia".     This
      went on until the 4th September 2001 and the Respondent was used as an
      intermediary because  he  could  speak  Fullah  and  assist  in  their
      negotiations with the traders who came to buy diamonds.     The United
      Nations had banned the Liberians from that trade.    That brought  the
      Respondent on 4th September  2001  to  Zozo  but  whilst  the  diamond
      transaction was going on the troops of  Charles  Taylor  attacked  the
      rebels in Zozo and the Respondent had to run with some of the Guineans
      back to Kailahun which he used as a route to go to Guinea.    While at
      Kailahun he met people who were antagonistic towards  him  because  he
      had been involved in some of the treatment accorded  to  them  by  the
      R.U.F.     The Respondent also met former members of the A.F.R.C. whom
      he and other members of the R.U.F. had at one  time  been  ordered  to
      torture.      The Respondent had nothing to identify him and  was  not
      identified as a Sierra Leonean rebel and managed to enter Guinea  with
      the nationals of  that  country  where  he  stayed  at  Conakry  until
      February 2002 and managed to obtain  assistance  in  travelling  on  a
      plane to the United Kingdom.

10.   The findings of the Adjudicator, if we can call them that at all,  are
      so brief that we consider it appropriate to  set  them  out  in  full.
      They are to be found at paragraph 9 of her determination and  read  as
      follows:

           In determining this matter I have considered  all  the  evidence
           both documentary and oral in the light of the  submissions  both
           oral  and  documentary  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.      The
           Appellant claims that he was a member of the R.U.F. as  a  child
           soldier  and  was  abducted,  fighting  with  them  against  the
           government forces and certainly the background material supports
           this.    It supports the Appellant suffered mental and  physical
           abuse  in  Sierra  Leone,  inhuman  and   degrading   treatment.
           Background evidence does indeed point that the C.D.F,  summarily
           executing and abusing suspected R.U.F. supporters,  particularly
           from the populace towards former R.U.F. fighters.


11.   We reproduce those last few lines as they appear.

12.   The Adjudicator expressed her conclusion as follows:

           My finding is that the Appellant has been persecuted  in  Sierra
           Leone and has a well founded fear of persecution now and in  the
           future  should  he  return  there.    I  also  find  there   are
           substantial grounds for believing that he is  at  real  risk  of
           serious harm should he return to Sierra Leone.


      Upon that basis she allowed the appeal.

13.   Mr. Revindran suggests that we ought to uphold  the  determination  of
      the Adjudicator.    We should consider the  level  of  risk  for  this
      Respondent who was only  13  years  old  when  abducted  and  that  is
      relevant  in  the  light  of  paragraph   7   of   the   Adjudicator's
      determination where she records the view taken  by  the  Secretary  of
      State in the refusal letter that in Sierra  Leone  circumstances  have
      now changed.   Even when the Respondent was in Wellington  there  were
      people from Freetown who were aware of his involvement with the R.U.F.
          That knowledge puts  the  Respondent  at  particular  risk.    The
      primary risk,  however,  he  maintains,  is  from  the  pro-government
      militia  the  civil  defence  force.     Although,  as  mentioned   in
      paragraph 5.55 of the C.I.P.U. report the United Nations reported that
      the disarmament of all militia and rebel groups had been  achieved  in
      January 2002 that does not  mean  that  such  groups  no  longer  have
      influence within the community and it is likely that all  groups  have
      retained caches of weapons.     Just because the C.D.F. is  no  longer
      identified as C.D.F. it does not mean that it is no longer active.

14.   We were referred to a letter dated 20th May 2002 from  the  U.N.H.C.R.
      to a representative of the Refugee Legal Centre urging States to  take
      a cautious approach to enforced returns to Sierra  Leone  because  the
      R.U.F. has failed on two previous occasions to follow through with its
      commitments to peace and it may take time  for  the  new  position  to
      filter down to the rank and file.      That  letter,  however,  is  of
      particular force where it mentions the heartland of the R.U.F. in  the
      Eastern region rather than Freetown.     More significantly,  however,
      it was pointed out to us by Mr. McGirr that the letter in question  is
      headed "Re: U.N.H.C.R. position of returning single female  to  Sierra
      Leone".

15.   In a report from U.N. OCHA  but  which  is  said  not  necessarily  to
      reflect the views of the United Nations  there  appears  the  reminder
      that resentment still runs high because the R.U.F. can  hardly  expect
      sympathy when it is possible to  see  child  amputees  walking  around
      without hands.      It has to be accepted, however, that the situation
      in Freetown is relatively stable.

16.   Mr. Revindran sought to persuade us that if  we  considered  that  the
      determination could not stand then as credibility was not called  into
      question and the Adjudicator  had  not  dealt  with  the  question  of
      internal flight  and  there  were  no  credibility  issues  to  create
      difficulty in regard to delay we ought to remit it, if at all, back to
      the same Adjudicator.

17.   Mr. McGirr suggested that the appeal ought to be remitted  to  another
      Adjudicator  because  Mrs.  Drummond-Farrall  had  not  addressed  the
      question of internal flight nor that  of  sufficiency  of  protection.
      The  Respondent  had  been  particularly  involved  because   of   his
      linguistic skills and there was an absence of any findings about  that
      and there were no findings about the protective  role  of  the  United
      Nations force.    In the grounds of appeal an analogy was  drawn  with
      the decision in Dyli  [200]  Imm.  A.R.  652.     That  case  provides
      support for the view that when a force  such  as  KFOR  in  Kosovo  is
      providing protection under the auspices of  the  United  Nations  then
      that is to be treated in similar manner to protection from  the  State
      itself.   We do not consider that the situation in Sierra Leone is  on
      all fours with that in Kosovo.    The force is  assisting  the  Sierra
      Leonee authorities and to draw an analogy with Dyli does not  seem  to
      us to be apt.

18.   We do not consider that this is a case of internal relocation at  all.
         The Respondent would be returned to Freetown which is where he  was
      born and the city which was his home.    It seems to us that the first
      ground of appeal has been made out that the Adjudicator's finding that
      the Respondent was at risk from the civil defence force as a suspected
      R.U.F. supporter is unsound.    That seems to us to be out  of  accord
      with the objective evidence to which we have made reference.

19.   The third ground of appeal also seems to us to be made  out  that  the
      Respondent did not in fact flee or find  it  necessary  to  flee  from
      Sierra Leone itself but the circumstances which had taken him from the
      R.U.F. into Liberia and then Guinea had led to his problems.

20.   Upon the objective evidence we are clearly of the  view  that  it  was
      made out before the Adjudicator that there was no real risk,  in  view
      of the more recent changes which have taken place in Sierra Leone, for
      the Respondent to be returned to Freetown.  That is his home city,  it
      is a place where there is no real present risk of persecution or where
      he would be  treated  contrary  to  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.   It has not been shown to us that such a  view  would  be
      mistaken.   So far as the population in  Freetown  is  concerned  what
      exists there is the usual situation after a state  of  civil  war  but
      which does not create problems  which  reach  the  level  of  severity
      necessary to establish a breach of Article 3.

21.   Remittal is not in our view the appropriate course.    The facts  have
      been established, they come from the Respondent, credibility is not an
      issue, the  objective  evidence  was  before  us,  both  parties  have
      addressed us upon that objective evidence.    Our conclusion  is  that
      the Secretary of State has made out his case, the appeal  is  allowed,
      and the directions of the Secretary of State restored.









                                                                D. J. Parkes
                                                       Acting Vice-President



