
H-NMB-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |AM (Risk: Domestic Violence |
|                           |        |- Article 3) Armenia [2003] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00025                 |
|On 4th June 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|04.06.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr A R Mackey - Chairman                                          |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Mukherjee of Counsel
            representing Popkin & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, who is an 18 year old citizen of Armenia  appeals  with
    leave against the determination of an  Adjudicator  Mr  D  J  Boyd  QC,
    promulgated 25th November 2002 wherein he dismissed an  appeal  against
    the decision of the Respondent who  had  refused  leave  to  enter  and
    asylum and human rights claims.   The  Adjudicator  however  stated  at
    paragraph 33 of his determination:

      "However I recommend that the  Secretary  of  State  should  carefully
         consider whether the appellant is at this stage in a fit  state  to
         be returned and that she be granted  further  leave  to  remain  in
         order to allow her  to  mature  and  recover.   Any  doubt  in  the
         Secretary of State's mind should be  resolved  in  the  Appellant's
         favour."

The Appellant's Background

2.    The Adjudicator had  found  the  Appellant's  evidence  credible.   He
    noted that she was the only daughter of a  couple  from  Armenia.   Her
    mother had been a Jehovah's Witness and had died of an illness in  July
    2001 when the Appellant was approximately 16.  The Appellant  was  thus
    left in the situation where her only close  relative  was  her  father.
    Unfortunately  there  had  been  a  violent  relationship  between  the
    Appellant's mother and father and  on  the  death  of  her  mother  the
    Appellant herself had began to suffer from beatings with belt and fists
    from her father and was  also  locked  in  a  darkened  room  for  long
    periods.  The Appellant had been able to arrange  with  her  only  near
    relative, an aunt, now based in  the  United  Kingdom  to  escape  from
    Armenia arriving in this country in September 2001 and initially  given
    leave to enter as a student.

3.    Before the Adjudicator  both  the  Appellant  and  the  aunt  MP  gave
    evidence.  It was explained that the Appellant was very  timid,  lacked
    confidence and grieved for the loss of her mother.  She was living with
    MP, her common-law partner and their three children.

4.    Psychiatric evidence was  provided  from  Dr  Caroline  Gorst-Unsworth
    which recorded the psychological problems of  the  Appellant  and  that
    during the time when she was receiving emotional support from her  aunt
    there had been therapeutic benefit.  It was claimed that on  return  to
    her father she will be caused further psychological damage.

5.    Consideration was also given to the issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
    could be supported by friends  from  the  Jehovah's  Witness  faith  in
    Armenia and while it was noted that the faith  was  itself  illegal  in
    Armenia  the  Adjudicator  did  not  consider  the  Appellant  suffered
    persecution in the past because of her religious beliefs.  However  the
    Adjudicator went on to find that the recovery of the Appellant would be
    impeded by further abuse from her father and that she would not be able
    to seek support from him or any other relatives, "she might get support
    and accommodation with friends, including a Witness family".   He  then
    concluded:

      "While her return to Armenia would trigger concerns about her  Article
         3 and 8 rights, I am not satisfied on balance that the  risk  would
         be so serious that these risks would be infringed.  I have to say I
         have reached this view only after careful deliberation."

      He then dismissed the human rights appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

6.     Mr  Mukherjee  submitted  to  us  that  the  determination   of   the
    Adjudicator was flawed and that there was a real risk of  a  breach  of
    either Article 3 or Article 8  of  the  ECHR  if  this  Appellant  were
    returned to Armenia.  He submitted that the father's domestic  violence
    was a real issue and that he would find her on return.  The psychiatric
    evidence supported the Appellant's depressed  psychological  state  and
    that we should give weight to the conclusions in that.

7.    Beyond  this  he  noted  that  there  was  no  other  support  network
    available to this Appellant on return to Armenia.  The evidence set out
    in a specialist report from Dr Robert Chenciner  (5th  November  2002),
    which had also been before the Adjudicator, confirms that there was  no
    government  or  non-governmental  organisations  available  to  provide
    support to a young woman alone in Armenia where there  was  a  risk  of
    domestic violence.

8.    He submitted therefore as there were clearly doubts  in  the  mind  of
    the Adjudicator from his conclusions at paragraphs 31 and  33  that  he
    should have gone on to at least conclude that there would be a risk  of
    a breach of either Article 3 or 8  for  a  period  of  many  months  or
    possibly years to come.  He submitted that the determination should not
    have ended in a vague recommendation but  in  a  firm  conclusion  that
    there was a real risk of abuse which would breach Article 3.

9.    In relation to the Article 8 claim we were able to ascertain that  the
    aunt MP has exceptional leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  until
    19th April 2004.  The Appellant is living with her aunt and  her  three
    young children and the partner of MP who was stated  to  be  a  British
    citizen.

10.   Mr Mukherjee submitted that it would be a breach of the  private  life
    of this Appellant she had established  in  UK  if  she  were  returned,
    particularly given the lack of mental health care and emotional support
    that would be available to her.

The Respondent's Submissions

11.   Mr Sheikh submitted to us that  the  Adjudicator's  determination  was
    not flawed in relation to the Article 3 ECHR assessment.   He  conceded
    that there was a risk that if  this  Appellant  were  returned  to  her
    father she may be abused again.  However he noted that she  was  now  a
    woman in her own right and would have the ability to live independently
    in a manner that would not breach Article 3.  He also asked us to  note
    the very  high  threshold  of  breach  of  Article  3  as  set  out  in
    determinations of the European Court of Human Rights such as Bensaid.

12.   He submitted that there was a possibility that the Appellant could  be
    supported by Jehovah's Witness families in Armenia.  She had shown some
    independence in the past by distributing leaflets on her own behalf and
    carrying out her religion.  He also noted that the Appellant's evidence
    indicated she had continued to see her  Jehovah  Witness  friends  even
    though her father refused to let her be involved.  Finally he submitted
    that there  was  a  possibility  of  financial  support  given  to  the
    Appellant on return by her aunt and also there was the  possibility  of
    the aunt returning to Armenia to be with the Appellant.

13.   On the issue of Article 8 he submitted that the determination  in  the
    Court of Appeal in Ullah and Do was relevant and the  Article  8  right
    could not be claimed in such a  situation.   He  also  noted  that  the
    Appellant's aunt MP did not have  status  to  remain  in  this  country
    beyond 2004.

14.   He submitted that, following the determination in the Court of  Appeal
    in Mahmood,  even if it were accepted that there would be a  disruption
    of the Appellant's family or private life by  her  return  to  Armenia,
    that it would not be disproportionate  to  the  rightful  objective  of
    immigration control.

15.   He also asked us to note that other recommendation could  be  made  to
    the Secretary of State and it was not a fault in the  determination  of
    this Adjudicator to make a recommendation and  it  do  not  indicate  a
    contradiction in the assessment.

16.    We  asked  whether  any  consideration  had   been   given   to   the
    recommendation of the Adjudicator.  We were advised  that  it  did  not
    appear this had happened presumably on the basis that the  Home  Office
    is awaiting the outcome of this appeal.

17.   In reply Mr Mukherjee submitted that it was  unrealistic  to  consider
    that this appellant could lead an independent life from her  father  on
    return to Armenia at this time of  her  life  particularly  noting  the
    agreed findings that she  was  a  quiet  woman  who  appeared  to  lack
    confidence and needed emotional support.  He noted that  the  objective
    evidence indicated that a person in such a situation  was  at  risk  of
    being forced into prostitution merely to survive.  He also asked us  to
    note that the psychiatric evidence indicated that the Appellant  needed
    further time to grieve over a  limited  period  of  time.   Finally  he
    submitted that  the  possibility  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses  giving  her
    support on return could not be argued  as  being  sufficient  and  that
    would not allow her to lead a life away from her father.

18.   He submitted also that it was wholly unrealistic to expect MP and  her
    family to return to Armenia.  Beyond that  we  did  not  have  evidence
    before  us  as  to  their  current  situation  in  the  status  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and them.

19.   We reserved our Determination.

The Issues

20.   We found the issue before us to  be  whether  the  assessment  of  the
    Adjudicator, of the human rights under Articles 3 and  8  of  the  ECHR
    sustainable.  If so should a recommendation made to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a period of further leave to remain?

DECISION

21.   We are satisfied  after  careful  consideration  of  this  Appellant's
    case,  which  because  of  the  acceptance   of   credibility,   raised
    humanitarian issues, that the  assessment  of  the  Adjudicator  was  a
    correct one.  The only possible ground  this  Appellant  could  succeed
    under would be under Article 3 of the ECHR.  In this  regard  we  adopt
    the binding reasoning of the Court of Appeal in Ullah and Do in respect
    of the Article 8 claim.

22.   The standard required under Article 3 is  a  high  one  and  this  was
    clearly reflected in the European Court Determination of  Bensaid.   It
    is  considered  that  while  the  Appellant's  situation  may   be   an
    unfortunate one   there are  not  substantive  reasons  for  concluding
    there would be a real risk of a breach of Article 3 if she were  to  be
    returned to Armenia.  We find ourselves in  almost  complete  agreement
    with the findings of the Adjudicator  that  while  an  infringement  of
    Article 3 has  not  been  established  to  the  risk  and  severity  of
    maltreatment levels, required in terms of relevant  jurisprudence,  the
    Appellant's humanitarian situation is a  very  concerning  one  in  the
    short term.  The  psychiatric  evidence  presented  reflects  that  and
    indicates the benefits received from the emotional support provided  by
    her aunt.  Noting that the Aunt MP herself has only  exceptional  leave
    to remain in this country until 18 April 2004 we strongly recommend  to
    the Secretary of State in this case that consideration should be  given
    to the grant of some form of leave to remain in this country until  the
    same date of 18 April 2004 for this Appellant.  During that period  the
    Appellant would have the opportunity to continue her recovery from  the
    loss of her mother and abuse by her father and ,in  addition,  grow  in
    age and maturity so that she would ultimately  be  able  to  return  to
    Armenia and live an independent life.  Whether return took  place  with
    her aunt or otherwise is a matter of conjecture  only  for  us  but  it
    could be taken  into  consideration  in  any  application  and  if  any
    extended leave to remain is granted.

23.   The appeal is dismissed, however, on the unique features of this  case
    noting the short term humanitarian considerations some form of leave to
    remain is recommended for consideration by the respondent to  the  date
    suggested.




                                                                  A R Mackey
                                                              Vice President

