
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |MS (Risk on Return -        |
|                           |        |Detention - India - "Q"     |
|                           |        |Branch) Sri Lanka [2003]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00124                 |
|On  14 October 2003        |        |                            |
|Dictated 14 October 2003                                          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|31.10.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Richard Chalkley (Chairman)                                    |
|Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Mr J Collins of Counsel, instructed by Rasiah & Co, Solicitors, appeared  on
behalf of the appellant and Mr D Ekagha, a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sri  Lanka,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Ms Susan B Pitt,
      who, in a determination promulgated  on  9  April  2003,  following  a
      hearing at Taylor House on 31 March 2003,  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the respondent, taken on 13 March  2001
      to refuse to grant leave to enter after refusing asylum.

2.    The appellant's claim that he was forcibly recruited as  a  driver  by
      the LTTE in 1990.  As a result of internal divisions within  the  LTTE
      he was detained by them in 1992.   In  December  1997  he  managed  to
      escape and fled to Southern India in March 1998.  While  in  India  he
      was arrested by security officials on suspicion of being a  member  of
      the LTTE and was held in gaol without charge until October  2000  when
      an uncle of his, who travelled  to  India  on  business,  secured  his
      release on payment of a bribe.  He then travelled back to  Colombo  in
      December 2000 but was arrested at the airport by the  authorities  and
      accused of LTTE connections.  He was detained for two months in prison
      until his uncle was able to obtain his release  by  bribing  a  prison
      official.  The appellant then fled Sri Lanka, fearing  both  the  LTTE
      and the authorities.  He claimed asylum on his arrival in  the  United
      Kingdom on 6 February 2001.

3.    The  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  Adjudicator's  findings  and
      suggest that her reasoning is irrational.   At  paragraph  10  of  the
      determination the  Adjudicator  accepts  that  the  appellant  gave  a
      generally consistent and accurate account, and  at  paragraph  11  she
      referred to medical reports submitted on his behalf.  However, she did
      not accept  that  the  reports  were  determinative  evidence  of  his
      account, despite the fact that serious scars had  been  noted  by  the
      doctor who gave the  opinion  that  causation  was  likely  to  be  as
      asserted  by  the  appellant.   The   grounds   also   challenge   the
      Adjudicator's failure to accept the appellant's means of  escape  from
      the LTTE, because they were somewhat similar to his  sister's  account
      of her escape via a toilet.   The grounds assert that the  appellant's
      sister's account was  irrelevant  as  to  the  appellant's  claim  and
      submitted that the coincidence of the  sister's  account  of  how  she
      escaped from  detention  should  not  have  played  any  part  in  the
      Adjudicator's assessment of the appellant's own escape.   The  grounds
      also suggest that at paragraphs 16 and 17  of  the  determination  the
      Adjudicator  indulged  in  speculation  and  that  there  was  nothing
      incredible about his returning to Sri Lanka after securing his release
      in India, or by him stating that he  had  nowhere  else  to  go.   The
      Adjudicator did not accept that the appellant would be able to  secure
      his release on payment of a bribe after he had been  detained  in  Sri
      Lanka in February 2001, but given the fact that bribery is endemic  in
      Sri Lanka this finding is  irrational.   The  grounds  suggested  that
      given the current volatility in Sri Lanka  the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      finding that the appellant would not be at risk  of  ill-treatment  on
      return.

4.    In his submissions to us, Mr Collins suggested that the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions did not stand up to  scrutiny.   The  Adjudicator  accepts
      that the appellant was  a  member  of  the  LTTE  and  that  following
      internal disagreements he was held in custody for two years, until  he
      managed to run away in 1997 and go to India.  While he was in India he
      was held by "Q" Branch  of  the  Security  Services  and,  Mr  Collins
      suggested, if it was accepted that he was held by "Q" Branch in  India
      then there must be a serious possibility that they will have passed on
      information concerning the appellant to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
      That, he suggested,  explained  the  appellant's  swift  detention  on
      return once he had secured release in India.  He  was  known  to  have
      been involved in the LTTE.  On his return to Sri Lanka now,  he  would
      simply be detained again.  In recent months there has been  a  serious
      deterioration in the situation in Sri Lanka.  He relied  on  paragraph
      4.76 of the CIPU report of April 2003, an extract of which  he  handed
      to us.  He suggested that security had been tightened in Sri Lanka and
      as a result the Tribunal should  exercise  increased  caution.   While
      scarring is not an overriding concern, the fact  that  this  appellant
      does have scarring indicates that he has been mistreated in the  past.
      The Adjudicator accepts that he was an LTTE member and the authorities
      in Sri Lanka know that this appellant has been detained in India.   So
      far as the Adjudicator's findings in relation to his escape from  LTTE
      custody is concerned, on any proper view it was, submitted Mr Collins,
      entirely plausible that he could have escaped in the way in  which  he
      described  to  the  Adjudicator.   The  Adjudicator's   approach   was
      irrational and in the circumstances the appeal should be allowed.

5.    Mr Ekahga submitted  that  the  determination  was  sustainable.   The
      Adjudicator did not believe  that  the  appellant  had  been  held  in
      custody in India and did not believe that if he had been he would have
      returned to Sri Lanka.  She did not therefore accept that he had  been
      detained on his return to  Sri  Lanka  or  that  he  would  have  been
      released on payment of a bribe.  He invited us to dismiss the  appeal.
      In his closing remarks to us, Mr Collins submitted that the  appellant
      was known to have had involvement with the LTTE.   It  was  to  escape
      from the LTTE that he went to India.  The authorities will know of his
      involvement with LTTE and that will cause him to be at risk.

6.    We reserved our determination.

7.    We have concluded that we must dismiss this appeal.

8.    We handed back to Mr Collins a bundle  of  documents  which  had  been
      submitted by his instructing solicitors but only within the  last  few
      days and not in accordance  with  directions  that  had  been  clearly
      issued by the Tribunal.  We permitted him to hand in pages 101 and 102
      of the Sri Lanka  April  2003  Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit
      Report.

9.    The Adjudicator found that the  appellant  gave  generally  consistent
      evidence across his interview and his witness statement, and  in  oral
      evidence and that he was accurate as to the sequence of events in  his
      account and the dates.  She found it credible that he was a member  of
      the LTTE.  In dealing with the medical evidence, the Adjudicator noted
      that the appellant may have had a broken ankle and has back pain.  She
      reports on the asylum medical  care  report  and  notes  the  scarring
      referred to in it.  In his conclusion, Dr Costa said:

           "[The appellant] has scars which, in my professional opinion, on
           the balance of probability, are compatible with his  allegations
           of how they were sustained."

      The Adjudicator notes that the scars were not particularly serious and
      could have been incurred in various other ways than that described  by
      the appellant.  She did not find that they were determinative evidence
      of his account and noted that in his submissions, Mr Collins  accepted
      that scarring was no longer considered to be a  significant  issue  on
      return to Sri Lanka.  The Adjudicator did  not  accept  that  scarring
      would be a significant factor on return.  We  find  that  contrary  to
      paragraph 5 of the grounds, the Adjudicator did take the  report  into
      account.   Simply  because  the  author  believed,  "on   balance   of
      probability" they were compatible with the appellant's allegations  of
      how they were sustained, did not believe that they could not have been
      sustained in some other way.


10.   In relation to the appellant's escape from the LTTE,  the  Adjudicator
      noted at paragraph 14 of her determination  that  he  claimed  he  had
      escaped by going through the side of a latrine which was  screened  by
      palm leaves.  What she said was that she did not find it plausible,

           "that someone the LTTE would want to detain for two years  would
           be able to escape in such a simple fashion.  He stated that  his
           escape  could  be  linked  to  or  somehow  explained   by   the
           assassination of the Deputy Leader of the LTTE in 1997.  He  did
           not elaborate on this and I am unable to see any connection."

11.   Having found the appellant's account of his escape to be  implausible,
      she then went on to note that  the  account  was  rendered  even  more
      implausible when the appellant's sister also  stated  at  the  hearing
      that she too escaped from  the  LTTE  whilst  using  a  latrine.   The
      Adjudicator found that this  undermined  the  appellant's  account  of
      actually being detained by the LTTE.  We find there to be no merit  in
      paragraph 6 of  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  appellant's  sister's
      account of how she escaped from detention did not play any part in the
      Adjudicator's assessment of the  appellant's  own  escape.   What  the
      Adjudicator  did  was  to  find  it  implausible  and  then  note  the
      coincidence.

12.   The Adjudicator went on in paragraph 16 to find  it  implausible  that
      the appellant would choose to return to Colombo in December 2000  when
      he had been in detention in India as a  suspected  LTTE  member.   She
      notes that there was a possibility that, had he been held in detention
      in India, the authorities would have passed details to the Sri  Lankan
      authorities.   She  notes  also  that  if  it  was  possible  for  the
      appellant's uncle to obtain false passports to enable the appellant to
      travel to India, there would have been no reason why he could not have
      been sent to somewhere safer than Sri  Lanka.   She  noted  also  that
      during the appellant's interview he stated that  his  uncle  had  said
      that he had a friend in Colombo who would  take  him  away,  and  this
      suggested to the Adjudicator that  there  was  an  intention  for  the
      appellant to leave Sri Lanka again or that he was to  go  into  hiding
      there.  In oral evidence he said he went back to Sri Lanka because  he
      had nowhere else to go.  She found  that  these  statements  were  not
      compatible and she did not believe his account of having  returned  to
      Sri Lanka in December 2000 to be credible.  We find  there  to  be  no
      merit in paragraph 7 of the grounds.  The Adjudicator's findings  were
      ones which, on the evidence before her, she was entitled to make.  The
      Tribunal find that it would have been illogical  for  the  appellant's
      uncle to have secured the appellant's escape from  custody  in  India,
      only to return the appellant to Sri  Lanka  when  it  must  have  been
      obvious that, if the appellant had been held  by  "Q"  Branch  of  the
      Security Services on suspicion  of  being  a  member  of  a  terrorist
      organisation, the Indian authorities were more  than  likely  to  have
      made enquiries of the Sri Lankan authorities  which  would  only  have
      alerted the Sri Lankan authorities and put him at risk if he  were  to
      return to Sri Lanka.  In the event it would have  been  illogical  for
      the appellant to return to Sri Lanka in order that his uncle's  friend
      could then send him away.  There would  have  been  no  need  for  the
      appellant to have returned to Sri Lanka;  he could  simply  have  left
      India for a third country.

13.   A challenge was made to the fact that the Adjudicator did  not  accept
      that the appellant would have been released on payment of a  bribe  on
      his return to Sri Lanka  when  he  was  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities.  In actual fact the Adjudicator clearly did  not  believe
      that the appellant ever did return to Sri Lanka, but what she does  in
      paragraph 17 is simply to find it incredible that if he  had  returned
      to Sri Lanka and been detained  by  the  authorities  because  of  his
      membership of the LTTE, as claimed by the appellant in oral  evidence,
      she did not believe that he would have been released, even on  payment
      of a bribe.  Given the background evidence which  suggests  that  over
      the 18 years or so of the war in Sri Lanka, members of  the  LTTE  had
      committed the most appalling human rights abuses,  the  Tribunal  find
      that the Adjudicator was entitled to reach that  conclusion.   In  any
      event, as we have already said, it  is  perhaps  academic  since   the
      Adjudicator did not believe that the appellant had ever gone to  India
      in the first place, and could not believe that if he had gone to India
      he would have returned to Sri Lanka  after  securing  his  release  on
      payment of a bribe.

14.   There was  no  credible  evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka had ever known of the appellant's involvement
      with the LTTE, neither was there  any  credible  evidence  before  the
      Adjudicator that the appellant was of any interest to the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities.  The  Adjudicator  carefully  considered  the   objective
      evidence before her and found there was no reason to believe  that  he
      faced a real risk of mistreatment if returned to Sri Lanka.   We  note
      that there have been difficulties with the peace talks.  At  paragraph
      4.874 to 4.84 of the Sri Lanka Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit
      Assessment (being the extract handed to us  by  Mr  Collins)  shows  a
      clear downward trend in  child  recruitment  and  in  other  ceasefire
      violations by both sides. We note that in April  this  year  the  LTTE
      suspended participation in the peace talks but indicated that they had
      no intention of breaking the ceasefire.  We have  concluded  that  the
      Adjudicator did properly evaluate all the evidence before her and make
      a proper assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Her  findings  are
      supported by clear reasons and on the evidence before  her  were  ones
      which she was entitled to reach.

15.   We have concluded therefore,  that  for  all  these  reasons  we  must
      dismiss this appeal.




                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President



