
                                  MK (Article 8 - Proportionality) Pakistan
[2003] UKIAT 00037

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                               Date of Decision:  7 May 2003
                                              Date of Promulgation: 05/08/03

                                   Before
                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                                Mrs R Faux JP

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 (Appellant)
                                     and


                                 (Respondent)


Representatives:
Mrs L Singh, Presenting Officer for the appellant.
Mr F Mohammed of Counsel instructed by International Immigration Advisory
      Service for the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Mr Steven P Alis, who, sitting at  Salford
      Magistrates  Court  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mohammed  Asif   Khilgi,
      hereinafter called the respondent. The Adjudicator concluded that  his
      removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  infringe  his  rights  under
      Article 8.


   2. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan and his date of  birth  is  16
      March 1966. The respondent came to the United Kingdom  on  31  October
      1997 when he was granted leave to enter and remain on the basis of his
      marriage as a foreign spouse. That  marriage  broke  down  and  on  13
      October 1998 he applied for asylum. That claim was refused on  18  May
      2000 and the decision was upheld by an Adjudicator on 17 January 2001.
      Leave to appeal to the tribunal was not sought but on 2 October  2000,
      the respondent sought leave to remain as the  husband  of  one  Samina
      Ali, a British citizen. The application was refused on 8  April  2002.
      He claimed breach of his rights under ECHR  on  21  May  2001.  On  20
      August 2001 the Secretary of State decided  to  refuse  to  grant  the
      respondent leaver to remain under the Human Rights Act 1998.  This  is
      the decision that the Adjudicator refused to  uphold  and  it  is  the
      Adjudicator's decision that is before us on appeal with permission  to
      appeal having been granted by Mr P R  Moulden,  Vice  President  on  7
      March 2003.

   3. The Adjudicator heard oral evidence from the respondent and  his  wife
      Samina. He made the following findings:


           a) The respondent had not been viewed as a credible  witness  by
              the Adjudicator who dismissed his asylum appeal.
           b) The respondent  had  taken  legal  advice  (albeit  incorrect
              advice) which confirmed to him that him and his wife that  if
              they married then his application would be  successful.  This
              clearly provided the respondent with a  motive  for  entering
              into his current marriage - namely to obtain leave  to  enter
              or remain in this country.
           c) Their son has not spent his formative years in the  UK  being
              only eight months old.
           d) The parties are in a genuine and subsisting marriage.
           e) At the time of the decision the parties were married and  had
              a young child.
           f) The parties have committed themselves financially to  a  life
              in the UK having purchased their present  property  and  both
              parties are in gainful employment.
           g) If the respondent was refused leave to remain then the spouse
              would have to  give  up  work  to  look  after  her  son  and
              therefore would be unable to comply with requirements of  the
              immigration rules on maintenance. Similarly if  she  went  to
              Pakistan pending her husband's fresh immigration  application
              she again would fail to comply with the rules.
           h) The respondent spends all day looking after  his  son  whilst
              his wife is at work and there is a strong bond between them.
           i) The respondent' wife is a British citizen and  has  lived  in
              the UK all her life and only visits Pakistan for holidays and
              family occasions.
           j) The respondent's wife suffers from a skin disorder which gets
              worse in hot climates.

      Based upon these findings the Adjudicator concluded that although  the
      interference in family life of the respondent is  in  accordance  with
      the law as he has lived in the United Kingdom without authority  since
      October 1998, and the removal was proposed for the legitimate  aim  of
      immigration    control,    the    interference    was     nevertheless
      disproportionate.

   4. The Secretary of State contends in his written grounds of appeal inter
      alia that the Adjudicator's decision  is  perverse  and  that  he  has
      failed to apply the guidelines given by the Court of Appeal in  [2001]
      1WLR 840. It is contended that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  indicate
      what, if any insurmountable obstacles there are  to  the  respondent's
      wife and baby relocating to Pakistan with him and why the  removal  is
      not proportionate  to  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
      control and also why it is unduly harsh to expect  the  respondent  to
      return to Pakistan to make an application for Entry Clearance.

   5. Before us Mr Mohammad raised a preliminary issue. He argued  that  the
      Secretary of State had filed the application for permission to  appeal
      beyond the permitted time. We informed him that this  issue  had  been
      ruled upon by one of our colleagues Mr D Parkes, Vice President and he
      had held that the application had been lodged  in  time.  We  told  Mr
      Mohammad that we would respectfully follow that ruling and that in any
      event the Tribunal has the jurisdiction  to  extend  time  limits  for
      lodging applications for permission to appeal. We invited him to  make
      any further submissions on this issue. He said he  wished  to  say  no
      more. We then asked him to address us on the merits of the Home Office
      appeal. He said that the Adjudicator had looked at  all  the  relevant
      matters and had properly allowed the appeal. When asked if in his view
      the Adjudicator's conclusions could be regarded  as  being  consistent
      with the principles set out in Mahmood, Baljit Singh [2002] UKIAT00660
      and Xhezo (01/TH/0625), Mr Mohammad said that decision  in  each  case
      must depend on facts. In this case, he pointed out, the respondent did
      not have a bad history as the appellant had in  Baljit  Singh.  Unlike
      the appellant in Mahmood, the respondent  had  entered  the  UK  as  a
      spouse having waited for five years to obtain an entry  clearance.  In
      Mahmood, the appellant's wife was born in  Pakistan  whereas  in  this
      case the wife was born in the United Kingdom and is therefore  subject
      to visa requirements in Pakistan. He pointed out that she also  has  a
      medical condition and more importantly is a key worker as  a  Teacher.
      He submitted that at  a  time  when  the  country  is  importing  such
      workers, it would be against the public interest to force her to leave
      the UK to maintain her family life with the respondent.

   6. Mrs Singh argued that the  respondent's  immigration  history  may  be
      different to that of Mahmood or Baljit Singh but he was subject to the
      same considerations in law as the others. The fact that he had come to
      the UK as a spouse was of no relevance.  What  was  of  relevance  was
      whether there were insurmountable obstacles  in  the  continuation  of
      family life in the country of origin. In this context, she  said,  the
      medical condition of the respondent's wife is of no weight as there is
      no evidence of its real nature, its prognosis and the availability  of
      required medical facilities in Pakistan. She said the burden of  proof
      was upon the respondent and he had produced no evidence on any of  the
      matters. She said that the respondent can return to Pakistan y himself
      and his wife did not need to go. She had known his immigration  status
      when she married him and she could not now complain that  his  removal
      is unfair. Mrs Singh reminded us that it was not the respondent's wife
      who was being removed but the respondent alone. She conceded  that  on
      present evidence the respondent meets  all  the  requirements  of  the
      rules for foreign spouses and that he  would  succeed  in  getting  an
      entry clearance if he were to apply for one. She was not able to  tell
      the Tribunal as to how long he would have to wait in  Pakistan  before
      he would be interviewed. She said that he receive the  same  treatment
      as other applicants in that category.

   7.  Mr  Mohammed  reminded  us  that  in  determining  proportionality  a
      balancing act had to be  carried  out  and  in  the  context  of  that
      balancing act it was important to have regard to the  time  scale  for
      processing of entry clearance applications. If delay were shown to  be
      significant, he said,  that  would  be  an  important  factor  in  the
      consideration of proportionality. We agree with  that  submission  but
      what we do not have  is  evidence  on  processing  times  for  spouses
      seeking entry currently from  Pakistan.  The  respondent  should  have
      produced that evidence as he is asking us to  rely  on  delay  in  the
      process. We can hardly be expected to rely  on  it  when  we  have  no
      evidence that upon removal the respondent may have to wait  years  and
      not months before his application for entry clearance is considered.

   8. We have given anxious consideration to all the facts and the arguments
      that we heard from Mr Mohammed and  Mrs  Singh.  With  regard  to  Mrs
      Singh's argument that  the  Adjudicator's  failure  to  indicate  what
      insurmountable obstacles there were in the respondent  continuing  his
      family life in Pakistan had rendered his decision as erroneous in law,
      is not an argument that finds favour with us. In our humble view,  the
      phrase "insurmountable obstacles" used by the Master of the  Rolls  in
      Mahmood has become grossly overused and somewhat abused  and  in  many
      situations misconstrued. It is not, if  we  may  say  so,  with  great
      respect, a magical mantra which must be recited in every case. We draw
      inspiration and comfort from what the Tribunal chaired by Mr Justice A
      Collins said in the case  of  Bakir  [2002]  UKIAT01176.  He  said  in
      paragraph 9 of the decision "The adjudicator's reference to  the  need
      for there to be 'no  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  family  living
      together in the country of origin  if  the  family  members  excluded'
      comes from the judgment of the Master of  the  Rolls  in  Mahmood.  At
      Paragraph 55 he sets out his conclusions as to  the  approach  of  the
      Commission and the European Court of Human  Rights  to  the  potential
      conflict between the respect for family life and  the  enforcement  of
      immigration control. The adjudicator has quoted number 3. It is to  be
      noted that,  helpful  though  they  are,  these  conclusions  are  not
      specifically adopted by the other two members of the court  (Laws  and
      May LJJ). The test to be applied is whether in all  the  circumstances
      it is reasonable to require the family members to leave  the  country,
      that is to  say,  whether  the  interference  is  proportional."  With
      respect we adopt and follow that test. We should like to add  that  if
      proof of insurmountable obstacles were the only yardstick for  success
      on an Article 8 claim, it would be a very high threshold to cross.  We
      note that under our immigration rules a spouse of a person present and
      settled in the United Kingdom has the right to enter  subject  to  the
      requirements  of  the  rules  none   of   which   require   proof   of
      insurmountable obstacle to carrying on family life in the  country  of
      origin. As Mr Justice Collins pointed  out  in  paragraph  11  of  his
      decision in Bakir "It is the particular nature of family life  in  the
      case which leads to the view that  the  conclusions  set  out  by  the
      Master of the Rolls in Mahmood,  itself  involving  a  marriage  to  a
      British citizen settled in the United Kingdom, are not all  embracing.
      Furthermore, it is to be noted that in conclusion  (6)  Lord  Phillips
      says: 'Whether interference with family rights  is  justified  in  the
      interests of controlling immigration will depend on (i) the  facts  of
      the particular case and (ii) the circumstances prevailing in the State
      whose action is impugned.' "

9.    Fascinating and even impressive though it was,  the  comparison  drawn
      by Mr Mohammed about the facts of the appeal before us with  those  of
      Mahmood and Singh, is misconceived since the end result in those cases
      is of no consequence but the legal principles, whatever these be, are.
      The question of course is what those legal  principles  are.  For  the
      Secretary of State we have often seen the Tribunal decision in  Baljit
      Singh  cited  as  authority  for  the  "legal  proposition"  that   an
      applicant's possible failure to qualify  for  entry  clearance  is  no
      reason to allow the claim under Article 8. Having  read  the  decision
      with care, it says nothing of the  kind.  If  it  had  we  would  have
      regarded it as case specific and not a legal principle. It appears  to
      us that the Home Office position is based upon  a  misconstruction  of
      Paragraph 21 of the decision. It is perhaps being read out of  context
      since paragraph 20  in  the  decision  makes  points,  with  which  we
      respectfully agree, to the contrary. The same applies to the  contents
      of paragraphs 24 and 25 of the decision.

10    Once family life is found to have been established, the  determinative
      issue in most cases is likely to be whether the interference caused by
      removal is proportional to the legitimate aim of immigration  control.
      This requires the decision maker to carry out a balancing exercise and
      he is required to  weigh  all  the  relevant  facts  in  balance.  The
      decision in each case will therefore very much  depend  on  facts.  In
      some cases certain facts may carry much weight and in others the  same
      facts may carry less weight. It is therefore not very helpful  to  use
      cases decided purely on facts as precedents and sadly the pressures on
      representatives in immigration appeals is such that many often give in
      to such temptations, knowing full well that they should not.

11.   Addressing the  facts  of  this  case,  we  have  concluded  that  the
      Adjudicator's conclusion was plainly wrong. His balancing exercise was
      fatally flawed in that he did not remind himself that the law required
      the respondent to obtain an entry clearance  to  live  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a husband and that there was  nothing  exceptional  in  his
      circumstances  that  should  exempt  him  from  compliance  with  that
      requirement.  The  requirement  may  well  have  no   more   than   an
      administrative significance but until it is shown to  be  an  unlawful
      hindrance to the right to family life,  it  has  to  be  applied.  The
      strongest factor in mitigation (if one  can  use  such  term  in  this
      context!) in this case is the profession of the respondent's wife. She
      is a key worker as a teacher and her husband's removal to Pakistan  is
      bound to have an adverse impact on her. She might have to give up  her
      job as a teacher while her husband  seeks  entry  clearance.  However,
      there is no evidence before us  and  nor  was  there  any  before  the
      Adjudicator that the respondent will be subjected to  long  delays  in
      securing his entry clearance. The respondent's  wife  will  of  course
      suffer hardship as  will  the  respondent  as  a  consequence  of  his
      removal. However, hardship even undue hardship is not  the  test.  The
      test is whether the decision is proportional or is  it  reasonable  to
      require the family members to leave the country. In this case there is
      no  likelihood  that  the  respondent's  wife  will  leave  with   the
      respondent or that she will need to live with him for a long  duration
      in Pakistan. The  couple  have  lived  together  as  a  family  for  a
      relatively short time and they knew at the time of their marriage that
      the respondent's future stay in the  United  Kingdom  was  in  serious
      jeopardy. With regard to the Adjudicator's view  on  the  difficulties
      that the respondent is likely to face in obtaining entry clearance, we
      do not share those. Mrs Singh conceded that the respondent  meets  all
      the requirements under the Rules and as the Tribunal  said  in  Baljit
      Singh, "It could be that, if the appellant's  wife  had  been  thought
      unable to work for the  foreseeable  future  and  the  appellant  upon
      return unlikely to receive a viable job offer from the  UK,  he  might
      not be able to fulfil the maintenance  requirement  of  paragraph  281
      straightforwardly. However, as Mr Deller correctly pointed out, recent
      case law has only looked at whether an applicant's arrival would cause
      additional recourse to public funds. And as someone who had worked  as
      a lorry driver in the past, the appellant was certainly  in  a  better
      position than some  foreign  husbands  to  show  he  would  soon  find
      employment. It must also be remembered that as a result of  Section  3
      of the Human Rights Act 1998 all the  provisions  of  the  immigration
      rules (as well as other legislation) have to be  read  purposively  so
      that their operation does not  give  rise  to  a  violation  of  human
      rights. In certain circumstances denial of entry clearance to a spouse
      because of his partner's physical inability to re-enter the job market
      could give rise to an allegation  based  on  financial  discrimination
      contrary to Article 8 read in conjunction with Article  14."  We  note
      that the respondent's employment history in the UK is good and  it  is
      therefore reasonable to assume that he will have little difficulty  in
      securing a viable job offer when he seeks an entry clearance or in the
      alternative he will be entitled to expect the Entry Clearance  Officer
      to accept that his previous employment history  would  not  cause  him
      difficulties in obtaining employment soon after his admission  to  the
      UK.

12.   For the above  reasons  we  find  that  the  respondent's  removal  to
      Pakistan would not be a disproportionate interference with his  family
      life. We set aside the Adjudicator's decision and allow this appeal.





K Drabu

Vice President

