
            AW (Article 3 - Risk- General Situation) Somalia CG [2003]
UKIAT 00111

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


Heard at: Field House   Determination notified
On: 16 July 2003
Prepared: 17 July 2003   29.10.03


                                   Before:

                         Mr L V Waumsley (Chairman)
                                Mr N Kumar JP

Between




                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:     Ms Y Yeboah of counsel, instructed by Irving & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer



 1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia, appeals  with  leave  against  the
    determination of an adjudicator  (Ms  A  Harrison)  sitting  at  Taylor
    House, in which she dismissed his  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights  grounds  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse   his
    application for asylum, and to give directions for his removal from the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

 2. The grounds on which the appellant sought asylum in the United  Kingdom
    were that he was a member of the  minority  Reer  Hamar  sub-clan  from
    Mogadishu where he lived with his widowed mother, his siblings and  his
    own wife and children.  After the civil war broke  out  in  Somalia  in
    1991, he and his family were harassed by members of the majority Hawiye
    clan.  In about 1991, they took refuge in the home of their neighbours,
    who were themselves Hawiye, but nevertheless assisted the appellant and
    his family.  They have remained there ever since, with the exception of
    the appellant who left Somalia in May 2002.

 3. The appellant states that during that lengthy period, he and the  other
    members of his family suffered constant  harassment  at  the  hands  of
    members of the Hawiye militia.  In particular, in 1996 members  of  the
    militia broke into the house, and raped his sisters.   Sometime  later,
    between 1996 and 1998, the appellant's brother, Ahmed,  was  killed  on
    his way to visit his aunt.  The appellant believes that he  was  killed
    by members of the Hawiye clan.

 4. In her determination, the adjudicator accepted the claimant's  evidence
    that he comes from Mogadishu.  However, she rejected the evidence given
    by the claimant himself and by three  witnesses  called  to  give  oral
    evidence on his behalf that he is a member of the Reer Hamar  sub-clan.
    She made a specific finding at paragraph 35 of her  determination  that
    the appellant is not a member of that sub-clan.  On the basis of  those
    findings, the adjudicator dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds.

 5. The grounds on which leave to appeal was granted may be  summarised  as
    follows.  The adjudicator overlooked serious  problems  experienced  by
    the appellant and his family during the last ten years, she misread the
    objective evidence which was before  her,  and  overlooked  significant
    matters in the evidence given by the  three  witnesses  called  on  the
    appellant's behalf.  In addition, she did not appear to have considered
    the evidence about  an  upsurge  in  fighting  which  had  occurred  in
    northern Mogadishu in May 2002.

 6. In her submissions on the  appellant's  behalf,  Ms  Yeboah  based  her
    challenge to the adjudicator's determination on two  main  limbs.   The
    first was that the adjudicator's determination was flawed and  perverse
    in its findings.  The second was that the current security situation in
    Somalia in general, and  in  Mogadishu  in  particular,  is  such  that
    returning failed asylum seekers generally to  Somalia  at  the  present
    time would in itself amount to a breach of Article  3  (prohibition  of
    torture) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 7. In support of the first of those limbs, Ms Yeboah  submitted  that  the
    adjudicator had failed to make findings on specific issues, such as the
    shooting at the appellant's brother, the previous disappearance of  his
    father, and the seizure of the father's  three  shops.   She  had  also
    failed to take proper account of the rape of the appellant's sisters in
    1996.

 8. Furthermore, she submitted that the adjudicator  had  misconstrued  the
    objective evidence which was before her.  She  had  rejected  the  oral
    evidence of the three witnesses called on the appellant's behalf.  That
    was, she submitted, a perverse conclusion for the adjudicator to reach.
     Taken together, these factors were such as to make  the  adjudicator's
    central finding that the appellant was not a member of the  Reer  Hamar
    sub-clan one which was seriously flawed.  On that basis, she invited us
    to remit the appeal for rehearsing before another adjudicator.




 9. Turning to the second main limb, she conceded that,  in  light  of  the
    adjudicator's finding that the claimant was not a member  of  the  Reer
    Hamar sub-clan, there would be no differential  risk  in  his  case  on
    return to Somalia.  Nevertheless, she argued that the  evidence  before
    the adjudicator showed that on return to Somalia, the  appellant  would
    face a real risk of being subjected  to  treatment  in  breach  of  his
    rights under Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  In  support  of
    that submission, she relied on her skeleton argument and on the various
    copy documents annexed to it.  She also cited from a number of passages
    in the main objective bundle lodged on the appellant's behalf.

10. Furthermore, she relied on the judgment of the European Court of  Human
    Rights in  Ahmed  v  Austria  (1996)  24  EHRR  278,  [1998]  INLR  65,
    particularly at paragraphs 40 to 49 (inclusive).  At paragraph 47,  the
    Court had found:

        "It follows that  the  applicant's  deportation  to  Somalia  would
        breach Article 3 of the Convention (art. 3) for as long as he faces
        serious risk of being subjected there  to  torture  or  inhuman  or
        degrading treatment".

    She submitted that  the  situation  in  Somalia  is  not  significantly
    different now from that which subsisted as the date of the judgment  of
    the European Court of Human Rights in Ahmed v Austria.

11. In his submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Elks  argued
    that the adjudicator's determination was as sound one.  She had  looked
    at all the evidence before her, and had arrived at findings  which  she
    was entitled to reach.  There was no need for  her  to  deal  expressly
    with all the evidence which was  before  her.   That  would  have  been
    unnecessary and bureaucratic.

12. As regards the new evidence submitted on the appellant's behalf in  the
    form of the copy documents annexed to Ms Yeboah's skeleton argument, he
    submitted that in light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Oleed
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] INLR 179,  that  is
    not evidence on which he was entitled to rely.   Paragraph  32  of  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Schiemann in Oleed  is  clear  on  the  point.
    This is new  evidence  which  was  not  before  the  adjudicator.   Her
    determination does not disclose any arguable error.  There is therefore
    no justification in allowing the appellant to adduce new evidence now.

13. Turning to the second main limb relied on by Ms  Yeboah,  he  submitted
    that the objective evidence discloses that  the  current  situation  in
    Somalia is not such that the appellant's return would expose him  to  a
    real risk of treatment in breach of his rights under Article 3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  If that were  the  case,  all  failed  asylum
    seekers from Somalia would succeed on human rights grounds.  He invited
    as to dismiss the appeal.

14. In reply, Ms Yeboah conceded that an adjudicator cannot be expected  to
    cover every single point in his or  her  determination.   Nevertheless,
    she argued that in the present instance, the adjudicator had failed  to
    consider material evidence.  Her determination  was  therefore  flawed,
    and should not be allowed to stand.

15. She submitted that the most substantial objective  evidence  which  was
    before the adjudicator was a copy of the Report of the  Joint  British,
    Danish and Dutch Fact-finding Mission  to  Nairobi,  Kenya  (17  to  24
    September 2000), a copy of which appears at pages 96 to 161 (inclusive)
    of the appellant's main bundle.  She argued that the  general  security
    situation in Somalia is constantly changing, and that the new  evidence
    submitted on the appellant's behalf, in the form of  the  annexures  to
    her skeleton argument, is relevant evidence which should be taken  into
    account.

16. She invited us to find that, even on the evidence which was before  the
    adjudicator, her conclusion that  the  appellant's  return  to  Somalia
    would not breach his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention was flawed.  That evidence alone showed that  the  appellant
    would be at significant risk on return.  The fact that the  same  would
    apply to other Somalis generally is not material.  The conditions which
    the appellant would face on  return  would  reach  the  high  threshold
    needed to constitute a breach of Article 3.

17.  As  stated  above,  Ms  Yeboah's  challenge   to   the   adjudicator's
    determination is based on two separate limbs.  The first  is  that  the
    adjudicator's specific findings relating to the appellant  himself  are
    flawed.  The second is that the general security situation  in  Somalia
    is still so bad that, notwithstanding the  adjudicator's  rejection  of
    the appellant's claim to be a member of the Reer  Hamar  sub-clan,  his
    return to Somalia at the present time would per se amount to  a  breach
    of his rights under Article 3.  We will therefore  deal  with  each  of
    those limbs in turn.

18. As regards the first limb, namely the challenge  to  the  adjudicator's
    specific findings, it is clear from the determination read as  a  whole
    that the adjudicator gave careful consideration to the evidence  before
    her, including the oral evidence given by the appellant and  the  three
    witnesses who were called on his behalf.   Having  done  so,  she  made
    clear findings of fact on the material issues.

19. In particular, in a careful and thorough  determination,  she  rejected
    the evidence given by the appellant and his three witnesses that he  is
    a member of the Reer Hamar sub-clan.  She also rejected the appellant's
    evidence of the various events which he had described as  having  taken
    place in Mogadishu between the start of the civil war in 1991  and  his
    departure from Somalia in May 2002.  She has given  cogent  reasons  in
    her determination for rejecting that evidence.  That  is  a  conclusion
    which was properly open to her on the evidence before her.  Despite  Ms
    Yeboah's able submissions on the appellant's behalf, we  are  satisfied
    that  there  are  no  arguable  grounds  for   interfering   with   the
    adjudicator's findings on the evidence.

20. It is also clear from the determination that the adjudicator was  aware
    of, and duly applied, the correct legal principles to her findings when
    arriving at her conclusions on both the asylum and human rights claims.
     Once again, they are conclusions which were properly open  to  her  on
    the basis of her findings.  There is no arguable basis for  interfering
    with them.  The first limb on which Ms Yeboah based  her  challenge  to
    the adjudicator's determination therefore fails.



21. We now turn to the second limb, namely Ms Yeboah's submission that  the
    security  situation  in  Somalia  in  general,  and  in  Mogadishu   in
    particular, is so bad that the appellant's return  to  Somalia  at  the
    present time would in itself constitute a breach of  his  rights  under
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  In that  regard,  as  stated
    above, Mr Elks invited us to exclude the additional evidence  submitted
    on the day of the hearing in the form of the copy documents annexed  to
    Ms Yeboah's skeleton argument.  He submitted that in light of the clear
    statement of principle which appears at paragraph 32 of the judgment of
    Lord Justice Schiemann in Oleed, that is evidence which  the  appellant
    is not entitled to ask us to take into account.  The  material  passage
    in Lord Justice Schiemann's judgment read as follows:

        "However, in the present case in  my  judgment  there  was  nothing
        wrong with the Adjudicator's determination, there was therefore  no
        reason to appeal it and it would be wrong for the  Home  Secretary,
        on the back of an appeal which has been dismissed, to seek  to  re-
        examine the threat to the refugee with reference to  a  date  later
        than the adjudicator's determination.  To permit this would  merely
        encourage appeals by a party who has no ground for appeal but hopes
        that the situation would  change  sufficiently  to  enable  him  to
        advance different arguments on different  facts  on  appeal.   Such
        procedures would not be in anyone's interest".

22. We are bound to say that we see  the  force  of  Mr  Elks'  submission.
    Nevertheless, we have considered de bene esse the  additional  evidence
    lodged by Ms Yeboah, and as we have come to the conclusion that it does
    not affect our decision on this issue, we do not find it  necessary  to
    make a ruling on Mr Elks' submission.

23. In support of her submission that the  general  security  situation  in
    Somalia is such that the appellant's return would constitute  a  breach
    of his rights under Article 3, Ms Yeboah relied on a number of passages
    from the appellant's bundle of objective material, details of which are
    duly recorded in our record of proceedings.  In addition, she relied on
    the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Ahmed  v  Austria
    (above), including in particular paragraph 47 which is set out above.

24. However, that is a judgment which was handed down as  long  ago  as  17
    December 1996.  As Ms Yeboah herself  submitted  during  her  arguments
    before us, the  general  security  situation  in  Somalia  is  changing
    constantly.  For that reason, we have to say that we found the judgment
    in Ahmed v Austria and the objective evidence relied on by Ms Yeboah of
    limited assistance in arriving at our conclusion on this issue.

25. On the other hand, we derive considerably more assistance from the Home
    Office Country Information  and  Policy  Unit  Assessment  relating  to
    Somalia issued as recently as April 2003.  We do of course take account
    of the fact that this is a document which has been prepared by  a  Unit
    within the  Home  Office  itself.   Clearly,  it  therefore  cannot  be
    regarded as comprising independent evidence.  Nevertheless, it is clear
    from its terms that it is well-researched and fully sourced throughout.
     It attempts to provide a balanced assessment of the  current  position
    in Somalia, drawing  for  its  information  on  a  number  of  normally
    reliable and impartial sources.  We are  therefore  satisfied  that  it
    provides a reliable, reasonably impartial and up-to-date assessment  of
    the current general position Somalia.

26. The Assessment contains at paragraphs  6.127  to  6.130  (inclusive)  a
    section dealing with the issue of returning  refugees.   At  paragraphs
    6.131 to 6.146 (inclusive), it contains a detailed section dealing with
    the current security  situation  in  various  parts  of  Somalia.   The
    overall position in the country is conveniently summarised at paragraph
    6.131 in the following terms:

        "According to the US State Department  report  covering  events  in
        2002 security conditions improved in many  parts  of  the  country.
        However,  in  its  review  of  2002  the  UN  Integrated   Regional
        Information Network reported that  Somalia  saw  an  escalation  of
        fighting  and  violence.    In   April   2003   the   UN   Resident
        Representative  and  Humanitarian  Co-ordinator  commented  in   an
        interview that "probably much more than 50 percent of  the  country
        is actually at peace and people get on with their lives".

27. Turning now to Mogadishu in particular, the Assessment discloses:

    "6.134   Scores  of  civilians  were  indiscriminately  killed   during
           fighting between rival fans and factions in May  2001  and  July
           2001 in Mogadishu.  During 2002 the violence continued unabated,
           incidents  of  abductions,  car-jackings,  armed  robberies  and
           general banditry reportedly increased.   In  February  in  (sic)
           2002 twelve people were reportedly killed and an unknown  number
           injured during fighting in Medina district.   This  was  between
           militias  loyal  to  Mogadishu  faction  leader  Musa  Sude  and
           supporters of Omar "Finish", his former deputy.   Omar  "Finish"
           had joined forces with factions who had signed a peace agreement
           with the TNG.


    6.135   Reportedly the worst violence occurred in May 2002, between  24
           and 28 May 2002 alone more  than  60  persons  were  killed  and
           hundreds injured in clashes between militia loyal to  Musa  Sude
           and TNG forces.  Hospital sources said most  of  the  casualties
           were civilian  non-combatants,  including  women  and  children,
           injured by indiscriminate fire.  Clashes between Muse (sic) Sude
           and Omar "Finish" again flared up in  July  2002  ahead  of  the
           peace talks in Kenya, this time 30 people  were  killed  and  50
           wounded.


    6.136   In December 2002 Mogadishu  fighting  between  members  of  the
           Abgal sub-clans in the Bermuda area of South Mogadishu  resulted
           in the death of 10  militiamen  and  injury  to  a  further  20.
           Fighting spread to both the K-4 area and Medina district of  the
           city where an unspecified number  of  civilian  casualties  were
           reported.  Although Elders were  successful  in  establishing  a
           temporary ceasefire more than 20 people were killed in a minibus
           attack on 24 December 2002.  Frequent kidnappings have also been
           reported in Mogadishu.   In spite of the signing of the  Eldoret
           Declaration and  subsequent  agreements  in  December  2002  the
           seaport and airport remain closed.










    6.137   On 27 February  2003  a  further  violation  of  the  ceasefire
           agreement signed in Eldoret occurred when fighting again erupted
           in Medina district between the rival militia of  Muse  Sude  and
           Omar "Finish"; seven people were reported to  have  been  killed
           and hundreds fled their  homes.   On  29  March  2003  the  TNG,
           faction leaders Qanyareh and Ali Ato, and representatives of the
           JVA and RRA reportedly agreed on measures to bring peace to  the
           capital in a process outside the talks in  Kenya.   Following  a
           visit to assess the humanitarian and security situation  the  UN
           Resident Representatives  and  Humanitarian  Co-ordinator  noted
           that the current situation  in  Mogadishu  was  problematic  and
           severely affected the ability of the international community  to
           do anything very meaningful.  However, he noted that security in
           the city was "good in some areas and not so good in others"


28. It is clear from this evidence that the current situation in  Mogadishu
    is far from settled or satisfactory.  Fighting between rival clans  and
    factions still breaks out from time to time, and innocent civilians who
    find themselves in the wrong place at the wrong time  are  at  risk  of
    being killed or injured in the crossfire.   There  are  some  signs  of
    hope, such as the Eldoret Declaration  and  the  subsequent  agreements
    signed in December 2002, but clearly much remains to be done to restore
    normality to the city.

29. Nevertheless, it is settled law that a high threshold has to be reached
    before Article 3, which confers  absolute,  not  qualified  rights,  is
    engaged.  In light of the objective evidence  before  us,  particularly
    that which is contained in the passages from  the  Country  Information
    and Policy  Unit  Assessment  set  out  above,  we  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that the general security  situation  in  Mogadishu  at  the
    present time, unsatisfactory as it undoubtedly is, is not such that  it
    may properly be said that the appellant's return to the Mogadishu would
    per se would constitute a breach of his rights under Article 3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention, or indeed any of the other Articles  contained
    in that Convention.

30. We therefore find against the appellant in relation to the second  limb
    on which he seeks to rely.  We are satisfied that the  adjudicator  was
    right to conclude that his return to Somalia  would  not  constitute  a
    breach of his rights under the Human Rights Convention.

31. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                       Dated

L V Waumsley
Vice President








