
    MA (Transfer of Proceedings - Evidence Part Heard) Ethiopia [2003] UKIAT
                                                                       00103


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination notified  |
|On: 20 October 2003                                |                        |
|Prepared: 20 October 2003                          |28th October 2003       |

                                   Before:

                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                       Mr L V Waumsley (legal member)

Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:           Mr S Muquit of  counsel,  instructed  by  Aston
Clark, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia, appeals with leave  against  the
    determination of an adjudicator (Mr P  D  Southern),  sitting  at  both
    Surbiton and Hatton Cross, in which he dismissed  her  appeal  on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds against the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse her application for  asylum  and  to  give  directions  for  her
    removal from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    The appellant's appeal came before the adjudicator on  two  occasions,
    namely 27 January 2003 and 3  March  2003.   The  appellant  gave  oral
    evidence on both occasions.  The reason for that is  set  out  in  some
    detail by the adjudicator in his determination at paragraph  2  in  the
    following terms:

         "This appeal had first come before  me  on  27th  January  2003  at
         Surbiton.  The appellant gave evidence and was in  the  process  of
         being cross-examined when Counsel for  the  appellant  indicated  a
         lack of satisfaction with the interpreter.  It was  suggested  that
         the interpreter was not accurately translating the evidence of  the
         appellant and as a result, it was submitted, there must be  a  risk
         that the evidence I had recorded in the Record of  Proceedings  was
         seriously misleading.  It  was  not  possible  to  obtain  a  fresh
         interpreter on that day and so the case  was  adjourned  to  Hatton
         Cross on 3rd March 2003.  Counsel for the appellant submitted  that
         the case ought to be heard  before  a  fresh  Adjudicator.   Indeed
         Counsel's instructing solicitors had written to  the  IAA  in  that
         regard.  It was said in that letter that "to preclude any  possible
         suspicion of prejudice, we consider that having  Mr  Southern  hear
         the appeal again will defeat the purpose of the adjourned hearing".
          Counsel submitted to me that I should not hear the appeal  on  3rd
         March because I would not be able  to  ensure  that  the  appellant
         received a fair hearing as I would be unable properly to  disregard
         the evidence I had heard on the earlier occasion.  I rejected  this
         submission.  As will be seen from this determination I have not had
         regard to anything the appellant said to me  on  27th  January  and
         indeed, I have not read the record I made  of  the  proceedings  on
         27th January.  I have based my decision entirely upon the  evidence
         heard at Hatton Cross on 3rd March 2003".

3.    The appellant was granted permission to appeal to this Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  However, for reasons which will appear below, it is
    only the first of those grounds which needs to  be  considered  by  us.
    That ground is conveniently summarised at paragraph 5 of the grounds of
    appeal as settled by the appellant's counsel in the following terms:

         "It is submitted that the SA's [adjudicator's] decision to  proceed
         with hearing the appeal on  3rd  March  2003  (notwithstanding  the
         assurance that he had no regard to earlier controversial  evidence)
         was,  as  a  matter  of  procedural  fairness,  wrong  in  all  the
         circumstances.  It is submitted that the SA's decision  to  proceed
         with determining A's [the appellant's] appeal  on  3rd  March  2003
         wholly undermined the very purpose of agreeing a de novo hearing.


         It is submitted that justice not only needs to  be  done  but  also
         must be seen to be done.  Whatever the ability of the SA to exclude
         from his mind controversial evidence taken earlier, this  does  not
         appease an appellant of the suspicion that such evidence  was  part
         of the information upon which  a  finder  of  fact  determined  his
         credibility".

4.    At the start of the hearing before us, Mr Deller,  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent,  informed  us  that  he  was  not  seeking  to  uphold  the
    adjudicator's decision to proceed with the hearing  on  3  March  2003.
    The appellant's oral evidence which the adjudicator had  heard  at  the
    previous  hearing  was  tainted  because  of  the  problems  with   the
    interpreter on that occasion, and  the  suspicion  that  that  tainting
    might affect the adjudicator's assessment of the evidence given at  the
    resumed hearing was by itself enough to undermined the  safety  of  his
    assessment.  Mr Deller was right to adopt that position.

5.    We take account of fact  that  an  adjudicator  is  a  member  of  the
    judiciary, not a member of jury who could not reasonably be expected to
    put out of his mind evidence which he has already heard.  Nevertheless,
    the fact remains that, however hard an adjudicator may seek to  exclude
    from his mind evidence which he has already heard, even if that was  on
    the previous occasion, the possibility remains that in arriving at  his
    assessment of credibility in relation to the fresh evidence, he may  be
    influenced,  albeit  unconsciously,  by  the  tainted  evidence   heard
    previously.

6.    In the circumstances, there remains the danger that the  losing  party
    may suspect that the  adjudicator's  assessment  of  the  evidence  was
    flawed, and that justice has not been done.  The only way  of  ensuring
    that the suspicion, however unjustified it may be in a particular case,
    does not arise is to ensure that the fresh hearing takes place before a
    different adjudicator.  That would of course  necessitate  obtaining  a
    transfer  order  from  a  senior  adjudicator  under  rule  52  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.

7.    There is one further issue which  requires  comment  from  us,  namely
    that the adjudicator having decided at the original  hearing  that  the
    case should be relisted for a fresh hearing before another adjudicator,
    and having informed  the  representatives  for  both  parties  to  that
    effect, subsequently changed his mind  and  arranged  for  the  resumed
    hearing to be listed before himself without first giving the parties an
    opportunity to address  him  on  the  point.   It  is  clear  from  his
    determination that the issue was canvassed by the  appellant's  counsel
    at the start of the resumed hearing, and to that  extent  both  parties
    did have the opportunity to address the adjudicator  on  the  issue  at
    that time.

8.    Nevertheless, as a general principle, an adjudicator who  has  decided
    to change his mind following a hearing at which  he  has  informed  the
    parties of his decision on a particular point should  as  a  matter  of
    procedural fairness give the parties  an  opportunity  to  address  him
    further, if necessary by reconvening the hearing, before giving  effect
    to his change of mind.  It is unfortunate, to put  it  at  its  lowest,
    that the adjudicator did not do so in the present instance.

9.    For the reasons set out above, we are satisfied that  the  adjudicator
    erred in proceeding with the  hearing  on  3  March  2003  despite  the
    objections  of  the  appellant's  counsel,  and  that  the   procedural
    unfairness which occurred as a consequence is by itself  sufficient  to
    vitiate his determination.  In the circumstances, there are no reliable
    findings of fact on the  material  issues  which  would  enable  us  to
    substitute our own conclusions for those reached  by  the  adjudicator.
    Accordingly, we see no alternative save to  remit  this  appeal  for  a
    fresh hearing before another adjudicator.

      Conclusions

10.   As this appeal has raised two issues of wider importance,  it  may  be
    of assistance to adjudicators generally if we summarise our conclusions
    on those issues as follows:

      1. Save where the evidence already taken is purely formal and  is  not
         in dispute between the parties, e.g.  as  to  the  witness's  name,
         address and date of birth, an adjudicator who has had to adjourn  a
         hearing because of  problems  with  an  interpreter  after  he  has
         started to take evidence should not continue to hear the case, even
         with another interpreter, save with the  express  consent  of  both
         parties, and then only if he (the adjudicator) is satisfied that it
         would be proper to  do  so.   Instead,  the  proceeding  should  be
         transferred to another adjudicator under rule 52 of the Immigration
         and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003;


      2. If an adjudicator has indicated  to  the  parties  during  an  open
         hearing that he is proposing to take a particular course of action,
         e.g. to have the  case  transferred  to  another  adjudicator,  but
         subsequently decides  to  change  his  mind,  he  must  not  do  so
         unilaterally without giving the parties a  further  opportunity  to
         address him first,  if  need  be  by  reconvening  the  hearing  or
         inviting written submissions from them.

11.   This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is  remitted  for
    a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than Mr P D Southern.


Signed                            Dated

L V Waumsley

Vice President

