
                 HS (Article 8 - Family) Iran [2003] UKIAT 00036


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date of Decision:  10 July 2003
                                              Date of Promulgation: 05/08/03

                                   Before
                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                                Mrs J Harris

                                   Between



                                 (Appellant)
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                (Respondent)


Representatives:
Miss N Dean solicitor of Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit for the
appellant.
Mr John Wyatt, Presenting Officer for the respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. He was born on 7 November 1973. He
      claims to have arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on  10  May
      2000 and applied for asylum on that date. On 5 April  2001  has  claim
      was turned down as was his claim to remain under the Human Rights Act.
      His asylum claim was certified under paragraph 9(4)(b) of  Schedule  4
      to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. His appeal under  Sections  65
      and 69(5) of the Act was heard by an Adjudicator, Mrs N  J  Gladstone,
      sitting at Salford Magistrates  Court  on  4  February  2003.  In  her
      determination promulgated on 13 February 2003 the Adjudicator gave her
      reasons for dismissing the appeal on both grounds. The  appellant  was
      granted leave to appeal to the Tribunal (Mr P R Lane, Vice  President)
      on 5 June 2003.

   2. The basis of the appellant's claim under Article 8 is the presence  of
      his mother and sister in the United Kingdom both  of  whom  have  been
      granted asylum. They arrived in the United Kingdom on 10  August  2002
      and were granted refugee status in September 2002. The appellant lives
      with them. His two other siblings had come to the United Kingdom on 10
      May 2005 but their claims were rejected and their  appeals  dismissed.
      They have sought permission to appeal to the Tribunal.

   3.  In relation to the Article 8 claim the Adjudicator's states "..it  is
      only in exceptional circumstances  that  a  relationship  with  family
      members other than partners or dependent  children  is  considered  to
      constitute 'family life'. The appellant is now 29 years  old,  I  find
      that he had been living independently of his  family  in  Iran  for  a
      period of time, despite his attempt to qualify his initial  answer.  I
      find that thee are no exceptional circumstances, and do  not  consider
      that Article 8 would be breached by the appellant's removal."

4.    It is with this approach of the Adjudicator that the  appellant  takes
      issue, claiming in his written grounds of appeal that  there  is  case
      law to suggest that there can be family life  between  adult  children
      and their parents and adult siblings - Boughanemi v France  (1996)  22
      EHRR 228. It is asserted in the grounds that "there is a great deal of
      emotional dependency between all the parties given their position here
      in the UK, and they all rely on each  other  for  practical  help  and
      support." The grounds also state "It is not reasonable to  expect  the
      appellant's mother and sister who have been granted asylum  to  follow
      the appellant to Iran as they would lose the protection they have been
      given by the UK. Likewise it is not open to the appellant to apply for
      a visitor's visa to come to the UK to visit  his  mother  and  sister.
      Having previously left Iran illegally, there is no real prospect of  a
      failed asylum seeker being granted entry clearance to the UK. Removing
      the appellant amounts to interference where there  are  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life being established elsewhere. It is  submitted
      that the interference is disproportionate to the end to  be  achieved,
      namely effective immigration control."

5.    Before we address the merits of the appeal we should  like  to  say  a
      word or two about the grounds of  appeal  which  we  have  re-produced
      above.  As  can  be  seen  the  grounds  make  a  number  of  "factual
      assertions" and a number of arguments. The factual assertions made are
      a) that there is a great deal of emotional dependency between all  the
      parties; b) they rely on each other for practical help and support; c)
      It is not open to the appellant to apply for a visitor's visa to  come
      to the UK; and d) there is no real prospect of a failed asylum  seeker
      being granted entry clearance. Grounds of appeal are not the place  to
      make assertions of fact. What  is  perhaps  worse  here  is  that  the
      "facts" asserted have no evidentiary  foundation  in  that  they  have
      never been asserted before.  Facts  are  established  by  oral  and/or
      documentary evidence. We have not been able to see any  such  evidence
      in this case. We cannot take account of these assertions as  none  has
      been appraised for veracity, having first been made at this late stage
      and that too in a wholly inappropriate manner.

   6. Miss Dean in her submissions to us helpfully drew our attention to the
      decision in Boughanemi v France 91996) 22 EHRR228. We noted  that  the
      facts of that case were materially different to those  before  us.  Mr
      Boughanemi had lived in France from the age of 8 to 28 - twenty years.
      He had then re-entered and lived illegally for a further period  until
      he was deported the second time. Most of his schooling was in  France.
      His parents and 10 siblings lived in France  -  8  had  been  born  in
      France. Further he had lived in France with a French woman by whom  he
      had a son. The relationship had lasted only a year and the couple  had
      separated before the child's birth. However he had  formally  accepted
      paternity of his son 10 months after his birth. The  Court  held  that
      the French Governments' doubts concerning the existence of family ties
      between Mr Boughanemi and his girlfriend from whom  he  had  separated
      were "not  wholly  unfounded".  However  France's  concerns  did  "not
      justify finding that (Mr Boughanemi) had no family and private life in
      France." The Court stated that the "concept of family  life  on  which
      Article 8 is based embraces, even where thee is no co-habitation,  the
      tie between a parent and his her child, regardless of whether  or  not
      the  latter  is  legitimate.  Although  that  tie  may  be  broken  by
      subsequent events this can only happen  in  exceptional  circumstances
      (see Gul). In the present case neither the belated  character  of  the
      formal recognition not the applicant's alleged conduct in  regards  to
      the child constitutes such  a  circumstance."  Further  Mr  Boughanemi
      parents and 10 siblings live legally  in  France,  "and  there  is  no
      evidence that he has no ties with them, family life did exist. As  the
      deportation order separated Mr  Boughanemi  from  his  child  and  his
      parents and siblings it was an interference with his right  to  family
      life.  However  the  Court  held  that  the   interference   was   not
      disproportionate because of his criminal convictions in France. As  is
      evident the existence of family life was not found solely  because  of
      his parents and 10 siblings - 8 of whom were born in  France.  It  was
      found also because of the applicant's relationship with his son who he
      had not  initially  accepted  and  had  never  financially  supported.
      Further the applicant had lived with his parents and siblings not  for
      a year or even less as in the case  before  us  but  for  over  twenty
      years. In the circumstances the decision in Boughanemi does not assist
      the appellant.

   7.  Miss  Dean  also  placed   reliance   on   the   Tribunal   case   of
      Soloot,01TH01366 drawing our particular attention to paragraph  22  of
      the determination. She said that the appellant could not continue  his
      family life with his mother and sister as they were refugees and  this
      factor had weighed heavily with the Tribunal in Soloot. It had  indeed
      but the material difference between the two claims is being overlooked
      by Miss Dean. In Soloot the appellant had  a  right  to  live  in  the
      United Kingdom as spouse of a woman present and settled in the  United
      Kingdom. The issue there was  queue  jumping  and  proportionality  of
      removal was judged in that  context.  In  the  appeal  before  us  the
      appellant has no right under the immigration laws to live here. He  is
      an adult who does not have any kind of leave under the Rules and  does
      not have a legitimate  expectation  of  securing  such  leave  in  the
      future. At the risk of repeating an overused  but  much  misunderstood
      phrase - insurmountable obstacles- we  find  that  the  appellant  can
      continue with his family life with his mother and sister in the UK  by
      means of letters, telephone calls and even visits. We accept that  the
      mother and the sister may not be able to visit him in Iran but we have
      no evidence that he will not be granted entry clearance to visit  them
      in the future as a visitor. He may or may not be granted permission to
      visit but given his age and the quality of his relationship  with  the
      two (the mother and his sister) it is not of  great  import.  We  have
      already made the point that we do not know what kind  of  relationship
      he has with his mother and his sister - i.e. how close  they  are  and
      whether there is anything beyond normal ties between them. The  burden
      of proof was upon him and he has not produced such evidence. We remind
      ourselves of what was said in the case of Advic v  United  Kingdom  by
      the European Commission of Human Rights in its judgment delivered on 6
      September  1995.  It  said,"Nevertheless,  in  accordance   with   the
      Commission's case law, the exclusion of a person from the  country  in
      which his close relatives reside may raise an issue under Article 8 of
      the  Convention.  However  in  examining  cases  of  this  nature  the
      Commission's first task is  to  consider  whether  a  sufficient  link
      exists between the relatives concerned to give rise to the  protection
      of the Article of the Convention. Although this  will  depend  on  the
      circumstances of each particular  case,  the  Commission  has  already
      considered that the protection  of  Article  8  did  not  cover  links
      between adult brothers who had been living apart for a long period  of
      time  and  who  were  not  dependent  on  each  other.  Moreover,  the
      relationship between a parent and an adult child would not necessarily
      acquire the protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence
      of further elements of dependency involving more than normal emotional
      ties."

   8. In our judgment the Adjudicator's  consideration  of  the  appellant's
      claim under Article 8 was fair and she applied the correct legal  test
      to the facts, which were placed before her.

   9. The appeal is dismissed.



K Drabu

Vice President

