
AG (Kosovo - Rape Victims - Psychiatric Treatment) Serbia & Montenegro
[2003] UKIAT 00181


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 6 August 2003
Prepared: 8 August 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                           Professor D. B. Casson


                              Mr D. R. Bremmer




Between:
      Claimant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the claimant: Mr J. Gillespie, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Mr J. Gulvin, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Serbia and Montenegro  and  comes  from
      Kosovo.  He appeals against the decision of an adjudicator, Mr James R
      Devittie, following a hearing  on  26  February  2003  dismissing  his
      appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  both  his
      asylum and his human rights claims.


   2. The claimant was born on 2 April 1976.  He is an ethnic Albanian.   He
      claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 22  December  1999.   He
      applied for asylum on the following day.  As  an  ethnic  Albanian  in
      Kosovo, he claimed that he had been persecuted by the Serbs.

   3. In paragraph 5 of the determination, the adjudicator  makes  it  clear
      that he considered that the appeal lacked merit.  He decided that  the
      claimant's evidence was vague and lacking in detail.  The  adjudicator
      referred to the presence of KFOR and UNMIK and considered  that  there
      was a sufficiency of protection.

   4. The claimant comes from  Mitrovica,  an  area  where  the  adjudicator
      accepted ethnic tensions still  prevail.   The  adjudicator,  however,
      classified the claimant as a  young  man  who  was  able  to  relocate
      himself elsewhere in Kosovo.

   5. The grounds of appeal argued that the adjudicator's determination  was
      fundamentally flawed.   It  is  said  that  the  adjudicator  was  not
      justified in his finding that the claimant's  account  was  vague  and
      lacking in detail.  In our judgment,  the  claim  was  bound  to  fail
      whether or not the adjudicator had made this finding.

   6. The situation in Mitrovica is set out in paragraphs 5.33  to  5.39  in
      the Country Assessment for April 2003 prepared by CIPU:



           Mitrovica



           5.33  The area of  greatest  ethnic  tension  and  hostility  in
           Kosovo is the city of Mitrovica. Divided by the river Ibar,  the
           city has about 9,000 Serbs controlling the north bank  and  more
           than 90,000 ethnic Albanians living  on  the  south  side.   The
           presence of 2,000 Albanians in the  north,  living  under  great
           pressure to leave from extremist Serbs, adds to the tension.

           5.34  Violence first swept the city after a rocket attack  on  a
           UNHCR bus killed 2 elderly Serbs in the south of the city  on  2
           February 2000.  Revenge attacks left 2 ethnic Albanians dead and
           soon afterwards grenades at two Serb cafes injured  25.   Others
           died in a series of clashes and shootings across the city.

           5.35  A curfew was introduced in  the  city  and  a  large  KFOR
           presence installed at the main bridge across the  Ibar.   Ethnic
           Albanians held a series of mass protests against  the  partition
           of the city. The  most  dramatic  of  these  was  a  march  from
           Pristina to Mitrovica by  a  crowd  estimated  at  about  70,000
           people, which had to be kept at bay  by  KFOR  using  tear  gas.
           Demonstrations by both ethnic Albanians and  by  Serbs  required
           the intervention of KFOR troops with several injuries sustained.



           5.36  In August  2000,  UNMIK  assumed  responsibility  for  and
           subsequently shut down the Zvecan lead  smelter,  (part  of  the
           Trepca mining complex, once  the  main  source  of  Yugoslavia's
           mineral wealth) because of concerns about high  levels  of  lead
           pollution

           5.37  After 9 months of relative calm, riots  erupted  in  April
           2002 after the arrest of  one  of  the  Serb  "bridge  watchers"
           (paramilitaries who monitored people crossing the bridge) for  a
           traffic violation. Over 300 Serbs confronted UNMIK police  armed
           with stones and hand grenades, resulting in injuries to 22 UNMIK
           policemen.  UNMIK responded by  doubling  the  number  of  UNMIK
           police in northern Mitrovica.

           5.38  in November 2002 UNMIK established its  administration  in
           northern Mitrovica, thus extending its authority throughout  the
           whole of Kosovo for the first time.  This was made  possible  by
           agreement  with  the  (then)  FRY  authorities  to   discontinue
           financing parallel Serb  structures  and  to  support  UNMIK  in
           assuming control of the administrative functions and  developing
           the KPS in northern Mitrovica.

           5.39  By early 2003, KFOR and  UNMIK  police  were  manning  the
           bridge instead of the "bridge-watchers" and 20 Serb KPS officers
           were patrolling the streets.  Sixty Serbs had been recruited  to
           work for the UNMIK administration and Serb teachers  had  signed
           contracts  with  UNMIK.   Nine  "quick  impact"  projects   were
           initiated to help with  regenerating  the  north  of  the  city,
           including relocation of the Kosovo Trust Agency HQ  to  northern
           Mitrovica,  the  installation  of   traffic   lights   and   the
           refurbishment of schools.


   7. This clearly demonstrates that the  claimant  is  able  to  return  to
      Mitrovica.  It will, of course, be a matter for him whether he chooses
      to go to northern Mitrovica or re-locate  in  the  Albanian  dominated
      southern part of the town.  Alternatively, he is a young man  and,  as
      found by the adjudicator, able to relocate himself in any  other  part
      of Kosovo.


   8. We have considered the medical evidence adduced  by  the  claimant  in
      support of his claim.  The report was prepared by Dr Nikki Taranto  on
      23 February 2003 after a single consultation. On page 4 of the  report
      it is said that the claimant had not seen a  psychiatrist  before  but
      that he had spoken to his GP about stress on two or three occasions in
      the past and had been given some medication for his sleeping problems.
       It is clear that he  had  never  taken  the  opportunity  of  seeking
      counselling in spite of his presence in the United  Kingdom  for  well
      over three years prior to the consultation.  The Psychiatrist  appears
      to make a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder but there is  no
      reference to methodology.  She suggests  that  specific  psychotherapy
      would be of benefit but, of course, the opportunity for this treatment
      has been available to the claimant for many years.  We do not consider
      that this report is helpful.  It emerges after  a  short  consultation
      with the claimant and is  highly  dependent  upon  what  the  claimant
      himself says about his medical condition.  It fails  to  set  out  the
      basis upon which the diagnosis was made.  It is made many years  after
      the trauma and, in the intervening years, the claimant appears to have
      had very little treatment, save for regular analgesia.  We  note,  for
      example, that a letter from Southend Hospital dated 18 December  2002,
      the  writer  refers  to  tension  type  headaches  that  the  claimant
      attributed to being brought on by stress and too much studying.

   9. The provision of medical services in Kosovo is considered in paragraph
      5.44 to 5.50 of the CIPU Country Assessment for April 2003:


           Medical services

           5.44  The health services are capable of providing  satisfactory
           primary care and are continuously improving. But some conditions
           requiring more complex or long term treatment are beyond current
           resources.   Details  are  not  included  here  because   health
           provision is constantly developing.

           5.45  All hospitals are  working,  but  the  capacity  of  their
           laboratories and x-ray departments is limited.   Also,  patients
           with conditions that require  regular  laboratory  control  (eg.
           transplantation patients taking  immuno-suppressive  drugs)  may
           not be able to find the necessary laboratory tests.  All  health
           houses  (large  health  centres  in  the  main  towns   of   the
           municipalities) are working but  their  diagnostic  capabilities
           are limited.


           5.46  There is a growing AIDS  problem  in  Kosovo,  thought  to
           originate  from  the  large  influx  of  prostitutes  into   the
           province.  Patients with rare, chronic diseases (e.g.,  lack  of
           growth hormone, hemophilia, HIV/AIDS) may not be  able  to  find
           the drugs they need in public health care institutions or  state
           pharmacies. Private pharmacies may be able to import  the  drugs
           they need, but they are likely to be expensive  and  the  supply
           may be uncertain.

           5.47  A review of the WHO mental health  project  in  July  2002
           made a positive evaluation of  the  progress  in  mental  health
           sector in Kosovo. The WHO mental health programme  has  impacted
           on the development of a  comprehensive  mental  health  strategy
           developed   in   collaboration   with   local   mental    health
           professionals. This may come to be used as a model  for  use  in
           other areas emerging from  a  period  conflict.  Also  a  Mental
           Disability and Mental Health Policy  Implementation  Task  Force
           has been established.

           5.48   Although   mental   health   provision   in   Kosovo   is
           underdeveloped, treatment for psychological conditions including
           Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is  available  in  Kosovo.
           Details of the "Kosova Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims
           (KRCT)" which provides treatment for PTSD are  included  in  the
           source documents.  Growing  numbers  of  people  in  Kosovo  are
           suffering  from  PTSD.   The  number  of  patients  treated  for
           psychiatric disorders by KCRT increased from 1,187  in  2001  to
           2812 in 2002.

           5.49  As with medical treatment,  the  range  of  medical  drugs
           available in Kosovo is  constantly  developing.   Many  standard
           drugs are now available, including Fluoxetin and Sertralin  from
           the Selective Serotonin Uptake  Inhibitors  group  (SSIs)  often
           used for the treatment of PTSD.

           5.50   A  report  by  Mental  Disability  Rights   International
           revealed that patients at the Shtimle Hospital were subjected to
           abuses by the staff. However,  at  the  end  of  2002,  physical
           protection of inmates was still inadequate.

  10. We note, in particular, paragraphs 5.48  and  5.49  dealing  with  the
      availability of drugs and  the  treatment  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress
      Disorder.


  11. Dr Taranto suggests on page 6 of her report that, were the claimant to
      return to the scene of his traumas, it would be almost inevitable that
      his condition would significantly worsen.  We do  not  understand  the
      basis upon which she reached that conclusion.  In any event, it cannot
      be construed as ruling out the claimant's  return  to  every  part  of
      Kosovo.  In our judgment, the adjudicator was entitled to find, as  he
      did in paragraph 5 of his determination, that the medical evidence did
      not establish that the claimant has a serious  psychiatric  condition.
      We  agree  with  that  conclusion.   In   those   circumstances,   the
      adjudicator's conclusion that the claimant's return  to  Kosovo  would
      not violate his human rights is sustainable.

Decision: The claimant's appeal is dismissed.






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
8 August 2003
