
ar               RR (Risk - Christian) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00081


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing: 22 August 2003
                                        Date Determination notified:18.09.03

                                   Before:

                     Mr J A O'Brien Quinn, QC (Chairman)
                               Mrs E Hurst, JP






                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and




                                                                  RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,
      appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  A.C.  Bulger)
      who, in a determination promulgated on  28  April  2003,  allowed  the
      appeal of the respondent, a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1  January
      1976, whose application for asylum had been refused by  the  Secretary
      of State on 12 November 2002.

2.    The Secretary of State was represented by Mr S.  Walker,  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer, while Miss S. Gibbons, of Counsel,  instructed  by
      Nathaniel & Co.  (464  Kingsland  Road),  solicitors  represented  the
      respondent.

3.    The grounds of appeal submitted in  this  case  by  the  Secretary  of
      State in this matter read as follows:

             '1. The Adjudicator has erred in his conclusion with regard to
                 the question of the appellant's risk of persecution due  to
                 being a follower of the Christian religion.


             a)  At paragraphs  15 to 19 the Adjudicator states that  there
                 is "a dearth" of  information  regarding  the  position  of
                 Christians in Afghanistan, at  paragraph  15  he  indicates
                 that this refers particularly to  Christian  converts  born
                 into Islam. However in each paragraph he fails  to  say  to
                 what information if any he has referred.


                 (i) It is incumbent upon the Adjudicator to  indicate  the
                 information he has considered when forming his conclusions.


             b)  The Adjudicator (at paragraph 20) indicates that there  is
                 a lack of information specific to the issues raised by  the
                 appellant in connection with his return to Afghanistan.


                 i)    The  Adjudicator  then  goes  on  to  consider  what
                 "common sense" suggests. It is submitted that in  doing  so
                 the Adjudicator has erred.  It  is  respectfully  submitted
                 that the Adjudicator should reach  his  conclusion  on  the
                 basis of the evidence  before him and not on  anecdotal  or
                 "common sense" conclusions.
                 ii)   In doing so it is submitted that the Adjudicator has
                 misdirected himself.
                 iii)    At paragraph  25  the  Adjudicator  discusses  the
                 "Accountability  Department"  in  Afghanistan,  further  he
                 indicates that there is  an  absence  of  information  with
                 regard to  "willingness or ability of the  security  forces
                 to enforce the policy of religious tolerance"
                 iv)  It is submitted that (given the lack  of  information
                 indicate above) the Adjudicator  has  erred  in  concluding
                 that:


                 1) The  appellant  would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
                    authorities for converting to Christianity
                 2) The appellant would suffer problems for  practising  his
                    religion,  either  from   individuals   or   others   in
                    Afghanistan
                 3) The authorities would be unwilling to provide  him  with
                    protection
             c)   At  paragraph  25  the  Adjudicator  indicates  that  the
                 appellant  would be practising his religion entirely in the
                 company of foreigners.  However he fails to say the way  in
                 which this affects the appellant's case.
             2)  At paragraph 26 the Adjudicator allows both the asylum and
                 the human rights appeal on the evidence discussed.
             3) Permission to appeal is  therefore  respectfully  requested
                 for the reasons outlined above. It is  submitted  that  the
                 grounds raise arguable issue that  merit  consideration  by
                 the Tribunal.

4.    Leave to appeal to the Tribunal was granted by  the  Tribunal  (Mr  A.
      Mackey, Vice President) on 16 June 2003.

5.    In granting leave to appeal, the Tribunal stated as follows:

             'I  have  carefully  considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  put
             forward. They do appear to indicate a basis for an  appeal  to
             the Tribunal. It is arguable that the conclusions  reached  by
             the  Adjudicator  were  not  open  to  him  on  the   evidence
             available. In  particular,  the  assessment  of  risk  to  the
             appellant on relocation to Kabul needs closer consideration to
             ascertain whether it is based on mere speculation or  a  well-
             founded conclusion.'


6.    When the appeal opened before the  Tribunal  on  22  August  2003,  Mr
      Walker produced before the Tribunal a document entitled 'International
      Religious Freedom Report 2002: Afghanistan,' two US  State  Department
      Reports on Afghanistan, one entitled 'Country Reports on Human  Rights
      Practices  2002'  and  the  second  'International  Religious  Freedom
      Reports 2002', together with Tribunal New Services down loaded from  a
      computer and dated New Delhi on 11 December 2001, while  Miss  Gibbons
      submitted four documents, relating to Christians in Afghanistan and  a
      document entitled 'Precepts Regarding Muslim Converts to  Christianity
      or Apostates'.

7.    We were addressed by Mr Walker, on the grounds of appeal as filed.

8.    He dealt, first of all, with ground 1, and drew our attention to  what
      the Adjudicator had said at paragraphs 15 and 19 of his determination,
      namely that there was a 'dearth' of information regarding the position
      of Christians in Afghanistan  and  indicated  that  that  referred  in
      particular  to  Christian  converts  born  into  Islam  but  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed  to  say  what  information,  if  any,  he  had
      referred to and that  it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  indicate  the
      information that he had considered when forming his  conclusions.   He
      submitted that, looking at the US State  Department  Reports,  it  was
      clear that the Adjudicator was wrong to say that there was  dearth  of
      information because it  was  clear  from  the  document  dealing  with
      international religious freedom, that, since  22  December  2001,  the
      legal basis for religious freedom in Afghanistan had been  found  with
      the Bonn Agreement of 5 December 2001 and in  the  1964  Constitution,
      which Constitution proclaimed Islam to  be  the  'sacred  religion  of
      Afghanistan' and also stated that the religious  rites  of  the  state
      should  be  performed  according  to  Hanafi  doctrine,  but  it  also
      proclaimed that 'non-Muslim citizens shall be free  to  perform  their
      rituals within the limits determined by laws for  public  decency  and
      public peace'.

8.    He also drew our attention to the second paragraph under  the  heading
      '(c)  Freedom of Religion in  the  Country  Reports  on  Human  Rights
      Practices in Afghanistan for 2002' where it is  stated  that  reliable
      sources estimated that 85% of the population were  Sunni  Muslims  and
      most of the remaining 15% were Shia,  that,  even  among  the  Muslims
      themselves,  there  were  differences  and  that  the  Shia   majority
      advocated a national  government  that  would  give  equal  rights  to
      citizens, and that there were small numbers of Ismailis living in  the
      central and northern  parts  of  the  countries  who  were  Shias  but
      considered the Aga Khan to be their spiritual leader. He also  pointed
      out that there was also a  small,  extremely  low  profile,  Christian
      community in addition to small numbers of adherents of other religions
      and that the number of adherents to claims of conservative  Islam  was
      growing. He also pointed out that it was there  stated  that,  in  the
      past, small communities of Hindus, Sikhs, Jews and Christians lived in
      the country but that most members of those communities had  left,  and
      that, even at their peak, those non-Muslim minorities constituted less
      than 1% of the population. He submitted that,  although  most  of  the
      country's small Hindu and Sikh  population  which  once  had  numbered
      about 50,000 persons, had emigrated or taken refuge abroad during  the
      many years of conflict, but that recently some minorities had begun to
      return and that  non-Muslims,  such  as  Hindus  and  Sikhs,  are  now
      estimated to number only in the hundreds.

9.    He submitted that it  was  also  stated  that  Afghanistan's  Interior
      Minister Gounus  Qanooni,  in  the  post-Taliban  interim  government,
      pressed upon the displaced Sikh and Hindu community to return to their
      hearth and homes, assuring 'equal rights to all  non-Muslims'. He also
      pointed out that the same Minister had told a delegation of  the  Sikh
      community which had fled to  India  from  Kabul  and  other  parts  of
      Afghanistan because of the troubled and unsettled conditions  of  that
      country, that they would have proper representation of  at  least  two
      members in the Loha Jirga or the Grand Council. He submitted, that  in
      those  circumstances,  there  was  sufficient  information   for   the
      Adjudicator to realise what the situation was in Afghanistan

10.   He also pointed out that the appellant had been  a  Muslim  before  he
      left Afghanistan in 1990  because  he  felt  aggrieved  by  the  harsh
      working demands which his uncle put on him, that his mother had  urged
      him to leave, and that he went to Pakistan  where  he  worked  with  a
      Pakistani Christian, and felt himself drawn to Christianity because of
      his employer's kindness, and had become baptised in 1998.

11.   He submitted that,  dealing  with  ground  1(b)  the  Adjudicator  had
      indicated that there was a lack of information specific to  the  issue
      raised by the respondent in connection with his return to  Afghanistan
      and that, in resolving these  matters,  the  Adjudicator,  instead  of
      applying a low legal standard, went on to consider what 'common sense'
      suggests which, he submitted, was an error, and that  the  Adjudicator
      should have reached his conclusion   on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      before him and not on anecdotal  or  'common  sense'  conclusions.  He
      submitted  that  the  Adjudicator,  in  paragraph  25,   reached   the
      conclusion that the respondent, in practising his religion,  would  be
      eminently noticeable as  a convert from Islam and,  having  regard  to
      the objective evidence, he would be practising  Christianity  entirely
      in the company of foreigners, but, again, Mr Walker  submitted,  there
      was no evidence to support that finding.  He submitted that, given the
      lack of information referred to by the Adjudicator, he  had  erred  in
      concluding that the appellant would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities for converting to Christianity, as there was  no  evidence
      to substantiate that, and  that  he  had  learned  in  coming  to  the
      conclusion that the respondent would suffer  problems  for  practising
      his religion, either  from  individuals  or  other   organisations  in
      Afghanistan and that he had erred  in  finding  that  the  authorities
      would be unwilling to provide him with protection.

12.   He submitted that, in the letter of refusal, the  Secretary  of  State
      did not find the respondent to be credible, did not  believe  that  he
      was a Christian and did not believe that  he  followed  the  Christian
      religion as he claimed.

13.   He submitted that Kabul was a large city  with  many  religions  being
      practised by many people and that the situation there  was  relatively
      safe. He submitted that the respondent was a young man who had  worked
      as a mechanic for a number of years and would have  no  difficulty  in
      finding employment there and would not have to return to his home area
      where he may have difficulty with his  uncle.   He  submitted,  again,
      that the respondent had never been a Christian, while  in  Afghanistan
      before, and that there was no evidence to indicate that  he  would  be
      persecuted as a Christian in Iran if he returned there.
14.   We then heard Miss Gibbons, in  reply,  and  she  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had found that the respondent was  a  genuinely  converted
      Christian and that he had been accepted as such.  She  submitted  that
      all the evidence indicated that he was a properly  baptised  Christian
      and a practising one.  She  submitted  that  he  had  practised  as  a
      Christian in Pakistan and had left there because of a  certain  amount
      of persecution. She submitted and drew attention to the fact  that  he
      was a Muslim who had converted to Christianity and  that,  looking  at
      the documents she had produced, stated that in the  Islamic  religious
      jurisprudence, the punishment for an  apostate  included  torture  and
      death. She submitted that under Islam's ideology of supremacy  'Dhimi'
      there were only three alternatives for dealing with non-Muslims  under
      the Islamic legal system which is that they  must  be  (i)  converted,
      (ii) subjugated or (iii)  eliminated.   She  submitted  that,  if  the
      appellant were to be returned to any part  of  Afghanistan,  he  would
      face the death sentence for  apostasy.   She  drew  attention  to  the
      situation in Afghanistan, as mentioned by Mr Walker, when he  referred
      to the Bonn Agreement and the 1964 Constitution, and  submitted  that,
      although it stated that non-Muslim citizens would be free  to  perform
      their rituals within the limits determined by laws for public  decency
      and public peace, as the respondent would be treated as  an  apostate,
      those laws with regard to public decency and public peace would follow
      the traditions and that the respondent would face death.

15.   She  submitted  that,  as  could  be  seen  from  her  documents,  the
      situation  of  Afghanistan's   religious   minorities   had   improved
      significantly since the fall of the  Taliban,  but  pointed  out  that
      religious freedom was not  protected  to  the  extent  called  for  by
      international standards. She pointed out that the country's  religious
      minorities  included  small  communities  of  Hindus  and  Sikhs  and,
      although there were no churches, expatriate Christians were reportedly
      able to meet in informal worship services in Kabul   and  one  or  two
      other major centres. She submitted that that would be  over-ridden  by
      the apostasy of the respondent.  She drew attention to what  was  also
      stated under the heading 'Blasphemy' where it stated that crimes under
      Sharia law were not codified or defined under Afghan  law,  but  under
      most interpretations  of  Sharia,  blasphemy  was  a  serious  offence
      sometimes punishable by death and that the respondent, by  becoming  a
      converted  Christian,  would  be  considered   as   having   committed
      blasphemy. She also drew attention to another of her documents,  where
      it  was  stated  that,  although  there  is  no  visible   church   in
      Afghanistan, the number of Afghan believers is increasing in urban and
      in some, or most, rural areas, but because of fear and suspicion, many
      believers found it difficult to meet in groups, that some  found  help
      and encouragement through  Christian  radio  programmes  in  the  main
      language of Afghanistan, but that the Taliban  religious  police  were
      active in seeking out 'converts' who were considered to be  apostates.
      She submitted that, although that applied at the time of the  Taliban,
      the situation had not changed to such an extent  that  the  respondent
      would be free to  practice  Christianity  in  Kabul  or  elsewhere  in
      Afghanistan.

16.    She  submitted  that,  in  order  for  the  respondent  to   practice
      Christianity in Afghanistan, he would have to practice it secretly and
      would not have the full freedom to practice his religion, which  would
      be against his human rights.  She submitted  that,  while  he  was  in
      Pakistan and in Iran he kept a low profile as a Christian, and that if
      he were returned to either Pakistan or Iran, it would not be safe  for
      him to do so, and that if he returned  to  Afghanistan,  he  would  be
      unable to practice his religion and that, as an apostate, he would  be
      at great risk of being killed, particularly as he could not return  to
      his own village where his uncle, for the preservation  of  the  family
      honour, would have him put to death and that, even in Kabul, he  would
      find it impossible to carry on his religion openly as a Christian. She
      submitted that the Adjudicator had come to the correct conclusion  and
      that the Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.

17.   We then heard briefly from  Mr  Walker,  in  reply,  and,  during  the
      course of  his submissions, it appeared that  certain of  the  replies
      given by the respondent  to  questions  asked  of  him  at  interview,
      appeared to indicate that the respondent was unaware of what branch of
      Christianity he belonged to, and that his  knowledge  of  Christianity
      was very sparse indeed.

18.   We then reserved  our  determination,  carefully  considered  all  the
      evidence and the submissions made to us, and considered Miss  Gibbons'
      skeleton argument and directed ourselves that the burden of proof  lay
      upon the Secretary of State and that the standard of proof was on  the
      balance of probabilities.

19.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, who allowed the appeal of the respondent, then  the
      appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  1  January  1976,  whose
      application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State.

20.   The basis of the respondent's claim was that he had left  Afghanistan,
      as a Muslim, in 1990, as he did not like the terms of employment  with
      his uncle, went to Pakistan, where he worked as a motor mechanic  with
      a Pakistani Christian, who so impressed him that he became a Christian
      himself and was baptised, but, due to his having been  ill-treated  in
      Pakistan, on account of his being a Christian, and  due  to  the  fact
      that, when his uncle visited him in Pakistan, and had discovered  that
      he had converted to Christianity, was shocked and threatened  to  kill
      him, the respondent left Pakistan, and went to live from six to  eight
      months in Iran, before leaving for the United Kingdom, where he sought
      asylum on the basis that if he were returned to Afghanistan, he  would
      face a real risk of persecution on account of his  Christianity  under
      both Conventions, both from the state from his uncles.

21.   The Secretary of State, in the first place,  was  not  satisfied  that
      the respondent had genuinely converted to Christianity, but, then went
      on to find that, if the respondent had converted to  Christianity,  he
      would not, after leaving Pakistan, have gone to Iran, but to a country
      which  predominantly  practised  Christianity  and  that  if  he  were
      returned to Afghanistan he  would  be  returned  to  Kabul  where  the
      situation was better than in the rest of the  country  and  there  was
      more security, that he did not have to return to  his own  area  where
      his uncles lived, and that he could practice his Christianity  without
      molestation.

22.   On appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
      respondent appealed to an Adjudicator  and  was  legally  represented.
      However, the Adjudicator, while he found that  the  respondent  was  a
      genuine Christian,  having  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  Reverend
      Pauline Shelton, the respondent's local vicar in  Stoke-on-Trent,  and
      having found that there was a 'dearth' of objective evidence about the
      position of Christianity in Afghanistan, and, in particular,  that  of
      Christian converts from Islam, even though the Home Office  Presenting
      Officer  before  him  had  pointed  to  paragraph  6.23  of  the  CIPU
      Assessment with regard to there being a policy of religious  tolerance
      in Afghanistan, having found that  it  seemed  to  him  that  all  the
      Christians who now lived  in  Afghanistan  were  foreigners,  assigned
      temporarily to relief work by foreign NGOs, who clearly constituted  a
      special case, and found that, despite  the  lack  of  information,  it
      seemed to him that 'commonsense'  suggested  that,  in  a  traditional
      Islamic society, like that in Afghanistan, conversion, by someone born
      into Islam, to Christianity, and in the light of the existence of  the
      Accountability Department, the respondent would face a  real  risk  of
      being persecuted under both the Refugee Convention  and  the  ECHR  on
      account of his conversion to Christianity.

23.   We have  heard  the  submissions  of  both  representatives  and  have
      studied the objective evidence before us.  As we see the situation  of
      the respondent and the situation where religious practice is concerned
      in Afghanistan, we must accept that Islam is the traditional  religion
      of the vast majority of  the  people  of  the  country  and  that  the
      practice  of  putting  to  death  those  who  convert  from  Islam  to
      Christianity, would, in areas where  Islamic  law  and  practices  are
      strictly followed, such as in rural areas and in the respondent's home
      village, where his uncles live, the respondent may very well face  the
      likelihood of being put to death on that account.

24.   However, despite the Adjudicator's findings that there  was  a  dearth
      of  information  with  regard  to  the  position  of  Christianity  in
      Afghanistan, there is objective evidence to the effect that,  as  Miss
      Gibbons' objective evidence shows, there  are  Christians  living  and
      practising their faith in Afghanistan, and that although there  is  no
      visible church in Afghanistan, the number of  Christian  believers  in
      urban and in some rural areas is increasing, that many believers  find
      it difficult to meet in  groups,  some  find  help  and  encouragement
      through  Christian  radio  programmes  in   the   main   language   of
      Afghanistan, although during the Taliban era,  religious  police  were
      actively seeking out 'converts' from Islam, who were considered to  be
      apostates.  However, with the fall of the Taliban, the seeking out  of
      apostates would appear no longer to be continued.

25.   Further, it is clear from US State Department Reports  on  Afghanistan
      for 2002, that there  is  a  small,  extremely  low-profile  Christian
      community,  in  addition  to  small  numbers  of  adherents  of  other
      religions.  And, again, it would appear, from official  sources,  that
      the Afghan government is encouraging the return of Sikhs  and  Hindus,
      assuring 'equal rights to all non-Muslims'.

26.   In the objective evidence, it is also stated  that  the  situation  of
      Afghan religious minorities has improved significantly since the  fall
      of the Taliban, although religious freedom is  not  protected  to  the
      same extent called for by international standards.

27.   However, most importantly, it is officially reported  that,  since  22
      December 2001, the legal basis for religious  freedom  in  Afghanistan
      has been found in the 5 December 2001 Bonn  Agreement,  and  the  1964
      Constitution. The  Constitution,  while  it  proclaims  Islam  as  the
      'sacred religion of Afghanistan' it also  proclaims  that  'non-Muslim
      citizens shall be free to perform  their  rituals  within  the  limits
      determined by laws for public decency and public peace'.

28.   We have noted  the  objective  evidence,  and  have  noted  also  that
      despite the demise of the Taliban, under which  regime  there  was  no
      religious tolerance, there  is  still  a  certain  opposition  to  the
      government's active pursuit of its policy of religious  tolerance  and
      problems with religious freedom still exist, nevertheless,  steps  are
      being taken towards the promotion of religious tolerance, and with the
      opening in Kabul of the US Embassy, since December  2001,  discussions
      have taken place on religious freedom with Afghan officials,   in  the
      context of its overall dialogue on the policy of protection  of  human
      rights.

29.   In these circumstances, while we  appreciate  that  religious  freedom
      has not reached the standard  recognised  internationally,  and  while
      additional Muslims may resort to extreme  measures  in  the  abuse  of
      human rights, we find that Christian communities do live and  practice
      their religion  in  Afghanistan,  mainly  in  urban  areas,  that  the
      situation of Christians has improved significantly, that the rights of
      non-Muslims to practice their religion is governed by the Constitution
      and by the Bonn  Agreement,  but  subject  to  laws  regarding  public
      decency and public peace, which should not affect the normal  practice
      of religion by Christians, and that, if  the  respondent  were  to  be
      returned to Afghanistan, he would be returning to Kabul, the  capital,
      which is a cosmopolitan urban area, there is no reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood that the respondent would face persecution for a Convention
      reason if returned there,  and  he  would  be  able  to  practice  his
      religion, albeit  at  a  lower  level  than  in  a  country  in  which
      Christianity was predominantly practised.

30.   Accordingly, although we are not wholly satisfied that the  respondent
      is a genuine convert to Christianity, as found by the Adjudicator,  we
      do not intend to challenge that view, as the point had not been raised
      in the grounds of appeal, and as the respondent's credibility was  not
      challenged either. However, even if we accept that the respondent  has
      converted genuinely to Christianity, we find  that  we  are  satisfied
      that, in the present political and religious climate  in  Afghanistan,
      the respondent has not established that he  would  have  a  reasonable
      degree  of  likelihood  of  being  persecuted  for  the  practice   of
      Christianity, while living in Kabul, and that he has  not  established
      that  the  United  Kingdom  government  would  be  in  breach  of  its
      obligations under Article 3 of the ECHR, in returning  him  to  Kabul,
      where he  could  practice  his  religion  among  the  other  Christian
      communities already living there.

31.   The determination of the Adjudicator is, accordingly, set  aside,  and
      that the appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.



                           J.A. O'BRIEN QUINN, QC
                                  CHAIRMAN










-----------------------
      1


