

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |SN (Scarring- Bribes - LTTE |
|                           |        |- Reprisals) Sri Lanka CG   |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00150          |
|Date:   12 November 2003   |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Chairman)                                       |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |And     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Appearances

For the appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel.
For the respondent:  Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  has
      been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  David  Taylor)  who  allowed  the
      respondent's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.    The appellant challenges the Adjudicator's  findings  in  relation  to
      the respondent's asylum claim contending that the  Adjudicator  failed
      to follow Ravichandran [1996] IAR 97, by not giving  clear  and  valid
      reasons as to why the respondent would be at risk if returned  to  Sri
      Lanka at the date of determining the appeal.  The  appellant  contends
      that the Adjudicator failed  to  take  full  account  of  the  current
      objective material relating to the peace process as  outlined  by  the
      CIPU April 2003 Report before him and reinforced by case law  and  the
      continuing ceasefire.

3.    The appellant refers to Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01689 in  which  the
      Tribunal held that "in the present  situation  having  regard  to  the
      present trends it is only exceptional cases that will not be  able  to
      return in safety.  The example of an exceptional case is  someone  who
      must be wanted in a relatively serious fashion".

4.    The appellant contends that the respondent does not fall  within  this
      category in that there is no evidence of  an  arrest  warrant  or  any
      other evidence to suggest that the respondent is wanted in  Sri  Lanka
      and that indeed the Adjudicator failed to make any  finding  that  the
      respondent was wanted by the authorities.

5.    The  respondent  claims  that  the  appellant's  last  arrest  was  in
      November 1999 well before the commencement of the ceasefire.

6.    The appellant notes that the respondent was released  in  relation  to
      both of his detentions by way of the payment of a bribe  and  as  such
      the continued interest by the authorities would be unlikely.

7.    Finally, in relation  to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  upon  risk  on
      return, the appellant contends that in the absence  of  evidence  that
      the respondent is wanted it is submitted that the scarring which is so
      heavily relied upon by the Adjudicator at paragraphs 30 and 31 of  his
      determination "is at most of only marginal relevance".

8.    There are in fact two  parts  to  the  appellant's  appeal  the  other
      relating to the Adjudicator's findings that Articles 2 and  3  of  the
      ECHR  were  engaged  but  more  particularly  in   relation   to   the
      Adjudicator's findings that the appellant's situation was such that to
      return him to Sri Lanka would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach
      of its obligations under Article 8.

9.    The  respondent  is  a  Tamil  from  the  North  of  Sri  Lanka.   The
      Adjudicator found his account  and  claimed  history  to  be  entirely
      credible and in this regard we set out below the Adjudicator's summary
      of the respondent's claim:

           ".... His family are supporters and have been involved for  some
           years with the LTTE, One of his older brothers, whom he has  not
           seen for five or six years, holds high rank in  the  LTTE.   Two
           other older brothers both live in the UK are  married  and  each
           has one daughter. They live together in one house (owned by  one
           of the brothers) and the appellant lives with them as well.  One
           of the brothers originally had refugee status in the UK and  the
           other came  as  a  student.   Both  have  now  obtained  British
           citizenship.


           In June 1991 the appellant was badly  injured  by  an  exploding
           bomb.  Serious operations were necessary and he has major  scars
           to his stomach. Over the next few years he assisted the LTTE and
           he says that he was forced to do this.


           At the end of 1995 the Sri Lankan Army captured Jaffna from  the
           LTTE and all the civilians relocated in  about  March  1996  for
           their safety.  Those who remained were  killed  or  tortured  as
           being LTTE supporters.  Shortly after relocation, the  appellant
           went home to collect some belongings but he was captured by  the
           authorities.  As a result of his scars  he  was  beaten  up  and
           tortured.  He was identified as being the  brother  of  a  high-
           ranking officer of the LTTE and  was  tortured  for  information
           about his brother.


           He was  released  with  a  bribe  from  his  father.   He  later
           contracted  malaria  severely.  In  January  1997,  despite  his
           weakness, he was asked to help the LTTE and did so under duress.




           The appellant's parents were unhappy at his being forced to work
           and, in November 1999 they arranged for him to go  to  Vavuniya.
           Shortly afterwards he was again detained on suspicion  of  being
           an LTTE member.  He was beaten and  required  to  identify  LTTE
           members.  He received scarring as a result of being tortured for
           the information.


           In February 2000 the appellant's brother-in-law  paid  money  to
           obtain his  release  and,  with  the  assistance  of  an  agent,
           arranged for him to flee  to  the  UK.   Because  of  his  older
           brother's senior position in the LTTE as well as because of  the
           numerous scars on his body he believes that he will be  detained
           and persecuted if he returns."  [The typed emphasis is ours].


10.   In  evaluating  the  evidence  at  the  hearing,  the  Adjudicator  at
      paragraph 19 of his determination turned his attention  to  a  medical
      report dated 28 May 2003 relating to the scarring to the  respondent's
      body.  He continued as follows:

           "....  The report states that the scarring  is  consistent  with
           his own description as to how the wounds were  caused.   At  his
           Counsel's request, I inspected  the  appellant's  scars  on  his
           chest and back although I made it clear  that  I  did  so  as  a
           layman without any medical knowledge.  The scars are  large  and
           numerous  and  unmissible".  [The  typed  emphasis   is   ours].




11.   Later in his determination at paragraph  24  and  in  summarising  the
      submissions of the appellant's Counsel, Mr Coleman, (who also appeared
      before us) the Adjudicator noted that:

           ".... However  the  appellant's  scars  are  unmistakable.  They
           caused him to be arrested on  the  last  occasion  that  he  was
           detained as the army thought that he was a combatant."


12.   The Adjudicator's findings in  relation  to  the  respondent's  asylum
      appeal are set out between paragraphs 26 and 32 of the  determination.
      The Adjudicator found the appellant  had  been  forced  to  leave  Sri
      Lanka,  "due  to  his  family's  involvement  with  the  LTTE".    The
      Adjudicator accepted the appellant's evidence, "as to  the  degree  of
      torture that he received at the hands of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
      when they forced him to state what he knew about LTTE activities".

13.   The Adjudicator accepted the  appellant's  evidence,  "that  the  LTTE
      came looking for him because he was informing against them".

14.   The Adjudicator continued inter alia:

           "I accept the appellant's evidence  as  being  credible.   Where
           there are inconsistencies in his statements, as  raised  in  the
           refusal letter, I am satisfied that they do not go to  the  core
           of his  evidence.   I  am  similarly  satisfied  that  when  the
           appellant fled Sri Lanka in March 2000 he did so  with  a  well-
           founded fear of persecution which, at that time, would certainly
           have been a Convention reason for obtaining  refugee  status  in
           the UK.


           Circumstances  since  January  2002  have,  of  course,  changed
           significantly in Sri Lanka with the  development  of  the  peace
           process. I am aware  of  the  indication  given  by  Mr  Justice
           Collins in the case of Jeyachandran when he stated that it is as
           yet premature to accept that everyone who has claimed asylum  in
           this country would be able to return safely.   But  the  present
           view is that it is only the exceptional cases that will  not  be
           able to return in safety.  There are few who  would  not  be  at
           risk but it is always necessary to consider the circumstances of
           each individual case.


           I have examined the latest objective evidence produced to me.  I
           am also conscious of the major scarring to the appellant's body.
            There is a serious risk that this scarring would bring  him  to
           the immediate attention of the authorities if he were to return.
            The state of affairs in Sri Lanka has  not  yet  moved  to  the
           position where  a  man  in  the  appellant's  situation  can  be
           reasonably sure of passing through immigration unnoticed.


           Applying the lower standard of  proof  that  applies  in  asylum
           cases, I am satisfied that this appellant is at risk  if  he  is
           sent back.  The fact that he is a Tamil  with  serious  scarring
           would be likely to bring him to the attention of the authorities
           and it would not be right to subject him to that risk.


           Having made such a finding of fact I am obliged to and do  allow
           the appeal on asylum grounds.  [The typed emphasis is ours].


15.   Ms Sigley drew our attention to the recent decision in  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Sabanathan [2003] EWCA Civ 1517.  It was a  case  where  the
      Tribunal allowed an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
      decision  of  an  Adjudicator  and  as  Ms  Sigley  pointed  out   the
      circumstances of the appellant in that case were not  dissimilar  from
      the respondent in the case before us.  The Tribunal had concluded that
      the scarring to that appellant was not particularly  visible  and  was
      not of any significance  and  that  it  would  not  draw  him  to  the
      attention of the Sri Lankan Army if he was returned.  It was also said
      that there was no evidence that the appellant was wanted in Sri  Lanka
      as an escapee or for any other reason.

16.   The Court considered the issue  of  whether  there  was  any  conflict
      between the cases of Oleed [2002] EWCA Civ 1906 and  Ravichandran  and
      concluded that there was no such conflict.

17.   We are mindful of the passages in the judgment  that  Ms  Sigley  most
      helpfully highlighted.  They include an assessment of  the  background
      documentation and in particular the Fact Finding Report of March  2002
      which records the position outlined by the Director of the Sri  Lankan
      CID that if a returnee were not wanted they would not  be  stopped  at
      the airport but where the CID  are  certain  that  an  individual  has
      committed or been convicted of an offence then they would be  stopped.
      Further, a computer holds the name and address and  age  of  a  wanted
      person.  Police purely  go  on  records  -  scars  would  not  make  a
      difference and the authorities would  not  make  a  decision  on  that
      basis.  It is right that this report  also  states  that  obtaining  a
      release from army custody on the payment of a bribe appears  to  be  a
      possibility and it is possible that such 'releases' would be  recorded
      as an official release without charge.

18.   We have, however, taken particular note of the  conclusions  of  Keene
      LJ at paragraph 27 which we set out below:

           "Insofar as one is seeking  to  reach  a  conclusion  from  such
           documentation as to whether the appellant would be on record  as
           an escapee, the IAT was in as good a position as the Adjudicator
           to form a view and was entitled to do so.  By itself  I  do  not
           suggest that the mere fact that the IAT could form  a  different
           view from that of an Adjudicator even in the case where  one  is
           dealing with documents, is enough.  As  has  been  indicated  on
           authorities to which I have referred, the IAT should be slow  to
           intervene in such matters merely because it  takes  a  different
           view but if it does come to the conclusion that  an  Adjudicator
           was clearly wrong in the conclusion which he reached then it  is
           entitled and bound to do.  In the present case the IAT  did,  in
           effect, conclude that the Adjudicator was plainly wrong  on  the
           inferences drawn by him in his  assessment  of  the  risks.   In
           those circumstances I cannot say  the  IAT  went  wrong  in  the
           approach which it adopted in this  case.   It  was  entitled  to
           allow the appeal as it did".


19.   The authorities to which Keene  LJ  had  made  reference  included  in
      addition to Oleed the approach of the Court in Borissov [1996] IAR 524
      and Keen LJ quoted a passage from the judgment of Hirst LJ in which he
      spelt out the basic principles which Keene LJ found  in  his  judgment
      was still applicable today.  The passage reads as follows:

           "Thus the jurisdiction of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal is not
           limited to questions of law and it is within the scope of  their
           jurisdiction for them to review, if they see fit to do  so,  the
           Special Adjudicator's conclusions of fact, though no doubt  this
           power will be sparingly exercised in  any  event  in  accordance
           with general principles, the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  will
           naturally be most reluctant  to  interfere  with  a  finding  of
           primary fact by the Special Adjudicator which is dependent  upon
           his assessment of the reliability or credibility  of  a  witness
           who has appeared before him".


20.   It is right to note that the Court further noted Balendran [1998]  IAR
      162 where the argument that perversity was  required  before  the  IAT
      although the term of conclusion  of  fact  was  rejected.   Ms Sigley
      indeed highlighted a particular section of a passage of  the  judgment
      of the then Lord Chancellor in  a  case  cited  in  Balendran,  namely
      Montgomerie & Co Ltd v Wallace-James [1904] AC73 as follows:

           "Where no question arises  as  to  truthfulness  and  where  the
           question is as to proper inferences to be  drawn  from  truthful
           evidence then the original Tribunal is in a better  position  to
           decide than the judges of an Appellate Court".


      Keen LJ observed that there was a difference between cases  where  the
      Adjudicator had  arrived  at  the  conclusion  of  fact  based  on  or
      principally upon oral evidence put  before  it  and  those  where  his
      conclusion is based on (or principally on) documentary material.  That
      was the difference as spelt out by Jawitt J in Balendran.


21.   We are mindful that although the Adjudicator in  the  case  before  us
      stated at paragraph 30 of his determination that he had  examined  the
      basis of the objective evidence produced to him, he fails to make  any
      further or more specific reference to objective evidence in  order  to
      substantiate his conclusion that the respondent would at the  date  of
      his determination, be at risk upon return for the reasons stated.

22.    Mr  Coleman  submits  that  given  the  length  of  the  respondent's
      detention in 1999/2000 and notwithstanding that he had eventually been
      released on the payment of a bribe, there was  a  clear  risk  that  a
      record of the appellant's detentions would indeed exist.   Apart  from
      observing to Mr Coleman these  were  not  factors  considered  by  the
      Adjudicator  within  his  determination,  we  do  not  find  that  the
      objective evidence placed before us supports his  contention  in  this
      regard.  Indeed there is evidence to the contrary as set  out  in  the
      Fact Finding Report of March 2002 to which we have above  referred  as
      did indeed the Court of Appeal in Sabanathan.

23.   As mentioned earlier the  report  also  stated  that  bribery  related
      releases might result in the possibility that such "releases" will  be
      recorded but only as an official release without  charge.   Indeed  in
      this regard we are persuaded by Ms Sigley's  submission  that  in  the
      unlikely event that the computer at the airport disclosed a record  of
      the appellant's detentions they would show that he  was  detained  and
      released and therefore there was still no reason why  the  appellant's
      scarring to his body should be discovered.  We agree  with  Ms  Sigley
      that the Adjudicator failed to give adequate and clear reasons for his
      conclusions.   Notwithstanding  the  unsatisfactory  nature   of   the
      Adjudicator's reasoning it was Ms Sigley's submission  with  which  we
      agree that the authorities would do nothing.  There is a ceasefire  in
      place. There must be many Tamils in the unfortunate position  of  this
      appellant not only in relation to his  past  dreadful  experiences  in
      detention but in being forced to identify LTTE members.

  24. Mindful of the judgment of  Keene  LJ  in  Sabanathan  in  noting  the
      difference in cases where the Adjudicator arrived at a  conclusion  of
      fact based on oral  evidence  put  before  him  and  those  where  his
      conclusion is based on the documentary  material,  we  have  concluded
      that the Adjudicator drew the wrong conclusions from his  findings  of
      fact.  As we say, he makes reference in his  determination  to  having
      considered the objective material but fails to be more specific.


  25.   We find that the Adjudicator was indeed plainly  wrong  to  conclude
      that the respondent's circumstances would place him in the category of
      an exceptional case.  In that regard we agree with Ms Sigley that  the
      Adjudicator, although taking into account other factors, appears  upon
      a careful reading of his determination to have placed  heavy  reliance
      on an examination of the respondent's scarring.  In  this  regard,  Mr
      Coleman accepted that the doubts expressed by the Tribunal in the past
      as regards the weight to be attached to reports prepared by Asylum Aid
      as in this case but he pointed out, as reflected in the determination,
      that at Mr Coleman's request the Adjudicator inspected those scars and
      concluded as he did at paragraph 30 that  he  was  "conscious  of  the
      major scarring to the appellant's body" and that there was "a  serious
      risk the scarring would bring him to the immediate  attention  of  the
      authorities if he were returned".

  26.   It is difficult to follow the Adjudicator's reasoning in  concluding
      that the scarring to the appellant's body  would  bring  him  "to  the
      immediate attention" of the authorities upon return.  It was  accepted
      by Mr Coleman and indeed observed by us and as stated by the  learned
      Vice President granting leave, Mr D J Parkes, "that according  to  the
      medical report the only scar upon the respondent's body which could be
      observed whilst he was wearing normal clothing was a cord of  hardened
      skin upon his right little finger".

  27.   The objective evidence makes clear  that  computerised  records  are
      kept of those citizens that are wanted by the Sri Lankan  authorities.
      As Ms Sigley rightly submitted, there is no reason to suppose that the
      respondent was on record and indeed this was not a matter  with  which
      the Adjudicator, in any event, made any reference such as  to  suggest
      that it formed part of his considerations in reaching his conclusions.



28.   Mr  Coleman  had  at  the  outset  accepted  that  the  Tribunal  were
      concerned with the objective situation as it stood in Sri Lanka at the
      time of the Adjudicator's  determination,  but  nonetheless  submitted
      that looking at the situation at the time of the  hearing  before  us,
      there was an atmosphere of current heightened tension in  relation  to
      which the authorities would be on a higher  state  of  vigilance  thus
      placing the respondent in his circumstances at higher risk.

29.    Having  found  that  the  Adjudicator  was  plainly  wrong   in   the
      conclusions that he drew from his findings  of  fact  we  have  indeed
      considered Bulletin 1/2003 recently issued by the  Home  Office  which
      refers to the recent political development whereby on 4 November 2003
      President Kumaratunga removed the portfolios of the Defence,  Interior
      and Mass Communication  from  the  relevant  Ministers  and  suspended
      Parliament until 19 November 2003.  We are however mindful  that  the
      Bulletin further records that on 5 November 2003 the President  issued
      a statement: -

           ". that the ceasefire between the Government and  the  LTTE  was
           not in jeopardy.  Her spokesman  said,  'the  President  has  no
           intention  of  resuming   or   provoking   the   resumption   of
           hostilities'."


      The Bulletin further records that following the return to Sri Lanka of
      the Prime Minister on 7 November 2003 that:


                 "That just after his arrival,  Sri  Lankan  officials  said
                 that the ten day state of emergency declared on 6 November
                 was being lifted to be replaced by less draconian  security
                 regulations".


      We do not therefore agree with Mr Coleman's  submission  that  in  the
      respondent's particular circumstances he would be at  heightened  risk
      if now returned to Sri Lanka.


  30. Although the Adjudicator made no reference within his determination to
      whether or not the respondent was a person on a wanted list,  we  find
      on the facts accepted by him that the respondent was released  on  two
      occasions from detention by payment of a bribe. The  circumstances  of
      the respondent's release is of clear  relevance  to  the  question  of
      whether or not the Sri Lankan authorities would be interested  in  him
      on return and in our view no such interest would exist.
  31.  As the Tribunal have made clear  in  Tharamakulaseelen  [2002]  UKIAT
      03444, and other cases, bribery related releases, especially from army
      custody will not in the absence of some special and credible reason be
      likely to be treated as escapes and will not result in  the  inclusion
      of the individuals involved on a wanted list.


  32.  As regards Mr Coleman's submissions in relation to  the  respondent's
      stated fear of the LTTE, we can but only point out that the  LTTE  are
      no longer an illegal organisation and though  that  by  itself  in  no
      sense indicates an end of human rights problems for persons associated
      with the LTTE or are perceived by them as being informers in the past,
      we are satisfied that a person with a profile such as this  respondent
      does not face any real risk on return of persecution or breach of  his
      human rights at their hands.  We are mindful that each case must  turn
      on its own facts and the normal risk factors have to be  assessed  and
      cannot be divorced from a consideration of the objective evidence.

33.   As was observed by Peter Gibson LJ  in  Selveratnam  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
      121:

           "... it is only in exceptional cases that a person returning  to
           Sri Lanka would attract the attention of the  authorities  there
           and that such persons are likely to be limited to those who  are
           wanted persons.   The  question  is  whether  the  case  of  the
           applicant is an exceptional case as a person  likely  to  be  of
           interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  so  likely  to  be
           detained, it being conceded that, once he is detained, there  is
           a substantial risk of persecution".


34.   The Adjudicator makes  no  reference  to  any  consideration  of  this
      important aspect of the matter at all within his  determination.   The
      Adjudicator simply confines  himself  to  what  he  describes  as  the
      indication given by Mr Justice Collins in Jeyachandran.

35.   Given that the only visible scars to  the  respondent  is  that  which
      appears on his right little finger, there is no reason to believe that
      the Sri Lankan authorities' attention  would  be  drawn  to  the  more
      extensive scarring to his body.

  36. We conclude on  the  facts  as  found  by  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      appellant is not a person on  a  wanted  list.   He  was  released  on
      payment of a bribe and that is of clear relevance to the  question  of
      whether or not that there is interest  in  him  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities on return. In our view no  such  interest  exists  in  the
      appellant's circumstances and as the Tribunal has made clear  in  many
      cases bribery related releases, especially from  army  custody,  would
      not in the absence of some special and credible reason be likely to be
      treated as escapes and  will  not  result  in  the  inclusion  of  the
      individuals involved on a wanted list.

  37.   We find that there is no real  risk  that  the  respondent  will  be
      detained simply by virtue of his prior detentions.  The respondent  is
      not an escapee.  He is not on  any  wanted  list.   His  case  is  not
      exceptional.

  38.   As regards the respondent's fear of the LTTE it is  noteworthy  that
      although  the  Adjudicator   in   his   determination   accepted   the
      respondent's evidence that the LTTE had come looking for  him  because
      he was informing against them, the Adjudicator made no finding or gave
      any consideration to the question of whether there would be  continued
      interest in the respondent by  the  LTTE  if  he  were  now  returned.
      Although since the  peace  process  the  LTTE  have  opened  political
      offices in government controlled areas in  the  North  and  have  been
      allowed to engage in activities in areas outside of their control,  it
      would, as Ms Sigley rightly submitted, take matters too far to suggest
      that given not least the passage of time, the LTTE would  continue  to
      have a  specific  interest  in  this  respondent  or  be  prepared  to
      concentrate their resources on establishing his return  to  Sri  Lanka
      and then hunting him down.  If that were  so,  as  Ms  Sigley  rightly
      submitted, it would impact on the circumstances of probably  thousands
      of young Tamil men who had been forced by the authorities to  identify
      LTTE members  in  the  past  in  similar  circumstances.  Further,  as
      paragraph 4.81 of the  CIPU  report  of  April  2003  made  clear  the
      majority of cease - fire violations perpetrated by the  LTTE  occurred
      in the North East of the country and  not  in  Colombo  to  where  the
      respondent would be returned and where  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      would be available to him. It was noteworthy that Mr Coleman  did  not
      draw our attention to any objective evidence to the contrary.

39.   For the above reasons we find that there is no reasonable chance or  a
      serious possibility of the respondent being persecuted for  a  Refugee
      Convention reason on his return  to  Sri  Lanka  or  that  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
      under Articles 2 and 3 would be breached on that return.

40.   We further so conclude in relation to the Adjudicator's  finding  that
      the appellant's circumstances in  this  country  were  such  that  his
      removal to Sri Lanka would be disproportionate  in  terms  of  Article
      8(2).

41.   Mr Coleman submitted that the  appellant's  circumstances  here  "were
      far beyond emotional ties".  He  submitted  one  of  the  respondent's
      brothers was a refugee in England and therefore could  not  return  to
      Sri Lanka and that the respondent had lived with his brother for three
      and a half years as a family in one home and helped to  take  care  of
      his brother's children. Close family ties here had therefore had  been
      established.

  42. We are however mindful of both the recent decision of the Tribunal  in
      Salad [2002] UKIAT  06698  and  indeed  an  earlier  decision  of  the
      Tribunal on a  similar  basis  in  Puvanesparan  [2002]  UKIAT  04876.
      Reference to both cases was made in the course of the  hearing  before
      us and indeed Ms Sigley provided us with a transcript of the  Tribunal
      determination  in  Salad.   Both  cases  establish  that   where   the
      relationship relied upon is not a close  family  relationship  between
      adults such as siblings there would have to be  special  circumstances
      before it was shown that there was a family life within  Article  8(1)
      or sufficient elements of private life to establish a protected right.
       Further in Salad the Tribunal reiterated that the link between  adult
      siblings would not normally  required  the  protection  of  Article  8
      without evidence of further elements of dependency involving more than
      the normal emotional tie.


  43.   We conclude that there is nothing in the respondent's situation that
      establishes such special circumstances as to  constitute  family  life
      within  Article  8(1)  or  sufficient  elements  of  private  life  to
      establish  a  protected  right.   Indeed,  we  note  that  it  is  the
      appellant's account he has a  family,  not  least  his  parents  still
      living in Sri Lanka.


  44.   We therefore find that the Adjudicator was plainly wrong to conclude
      that the respondent's circumstances engaged Article 8 of the ECHR.

     45.     We therefore reverse the Adjudicator's decision and  allow  the
      Secretary of State's appeal.





                                                               N H Goldstein
                                                              Vice President



