
Heard at Field House on:
14 November, 2003
Prepared on:
14 November, 2003
Signed on:
19th November, 2003
 | |AG (Article 8 - Approach) Azerbaijan [2003] UKIAT 00155  | |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. Richard Chalkley (Chairman)                                   |
|Mr. A. Smith                                                      |
|Mr. F. Jameson                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


JD




      Mr. A. Mahmood, Counsel, instructed by Dicksons  HMB  Solicitors,
      appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Mr. John Jones, a Senior
      Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Azerbaijan, appeals with the leave of
      the Tribunal against the decision of an Adjudicator,  Mr.  J.  W.
      Miller, who in a determination  promulgated  on  29  April  2003,
      following a hearing at Bennet House on 22 April  2003,  dismissed
      her appeal against the decision of the respondent, taken on  11th
      September, 2001, to direct her removal after refusing asylum.


   2. The Appellant was born on 15 January  1976  and  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom, with her son Alexander, born on 11 June 1995,  on
      11 July 2001 as  a  clandestine  entrant.  She  was  served  with
      illegal entry papers on 11 July 2001 and claimed  asylum  on  the
      same day.

   3. The Appellant is of mixed Azerbaijan and Russian ethnicity and of
      the Russian Orthodox faith.  She was married to a Muslim in 1993.
      He sadly died in 1998 and  following  her  husband's  death,  she
      claimed that she was mistreated by her late husband's family.


   4. Two months after  her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  on  18
      September 2001, the Appellant was married to an Afghan  national.
      Mr. Shir Mohammad Amir  Mohammad,  who  on  18  March  2002,  was
      granted exceptional leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  until
      18 March 2006.  On 2 July 2002, a child of that union  was  born,
      Amelia.

   5. The grounds of application for permission to appeal  assert  that
      the Adjudicator's decision that the Appellant's family, including
      her husband (an Afghan national), could be expected to make their
      home  in  Azerbaijan  was  unreasonable,  and  contrary  to   the
      evidence. They assert that the Adjudicator failed to consider all
      the considerable language and cultural difficulties  which  would
      face the Appellant's  husband,  Azerbaijan's  poor  human  rights
      record and  the  fact  that  the  objective  evidence  (US  State
      Department report) indicated widespread societal  and  government
      discrimination  against  non   Azeri   ethnic   minorities.   The
      Adjudicator's  findings  that  there  were   "no   insurmountable
      obstacles to the Appellant making application from Baku  to  join
      her spouse in this country" was unreasonable and contrary to  the
      evidence and it ignored the fact  that  the  Appellant  would  be
      precluded for a period of three years  from  applying  for  entry
      clearance under the Immigration Rules, since her husband had only
      been granted exceptional leave to remain and this did not entitle
      his spouse or children under the age of 18 years to join him.


   6. Mr. Mahmood indicated to us that he had not actually  received  a
      copy of the grant of permission to appeal. Since the hearing  was
      being conducted via a video link with  Birmingham,  we  adjourned
      while our clerk sent a copy  of  the  grant  to  Mr.  Mahmood  by
      facsimile. On resuming the  hearing  he  indicated  that  he  had
      received and read it.


   7. Mr. Mahmood submitted that the proper test  to  be  applied  when
      considering the Appellant's Article  8  claim,  was  whether  the
      conditions in Azerbaijan would offer her and her  family  a  safe
      and durable place for them  to  pursue  their  family  life.  If,
      instead of them  returning  together  to  Azerbaijan,  they  were
      separated, then the question would be for how long they might  be
      separated since the Appellant's husband  has  only  been  granted
      exceptional leave to remain,  and  the  Appellant  would  not  be
      entitled to make an application to return as a spouse until  such
      time as her husband had indefinite leave. It was not possible  to
      know  whether  that  would  ever  happen  and,   if   so,   when.
      Additionally,  one  had  to  bear  in  mind  the  effect  of  the
      Appellant's removal  on  her  children,  and  in  particular,  on
      Alexander, an 8 year old who arrived in the United  Kingdom  with
      the  Appellant.  Mr.  Mahmood  referred  us  to  the  Appellant's
      husband's statement included within her bundle. In  paragraph  5,
      her husband had said:-


        'I love my wife and children very much and I have  the  family
        that I always dreamed  of.  If  my  wife  and  Alexander  were
        returned to Azerbaijan, then my daughter would have to  remain
        in the United Kingdom with me, and it would be  very  hard  on
        us. It would severally affect my life [sic]. My wife and child
        would not be with me and it would be hard for me to  cope.  My
        family would be broken up'.


   8. There was, submitted  Mr.  Mahmood,  clear  evidence  before  the
      Adjudicator as to what the circumstances to be. He referred us to
      what  the  Appellant  herself  had  said  in  her  statement.  In
      paragraph 10, she had said:-


        'My son Alexander is currently attending school  in  Stoke-on-
        Trent. He has been attending school since November 2001. He is
        doing well, and he is settled. He has  lots  of  friends,  and
        loves playing football. He dreams of becoming a footballer and
        playing for Manchester United. He wins  lots  of  awards  from
        school. It would be very hard for him to leave the UK. It  was
        very hard for him when we first came to the UK ,  though  even
        in the UK, was not safe and that he could be killed [sic].  He
        was very afraid and he used to have nightmares because of what
        happened to us in Azerbaijan. He used to fear that someone was
        coming to kill him. He did not feel safe. He is very afraid of
        being returned to Azerbaijan.'


   9. The Adjudicator had  not  dealt  properly  with  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 claim and had not dealt with the son's  situation.  The
      family would, if they  were  all  returned  to  Azerbaijan,  face
      considerable difficulties. While it is true that  in  the  United
      Kingdom the Appellant's husband faces considerable  language  and
      cultural  difficulties,  there  is   at   least   no   widespread
      discrimination in the United Kingdom.  He  will  face  widespread
      societal and government discrimination in Azerbaijan.  These  are
      exceptional reasons why this Appellant  should  be  permitted  to
      'queue jump' rather than be forced to leave  the  United  Kingdom
      and make an application  to  return  as  the  spouse  of  someone
      settled here, at some future uncertain  date.  It  would  be  her
      husband's choice whether or not to remain  and  then  assist  his
      wife to re-enter at a later stage if he were able to, or  whether
      he should go with  her  to  Azerbaijan.  However,  submitted  Mr.
      Mahmood, the situation in Azerbaijan was very poor.


  10.  He  referred  us  to  objective   material.   In   the   Amnesty
      International annual report 2003, it  showed  that  a  referendum
      approved  numerous  changes  to   the   Constitution.   But   the
      authorities reportedly pressurised and induced voters to  approve
      the changes, and there had been allegations of widespread  ballot
      irregularities.  In  October,   the   police   broke   into   the
      headquarters of an opposition party in a move widely perceived as
      increasing harassment of the opposition. A  number  of  religious
      organisations, mainly Muslim, were banned.


  11. The US State Department report  showed  that  a  growing  moneyed
      class had emerged in Baku and poverty nationwide  had  decreased,
      but 49 per cent of the population still lived below  the  poverty
      level.  The  Government's  human  rights  record  remained  poor.
      Arbitrary arrest and detention continued to  be  a  problem.  The
      Government  took  no   action   to   punish   abusers,   although
      perpetrators were prosecuted  in  a  few  cases.  The  Government
      continued to restrict freedom of speech and press, and the  press
      faced continued harassment throughout the year. Violence  against
      women  remained  a  problem.  Discrimination  against  women  and
      certain ethnic minorities were problems. The Government  did  not
      hold most members of the police accountable  for  their  actions.
      The Constitution provides that persons of all faiths  may  choose
      and practise their religion without restriction,  but  there  are
      some abuses and restrictions. Some officials were said, at times,
      to discriminate against members of minority religions. There  had
      been  small  congregations  of   evangelical   Lutherans,   Roman
      Catholics, Baptists,  Molokans  (old  believers  in  the  Russian
      Orthodox Church), Seventh  Day  Adventists  and  Daha'is  in  the
      country for more than one hundred years. In the last ten years, a
      number of new religious groups that were considered 'foreign'  or
      'non-traditional' had been established. These include Pentecostal
      and  Evangelical  Christians,  Jehovah's  Witnesses   and   Hari-
      Krishnas. There were some reports  of  Government  harassment  of
      these  non-traditional  groups.  In  many  instances,  abuse   by
      officials reflected the popular prejudice against  conversion  to
      Christianity  and  other  non-traditional  religions.  There  was
      official  concern  regarding  'foreign'   (mainly   Iranian   and
      Wahhabist Muslim missionary activity). There  were  also  reports
      that the Government closed down Muslim groups and  organisations,
      allegedly having ties with terrorism.


  12.  The  importation  of  religious  materials  was  restricted.  In
      December, the State Committee for work and religious associations
      denied  a  Baku  bookstore  permission  to  import  four  hundred
      religious  books  on  the  grounds  that  the  store  was  not  a
      'religious organisation'. SCWRA officials told foreign  diplomats
      that they had blocked the import of Islamic literature  that  did
      not accord with Azerbaijani values.

  13. Hostility  also  existed  towards  foreign  (mostly  Iranian  and
      Wahhabist) Muslim missionary activity, which partly was viewed as
      seeking to spread political Islam, and thus a threat to stability
      and peace. Ethnic Azerbaijanis  have  fled  areas  of  Azerbaijan
      controlled by ethnic Armenians and Mosques in this area that  had
      not already been destroyed did not function.  He  submitted  that
      the situation in Azerbaijan was poor. He  acknowledged  that  his
      reference in his grounds to widespread  societal  and  government
      discrimination against "non Azeri" ethnic minorities was an error
      on his part. The cumulative effect of the  problems  this  family
      would face, namely the fact that the  Appellant  is  a  Christian
      woman married to a Muslim who would be regarded as  a  foreigner,
      means  that  her  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   be
      disproportionate. As an Afghan citizen he would be in difficulty.


  14. Counsel sought leave to call both the Appellant and  her  husband
      to  give  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  Afghan  citizens   are
      different from Azerbaijanis and would be  recognisable  as  such.
      The Tribunal declined to grant leave.


  15. Mr. Mahmood conceded that there was no objective evidence  before
      us that showed that Afghanis suffer discrimination in  Azerbaijan
      but, given the evidence as to how other  nationals  suffered,  it
      was clear that this Appellant's husband  would  also  suffer,  he
      submitted. The Appellant herself is from a minority religion  and
      would face difficulties. The  objective  evidence  clearly  shows
      that officials discriminate against  woman  and  Christians,  and
      this  Appellant's  husband  would  too.  It  would  not,  in  the
      circumstances, be unreasonable for him to decline  to  return  to
      Azerbaijan with his wife.

  16. Additionally, Mr. Mahmood submitted that the Adjudicator had  not
      adequately dealt with Alexander's situation and the  effect  upon
      him on return to a  country  where  he  did  not  feel  safe.  He
      submitted that the appeal required further  consideration  by  an
      Adjudicator other than Mr. Miller.

  17. Mr. Jones reminded us that the  only  issue  before  us  was  the
      question of proportionality. He referred us to paragraph  55  (v)
      of the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (on  the  application
      of Mahmood) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2001]
      INLR 1. The Appellant and her husband both knew before they  were
      married that their immigration  situation  in  this  country  was
      precarious. There were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family
      living together in Azerbaijan.  Despite  the  objective  evidence
      referred to by Mr. Mahmood,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  there
      would be no breach of the 1951 United Nations Convention  on  the
      Status of Refugees or  of  Articles  2  or  3  on  returning  the
      Appellant and while there was evidence to which Mr.  Mahmood  had
      referred, indicating that women still suffer  discrimination  and
      certain ethnic minorities  also  suffer,  there  was  nothing  to
      indicate that Afghani citizens  suffer  any  discrimination.  The
      discrimination to which this couple may  be  subjected  did  not,
      even  when  viewed  cumulatively,  amount  to  an  insurmountable
      obstacle.

  18. Insofar as there was any error in relation to  the  Adjudicator's
      consideration of the effects  of  return  on  Alexander,  and  he
      indicated that he was not  accepting  that  there  was  any  such
      error, the Tribunal could correct  it.  It  was  clear  from  Mr.
      Miller's  very  clear  determination  that   he   had   carefully
      considered the objective evidence. In paragraph 7 he had said  as
      much. There was no error in the Adjudicator's  approach.  In  any
      event, submitted Mr. Jones, it was clear  from  the  document  at
      page D18 of the Appellant's own bundle, comprising a copy of  the
      grant of status to the Appellant's husband of 18 March 2002, that
      an application could be lodged and considered,  even  though  the
      appellant's husband had only been granted  exceptional  leave  to
      remain, if there were compelling compassionate circumstances.  He
      invited us to dismiss the appeal.



  19. Mr. Mahmood drew our attention  to  page  E19  of  the  objective
      material.  In  the  US  State  Department  report,  there  was  a
      reference to the fact that many indigenous ethnic groups live  in
      the country. The Constitution  provides  the  right  to  maintain
      one's nationality and speak, be educated and carry  out  creative
      activity in one's mother tongue,  or  any  language  as  desired.
      However,  some  groups  have  complained  that  the   authorities
      restricted  their  ability  to  teach  or  print   materials   in
      indigenous languages. Separatist activities undertaken by  Farsi-
      speaking Talysh in the South and Caucasian Lezghins in the  North
      in the early 1990s, engendered some suspicions in other  citizens
      and  fostered   occasional   discrimination.   Meskhetian   Turks
      displaced from Central Asia, as well as Kurdish displaced persons
      from the Armenian occupied  Lachin  region,  also  complained  of
      discrimination. A senior government official was responsible  for
      minority  policy.  Some  members  of  other  ethnic  groups  also
      complained  credibly  about   discrimination.   Preventing   this
      discrimination was said not to be a  Government  priority.  There
      was no indication, Mr. Mahmood said, as to which minority  ethnic
      groups were at risk. The Government clearly do  not  do  anything
      about discrimination. He invited us to allow the appeal.


  20. We reserved our determination.

  21. We are most grateful to Mr. Mahmood for the very full,  eloquent,
      courteous and helpful submissions he made to us.  He dealt  fully
      with all aspects of the appellant's appeal.

  22. We have concluded, however, that we must dismiss this appeal.  We
      reminded ourselves of what  the  Master  of  the  Rolls  said  in
      Mahmood.   Having   reviewed   and   analysed   the    Strasbourg
      Jurisprudence, he said:

        'From these decisions I have drawn the  following  conclusions
        as to the approach of the Commission and the European Court of
        Human Rights to the potential conflict between the respect for
        family life and the enforcement of immigration controls:


             (i)      A state has the right under international law to
                   control  the  entry  of   non-nationals   into   its
                   territory, subject always to its treaty obligations.


             (ii)   Article 8 does not impose on a State  any  general
                   obligation to respect the choice of residence  of  a
                   married couple.


             (iii)   Removal or exclusion of one  family  member  from
                   the State where the other members of the family  are
                   lawfully resident,  will  not  necessarily  infringe
                   Article 8,  provided  there  are  no  insurmountable
                   obstacles for the  family  living  together  in  the
                   country of origin of the  family  members  excluded,
                   even though this involves a degree of  hardship  for
                   some or all members of the family.


             (iv)     Article 8 is unlikely  to  be  violated  by  the
                   expulsion of a member of a family that has been long
                   established in a State if the circumstances are such
                   that it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  other
                   members  of  the  family  to  follow   that   member
                   expelled.


             (v)    Knowledge on the part of one spouse at the time of
                   marriage that the rights of residence of  the  other
                   were precarious, militates against a finding that an
                   order excluding the latter spouse  violates  Article
                   8.


             (vi)     Whether  interference  with  family  rights   is
                   justified in the interest of controlling immigration
                   will depend on (1) The facts of the particular  case
                   and (2) The circumstances prevailing  in  the  state
                   whose action is impugned.'

  23.  At the time this Appellant married her husband, they  were  both
      aware that their immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom  was
      precarious. Mr. Mahmood suggested  to  us  that  the  Appellant's
      husband was aware that he would be granted exceptional  leave  to
      remain, prior to the Secretary of State  having  granted  it.  We
      accept that he  may  have  believed  that  he  would  be  granted
      exceptional leave to remain, but he could not possibly have known
      that he would be, any more than the Appellant could have done.


  24. We have  carefully  considered  the  objective  evidence  in  the
      Appellant's bundle. There was no evidence before us  to  indicate
      that Afghani citizens suffer discrimination  in  Azerbaijan.  The
      Appellant's husband,  is,  of  course,  a  Muslim.  There  is  no
      evidence before us that he would have any difficulty  at  all  in
      continuing to  practise  his  religion.  The  objective  evidence
      appears  to  suggest  that  hostility   exists   towards   Muslim
      missionary activity, which partly is viewed as 'seeking to spread
      political Islam and thus a threat to stability and peace'.  While
      there were reports that  the  Government  had  closed  down  some
      Muslim groups and organisations, this was allegedly because  they
      were thought to have ties with terrorists. We  noted  that  there
      were several religious groups who had reported that they had  not
      been registered with the Government, but this had  not  prevented
      them from functioning. We  accept  that  there  may  be  societal
      discrimination against women, but they are said by the  US  State
      Department's report to enjoy the same rights as men.


  25. We do not believe,  having  carefully  considered  the  objective
      evidence before us, that there is any reason to think  that  this
      Appellant will, if she returns to Azerbaijan  with  her  husband,
      suffer any ill-treatment or discrimination on account of her  own
      religion, on account of her being married to an Afghani  citizen,
      or on account of her having married a Muslim,  or  because  these
      cumulative facts. Neither do we believe on the evidence before us
      that there is any  reason  to  think  that,  were  he  to  go  to
      Azerbaijan with his wife, the Appellant's husband will  face  any
      ill-treatment or  discrimination  on  account  of  his  being  an
      Afghani citizen, on account of his being a Muslim  married  to  a
      Christian, or because these cumulative facts, or, indeed, for any
      other reason.

  26. We do not accept the Appellant's claim in her statement  that  it
      would be hard for her son to leave the  United  Kingdom.  To  his
      credit, he appears to have settled down and adjusted to  life  in
      the United Kingdom well. We have no reason  to  believe  that  he
      will not do so on return to Azerbaijan. He will be  supported  by
      the Appellant, and, if he chooses to return with her, by his step-
      father. Given that he appears to have adjusted very quickly to  a
      different culture and language in the United Kingdom, we  believe
      that this  will  stand  him  in  good  stead  on  his  return  to
      Azerbaijan.

  27. The circumstances prevailing in Azerbaijan, as  set  out  in  the
      objective material before us, will mean that there will  be  some
      degree of hardship for the Appellant and  her  husband  on  their
      return to Azerbaijan in terms of housing and employment,  but  we
      find that there are no insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant
      and her husband  returning  to  live  in  Azerbaijan  with  their
      children and for all these reasons have concluded  that  we  must
      dismiss this appeal.

  28. Appeal dismissed.


                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President


