
jh
FB (Removal Directions - Section 69(1) Appeal) Lebanon [2003] UKIAT 00104
Heard at Field House
On  8 October 2003
Dictated 8 October 2003
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                         28.10.2003


                                   Before:

                       Mr Richard Chalkley (Chairman)
                                Mr C Thursby

Between




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Mr D Medhurst, Counsel, instructed by Aaronson &  Co,  Solicitors,  appeared
on behalf of the  appellant  and  Mr  Colin  Flynn,  a  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.  The  appellant  appeals  with  leave  of  the  Tribunal  against  the
      determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  Mark   Davies,   who   in   a
      determination promulgated on 16 April 2003,  following  a  hearing  at
      Leeds on 28 March 2003, dismissed his appeal against the  decision  of
      the respondent taken on 6 December 2002 to refuse leave to enter after
      refusing asylum.  His appeal was therefore under Section 69(1) of  the
      1999 Immigration and Asylum Act.

   2. The appellant is an ethnic Palestinian born on 14 May, 1956 in Lebanon
      who, until his arrival in the United Kingdom on 8 October  2002,  had,
      since 1976, lived in the United  Arab  Emirates.   He  was  granted  a
      United Kingdom visit visa on 4 June 2002 in Abu Dhabi.  The  visa  was
      for six months and expired on 4 December 2002.  In granting leave, the
      Vice President said:

          "The only issue worthy of  merit  is  returnability  to  the  UAE,
          whether at the date of the Adjudicator's determination or now,  in
          view of the expiry of his residence permit.  Therefore  the  grant
          of leave is limited to grounds 1.3 and 1.4."

   3. Ground 1, paragraph 3, said:

          "The Adjudicator  erred  at  paragraph  53  in  finding  that  the
          appellant and his family can return to the UAE.  At  Annex  E5  of
          the Home Office bundle [the appellant's] period  of  residence  is
          recorded as expiring on 20/6/03 however [the appellant] stated  in
          evidence that his leave would  in  fact  expire  six  months  from
          departure from the UAE.  This is confirmed in the small  print  on
          the travel document at E5 which states "residence  permit  becomes
          invalid if bearer resides  outside  the  UAE  for  more  than  six
          months".  The  six  month  period  expired  on  the  date  of  the
          determination, i.e. 7/4/93, [the appellant] having left on 7/10/03
          (E5 stamp unclear but see E4 and fact that UK port interview  took
          place on 8/10/02).  Therefore at the  time  of  the  Adjudicator's
          decision [the appellant] had no right of  residence  in  the  UAE.
          [The appellant's] residence was granted purely for work  purposes,
          he was not allowed to own property in UAE and would not be able to
          reside there without an existing job, interview at  D6q.32-34  and
          determination paragraph 37."

   4. Ground 1, paragraph 4, said:

          "In  the  circumstances  the  removal  directions  to   UAE   were
          ineffective at the date of the determination.  [The appellant]  is
          currently in no sense a UAE  national  or  resident  and  as  such
          removal there would not be  in  accordance  with  the  law.   [The
          appellant] was entitled to have the issue of nationality  properly
          decided by the Adjudicator, see Agatha Smith (00/TH/02130) at para
          55."

   5. In addressing us, Mr Medhurst suggested that the Adjudicator failed to
      make a finding that the appellant had been habitually resident in  the
      United Arab Emirates but for the reasons  stated  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal, this appellant will not be  re-admitted  to  the  United  Arab
      Emirates since his residence permit has now expired and he  no  longer
      has a job there.  He will not, therefore, be entitled to apply  for  a
      fresh residence permit.

   6. The Tribunal  pointed  out  to  Mr  Medhurst  that  it  had  been  the
      appellant's claim, which was unchallenged by the respondent, that  the
      appellant had lived in Lebanon since 1976 when he  had  embarked  from
      the United Arab Emirates to the United Kingdom.  It  appeared  to  the
      Tribunal that there was power in law to remove the  appellant  to  the
      UAE and the fact that he may  not  be  admitted  to  the  UAE  was  an
      administrative difficulty, but not  one  which  rendered  the  removal
      directions unlawful.  Mr Medhurst responded by suggesting  that  since
      the Adjudicator had failed to make a finding that  the  appellant  was
      stateless the determination was  defective.   The  appellant's  former
      residence permit had expired.  He had been granted a residence  permit
      because he was working in the UAE but no longer had a  job  there  and
      would not be re-admitted.

   7. Mr Flynn reminded us that this was an appeal under  Section  69(1)  of
      the 1999 Immigration and Asylum Act.  It  was  the  appellant's  claim
      that he had resided  in  the  UAE  for  some  26  years.   He  is  not
      stateless; he travelled on a Lebanese travel document issued  to  him.
      There was no evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  show  that  were  the
      appellant to return to his former habitual residence he would  not  be
      granted renewal of his residence permit and he has  simply  failed  to
      show that he  would  be  refused  entry.   Mr  Medhurst  responded  by
      suggesting that the appellant was not a Lebanese citizen  and  has  no
      nationality.  He was, therefore, stateless and the Adjudicator  should
      have decided the issue of his nationality.

   8. We reserved our determination.

   9. We have concluded that we must dismiss this appeal.  We now  give  our
      reasons.

  10. This is a Section 69(1) appeal.  If it had been an  appeal  against  a
      decision to give removal directions  (as  opposed  to  a  decision  to
      refuse leave to enter) and the appellant had raised  a  Section  67(2)
      appeal, we would then have had jurisdiction to consider  the  validity
      of the removal directions to the United Arab Emirates.  That, however,
      is not the case.  The appeal  is  brought,  as  we  have  said,  under
      Section 69(1), against a decision to refuse leave to enter.   Even  if
      the country of removal specified in the  notice  of  the  decision  to
      refuse leave to enter is not one to which the Secretary  of  State  is
      entitled to remove  the  appellant  (and,  for  the  reason  given  in
      paragraph 11 below, we do not find that this  has  been  shown),  this
      would not invalidate the decision to refuse leave to enter.

  11. In any event, the appellant embarked from the United Arab Emirates for
      the United Kingdom.   The  Secretary  of  State  is  empowered,  under
      Section 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act (now see  Rule  4(2)  of
      the Immigration (Removal directions) Regulations  2000)  to  remove  a
      person to the country or territory in which he embarked for the United
      Kingdom.

  12. Removal directions can be set for a country even if  it  is  uncertain
      whether the authorities of that country would admit the  individual  -
      see Andrei Pavlov [2002] UKIAT 02544.  The possibility that  a  person
      may not be admitted by the receiving country, is a practical  obstacle
      to re-admission -  see  [2003]  UKIAT  00016L  -  but  this  does  not
      invalidate the decision of the Respondent.   Furthermore,  it  is  not
      necessary for the Appellant to be readmitted for  settlement.   It  is
      therefore not relevant for us to consider whether,  if  the  appellant
      were to apply for a renewal of his residence permit in the United Arab
      Emirates, this would be granted or refused.

  13. Accordingly, we have concluded as follows: firstly,  that  we  do  not
      have jurisdiction  to  consider  the  validity  or  otherwise  of  the
      Secretary of State's decision to specify in the notice of the decision
      to refuse leave to enter the United Arab Emirates as  the  country  to
      which the appellant would be removed; and, secondly, that, even if  we
      did have such jurisdiction,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
      specify the United Arab Emirates as  the  country  of  destination  is
      lawful.

  14. As to the issue of nationality, it is not enough  for  a  claimant  to
      simply assert that  he  is  stateless.   He  must  prove  that  he  is
      stateless, to the low standard of proof.  The  principle  in  Bradshaw
      [1994] IMM AR 359 applies.  Save where there are serious obstacles, it
      is incumbent upon a claimant to make an  application  for  nationality
      and furnish evidence as to the outcome of  such  an  application.   In
      this case, the appellant has not made  any  application  for  Lebanese
      nationality.  We note, however, that a Lebanese  travel  document  was
      issued to him.  On the evidence before us, we are not  satisfied  that
      the appellant has established that he is stateless.

  15. In any event, we are of the opinion that the issue of  nationality  in
      this particular case does not affect the outcome of this appeal.  This
      is because, even if he is stateless, the fact  is  that,  by  his  own
      evidence, he  was  formerly  habitually  resident  in  the  UAE.   Mr.
      Medhurst sought to suggest that the Adjudicator had not made a finding
      that the appellant was habitually resident in the UAE.  However, it is
      the appellant's own evidence that he lived in the UAE from 1976  until
      he embarked for the United Kingdom.  Whilst the  Adjudicator  had  not
      made a specific finding that the appellant's former habitual residence
      was the UAE, it is clear from a reading of the Determination that  the
      Adjudicator had accepted the appellant's evidence that he had lived in
      the UAE from 1976 until he left the UAE to come to the United  Kingdom
      and, indeed, it has never been in dispute.

  16. Since the notice of the decision to refuse leave to enter states  that
      removal will be made to the UAE, this sets the scope  of  the  appeal.
      Although a removal direction was not an essential feature of a  notice
      of a decision to refuse leave to enter (as it would have been  if  the
      decision had been one to give removal directions), it did provide  the
      focus of the grounds of application under Section 69(1) - see  Slavisa
      Kojic [2002] UKIAT 05114.  This means that this  appeal  falls  to  be
      determined on the following basis:

          a) whether the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in
             the UAE; and

          b) if there is a risk that he will be refouled  from  the  UAE  to
             some other place, whether he will be refouled  to  a  place  in
             which he does have a well-founded fear of persecution, in  this
             case, Lebanon?

  17.  In relation to (a) above, the Adjudicator  found,  at  paragraph  54,
      that there was no evidence to suggest that it  was  reasonably  likely
      that the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution  or  of  his
      human rights being breached on return to the UAE.  The Adjudicator has
      given clear and logical  reasons  for  his  findings,  which,  on  the
      evidence before him, were open to him.

  18. In relation to (b) above, the Adjudicator found in paragraph 60 of his
      determination that the  appellant  and  his  family  could  return  to
      Lebanon without risk of breach of either Convention.



  19. For all these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.









                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President

