
Heard at Field House Date: 5th August 2003
AK (Appeal Announced Allowed but Reported Dismissed) Rwanda [2003] UKIAT
00047

                                   Between

                                 RESPONDENT

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


Date Determination notified:
19 AUG 2UU3
.................... ......................


                 APPELLANTS

              Before:

                   His Honour Judge G Risius CB (Chairman)
                               Dr A U Chaudhry

                             Mr Alfonsi Katabazi
                       Beth Blessing Katabazi (Child)
                            Eva Katabazi (Child)
                          Ian Paul Katabazi (Child)
                            Ines Katabazi (Child)
                          Margaret Katabazi (Wife)

                and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department



Representation:

Mr D Warburton of counsel, instructed by the I A S Tribunal Unit, for the
appellant; Mr D W Saville, a Home Office Presenting Officer, for the
respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1 . The appellants, citizens of Rwanda, appeal with leave  of  the  Tribunal
against the  decision  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J  R  Devittie,  who  in  a
determination promulgated on 5'h March 2003 dismissed their appeals  against
the decision of t he respondent, made o n  31  s`  October  2001,  to  issue
directions for t heir removal from the United Kingdom  following  a  refusal
of asylum.

2. Leave to appeal to the Tribunal on the basis of an assertion that "At
the end of the hearing the Adjudicator stated he would allow the appeal".
In the event, he dismissed it. Mr Warburton handed us a manuscript note
made by the appellants' representative at the hearing, stating "Adjud -
Appeal allowed will send decision within 8 weeks." We had in fact Mrs
Ghai's witness statement dated 21st July 2003 to the same effect. Mr
Saville confirmed that the respondent's representative at the hearing had
made a similar note on the Home Office file.
3. It is accordingly clear that the adjudicator  announced  to  the  parties
that  he  would  be  allowing  the  appeal  but  proceeded   to,   issue   a
determination dismissing it. In accordance with the decision of  Harrison  J
in Mohammed Bashir (CO-4643-98), the proper course  in  such  cases  is  to'
remit the appeal for rehearing. Mr Warburton told us  that  subject  to  the
Tribunal's views, he and Mr Saville were in  agreement  that  thi  'was  the
appropriate method of disposal.

4. What happened in this case was unfortunate, to say the least. As  pointed
out in Mohammed Bashir, adjudicators should  not  announce  their  decisions
after the hearing unless "confident that  it  will  be  reflected  in  [the]
written notice of determination. Only in  exceptional  circumstances  should
there be any need to diverge from the decision announced at the end  of  the
hearing. If the ... adjudicator does perceive any need to  change  his  oral
decision, it would normally  be  necessary,  in  the  interests  of  natural
justice, for him to invite  the  parties  to  make  further  representations
before coming to his final  determination".  That  did  not  happen  in  the
present case.

5. For these reasons we allow this appeal to the extent that it is remi ed
for hearing afresh by an adjudicator other than Mr J R Devittie.







                                        His Honour Judge G Risius CB
                                                         Chairman
His Honour Judge G Risius CB Chairman

