
                             Appeal Number:  KH (Fair Trial - Surendran
Guidelines) iraq [2003] UKIAT 00048




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Decision:  1 July 2003
                                      Date of Promulgation: 26TH August 2003

                                   Before
                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                                 Mr A Jordan

                                   Between

                                 (Appellant)
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 (Respondent)


Representatives:
Mr A Rahman of Counsel instructed by Genga & Co, solicitors for the
appellant.
Mr D Ekagha, Senior Presenting Officer for the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This appeal to the Tribunal  has  been  brought  on  a  narrow  but
        important point. The appellant is a national of Iraq  whose  appeal
        against the decision of  the  respondent  to  give  directions  for
        removal following refusal to  grant  asylum  was  dismissed  by  an
        Adjudicator, Miss L Brown,  sitting  at  North  Sefton  Magistrates
        Court. He sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
        Tribunal  (Mr  Richard  Chalkley,  Vice  President)  to  prove  his
        allegation in the grounds that the hearing before  the  Adjudicator
        had been conducted in a  manner  inconsistent  with  principles  of
        fairness in that the appellant was  subjected  to  repeated  "cross
        examination  both  by  the  Home  Office  Representative  and   the
        Adjudicator simultaneously."


     2. We have received the Adjudicator's comments on the  allegation  and
        we have also received a written statement of  the  appellant.  More
        importantly though we have received a typed certified copy  of  the
        record of proceedings before  the  adjudicator.  We  are  immensely
        grateful to  the  Adjudicator  for  her  co-operation  and  helpful
        comments. We expressed our extreme displeasure with Counsel who was
        the appellant's representative before the Adjudicator and who could
        have but has not put in his own witness statement. He should not in
        the circumstances have represented the appellant before us. He  was
        responsible for drafting the grounds of appeal and when pressed  by
        us about the veracity  of  the  contents  of  the  ground  alleging
        unfairness, he attempted to give oral evidence. We declined to hear
        it and made it clear to him that as Counsel he owed a duty  to  the
        Court and  that  allegations  of  impropriety  against  a  judicial
        officer are extremely serious and required to be proved to  a  high
        standard. We did not think it appropriate to adjourn the hearing to
        enable the Counsel to prepare his witness statement  and  to  offer
        himself for oral evidence. This would have caused delay  of  months
        and we did  not  think  it  was  necessary.  We  hope  though  that
        representatives will note that the Tribunal  takes  allegations  of
        the kind made in this case very seriously  and  expects  scrupulous
        and professional behaviour in proving the allegations.

     3. We have had the benefit of making a careful study of the record  of
        proceedings. Based upon our reading of the record we think that  it
        is in the interests of justice to direct that  the  case  be  heard
        afresh by a different Adjudicator. However we should like  to  make
        it clear that by doing so we do not uphold the allegations made  in
        the grounds of appeal. We are concerned that in  the  course  of  a
        lengthy cross examination which was carried out by the respondent's
        representative, the Adjudicator has asked a  number  of  questions.
        The timing, the content and the nature of some of  these  questions
        could lead to a perception of bias. An Adjudicator has every  right
        to ask questions and to seek clarifications of evidence but he must
        not enter the arena and his questions must be formulated in such  a
        way and asked at such a time as to ensure that he is not seen to be
        taking sides. We do not make any criticism of  the  Adjudicator  in
        this case but it is clear to us that the hearing before her was not
        a very happy one and it was not assisted by the fact that  it  took
        place during the month of Ramadan and the appellant as well as  his
        Counsel were fasting.


     4. We allow this appeal but to the limited extent of directing that it
        be heard afresh by an Adjudicator other than Ms L Brown.








K Drabu

Vice President

