

KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |FO (Albanians - Article 3)  |
|                           |        |Serbia and Montenegro [2003]|
|                           |        |UKIAT 00069                 |
|Date:  8 August 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|09.09.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes (Chairman)                                            |
|Dr A U Chaudhry                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms R Giltrow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms L Maroof of Counsel instructed by Brain Sinnott  &
                       Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent is a citizen of what was formerly the Federal  Republic
      of Yugoslavia but is now Serbia and Montenegro.  He  was  born  on  14
      November 1983 in the province of Kosovo and  is  of  Kosovan  Albanian
      ethnicity.  He claims to have entered the United Kingdom illegally  on
      16 September 1999.  On 24 September 1999  he  claimed  asylum.   That
      application was refused  on  29  January  2001  when  he  was  granted
      exceptional leave to remain until 14 November 2001, the date on  which
      he would attain the age of 18.  On 30 October 2001 his representatives
      applied  to  the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate  for   an
      extension of the appellant's exceptional leave to remain in line  with
      that which had been granted  to  his  cousin,  Romeo  Olluri.   On  14
      December 2001 they wrote a  further  letter  to  the  Immigration  and
      Nationality Directorate  claiming  that  any  forced  removal  of  the
      appellant would be in breach of Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998
      by which they no doubt intended to refer to Article 8 of the  European
      Convention incorporated into United Kingdom law by that Act.

2.    In response to  an  invitation  from  the  appellant,  the  respondent
      submitted a statement of additional grounds dated 5 July 2002 in which
      he stated that the Serbs had killed his parents and that  he  believed
      that his brother also was dead, so he had no family at all in  Kosovo.
      He recorded that he travelled to the United Kingdom with  his  cousin,
      that they lived together and he was now his only family relation.   He
      said that his cousin had been granted four years exceptional leave  to
      remain which would lead to a grant of indefinite leave at the  end  of
      that period and it was his case that as Romeo was the only  family  he
      had, any forced expulsion of him from the United Kingdom would  breach
      his rights under Article 8 of the European Convention.   Additionally,
      he claimed that he had been traumatised by his experiences in  Kosovo,
      requiring medication and counselling treatment, and  that  his  forced
      return would be in breach  of  his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention.

3.    That application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
      reasons set out in a letter dated 1 August 2002.  He  dealt  with  the
      Article 3 claim in the following terms at paragraphs 7 and  8  of  the
      that letter:

      "7.   You state that your client will  suffer  inhuman  and  degrading
           treatment if removed from  the  United  Kingdom  because  he  is
           suffering from post traumatic stress disorder.  You  claim  that
           to return Mr Fatjon Olluri would lead to  the  deterioration  of
           his health.  The Secretary of State has  considered  your  claim
           but is aware that case law at Strasbourg makes clear  that  PTSD
           cannot amount to inhuman and degrading  treatment  even  when  a
           condition  deteriorates  on  return.   This  opinion  has   been
           confirmed in Cruz Varas v Sweden [1991] - 14 EHRR 1 and Kudla  v
           Poland (26/10/00).  Such conditions  do  not  meet  the  minimum
           level of severity required to achieve a claim  under  the  ECHR.
           Furthermore, the Secretary of  State  is  of  the  opinion  that
           should your client's condition continue  and/or  deteriorate  on
           return to Federal Republic of Yugoslavia  he  will  be  able  to
           access adequate medical facilities there.


      8.    The Secretary of State further notes that hospitals have been re-
           opened and with extensive reconstruction works, there have  been
           significant  improvements  in  the  physical  infrastructure  in
           Kosovo."


4.    The letter then goes on to deal with the Article 8  claim  with  which
      we are not concerned in this appeal since there has been no appeal  on
      the part of the respondent against the failure of the  Adjudicator  to
      deal with the Article 8 claim (based on his life in the United Kingdom
      with his cousin) on the basis that he had  allowed  the  appeal  under
      Article 3 and was therefore relieved of necessity of so doing.  It  is
      appropriate to record, however, that at paragraph 11 of the letter the
      Secretary of State dealt with the claim that the  appellant's  parents
      were dead and possibly also his brother.  It was noted that he had not
      lodged any corroborative  evidence  to  support  the  claim  and  that
      according to his asylum interview on 19 January 2000  he  had  had  no
      contact with his family since arriving in the United Kingdom  so  that
      he would not have any information about whether his family were  alive
      or dead.  The Secretary of State noted that the respondent had adduced
      no evidence to show that he had other family/friends in  Kosovo  apart
      from his nuclear family, with whom he  could  find  help/support.   We
      further note that in neither of the two witness statements which  were
      produced before the Adjudicator is there any suggestion on the part of
      the respondent that his parents or indeed his brother had been  killed
      at the time he left Kosovo.   What  he  related  were  four  incidents
      between March 1998 and April 1999 which culminated in the family being
      evicted from their home in April 1999 when they went  to  Delobrad  to
      live with relatives.  The appellant and his cousin were then  sent  by
      the families out of Kosovo in September 1999 and  this  was  the  last
      occasion that the respondent saw his parents.  That  was,  of  course,
      after KFOR and UNMIK had entered Kosovo in the intervening  period  in
      June 1999.  All that the respondent claims in those statements is that
      he has had no contact with his family  since  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  He does not suggest that he has made any attempt to  contact
      his family,  whether  immediate  or  extended,  in  Kosovo  since  his
      arrival.

5.    On 23 August 2002 the Secretary of State issued the  usual  notice  to
      the respondent of his right to appeal on human rights grounds  against
      his decision refusing to  grant  him  leave  to  remain  either  under
      Article 3 or Article 8 on the basis which he had put forward.

6.    The respondent appealed against that decision on both Article 3 and  8
      grounds and his grounds of appeal add nothing to what had already been
      said in support of the application.

7.    His appeal was heard on 27 November 2002 by an  Adjudicator,  Mr  S  S
      Chohan, who observed that the respondent had never  apparently  sought
      to appeal against the initial refusal of  his  asylum  application  so
      that there were no outstanding rights  in  that  respect  and  he  was
      concerned solely with the human  rights  claims  which  had  been  put
      forward.  As we have noted he allowed the appeal under Article  3  and
      did not therefore consider it necessary to deal with the  claim  under
      Article 8.

8.    The Secretary of  State  was  granted  leave  to  appeal  against  the
      allowing of the respondent's appeal under Article 3  of  the  European
      Convention and  that  is  the  only  issue  which  is  before  us  for
      determination.

9.    The Secretary of  State  raised  challenges  on  two  grounds  in  the
      grounds of appeal.  The first was that on the facts the  Adjudicator's
      decision was unsustainable since there was no credible  evidence  that
      removal of the respondent to his own country would, on  the  basis  of
      his diagnosed medical condition ,reach the high threshold necessary to
      engage Article  3  having  regard  to  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
      particularly in  the  final  judgment  in  Bensaid  v  United  Kingdom
      (Strasbourg 44599/98) [2001] INLR 325.  The second basis was that  for
      various reasons the psychiatric report produced by Dr Hicks was flawed
      and should not have been relied upon  by  the  Adjudicator.   Save  in
      relation to Dr Hicks' views as to the level of treatment  which  would
      be available to the respondent in Kosovo are concerned - a  matter  on
      which Ms Maroof conceded that the doctor was not qualified  to  reach
      views and which would depend upon the view  which  we  formed  of  the
      objective evidence in this respect - the second basis of challenge was
      effectively abandoned by Ms Giltrow, who accepted that she  could  not
      go behind the diagnosis of post traumatic stress  disorder  which  had
      been made by Dr Hicks.

10.   The medical evidence before the Adjudicator was a  psychiatric  report
      dated 29 October 2002 by Dr  Hicks  who  holds,  in  addition  to  his
      general medical qualifications, the qualification  of  Member  of  the
      Royal College of Psychiatry, and who is an Honorary Clinical  Lecturer
      in Psychiatry at the University of Bristol and a specialist  registrar
      in adult mental health at Wootton Lawn Hospital in Gloucester.

11.   That report is based on one interview with the respondent in which  he
      gave  his  history,  which  confirmed  at  paragraph  3.1.5  that  the
      respondent's parents had decided he should leave Kosovo  for  his  own
      safety  and  that  his  father  and  uncle  made  all  the   necessary
      arrangements.  The report noted that the respondent  lived  in  rented
      accommodation with his cousin Romeo in Swindon, that  he  had  a  part
      time job with Sainsburys Homebase  there  and  had  completed  a  GNVQ
      course in IT at Swindon  College  of  Further  Education  as  well  as
      courses in English and maths since his arrival in the United  Kingdom.
       He said that he was physically fit and well with no past  history  of
      note.  At paragraph 3.8.2 it was noted that  the  respondent  did  not
      describe any symptoms or show any  signs  suggestive  of  a  psychotic
      illness and that he was orientated  in  time,  place  and  person  and
      thought that his current problems were  psychological  in  nature  and
      caused by his experiences in Kosovo.  At paragraph 4, Dr Hicks  stated
      that the respondent described symptoms and signs consistent  with  the
      diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder and gave it  as  his  view
      that the respondent would benefit from anti-depressant medication  for
      at least six to twelve months as well as a psychological  approach  to
      his problems.  In this respect he recommended that the counselling  he
      was then receiving at the  GP  practice  should  continue  but  if  he
      continued to suffer symptoms despite that treatment plan he  could  be
      referred to the local  Community  Health  Team  for  more  specialised
      treatment if needed, and that  the  length  of  psychological  therapy
      would depend on his response to treatment.  He also concluded that the
      respondent would benefit from continued  support  which  he  had  been
      receiving under the care of local Social  Services.   This  would,  of
      course, have followed from the fact that he was a minor on his arrival
      in the United Kingdom.   As  to  the  future  prognosis,  he  says  at
      paragraph 5 that the respondent is  likely  to  suffer  chronic  (long
      term) symptoms if he does not receive the  recommended  treatment  and
      that recovery would be helped by a perception of physical  safety  and
      social support.  He referred to the Diagnostic and Statistical  Manual
      of Mental Disorders which stated "symptom reactivation  may  occur  in
      response to reminders of the original trauma, live stressors,  or  new
      traumatic events...".  He concluded at paragraph 5.4 as follows:

           "In my opinion it is  likely  that  Mr  Olluri  would  suffer  a
           recurrence and worsening of his symptoms of PTSD and  depression
           if he were forcibly returned to  Kosovo,  as  he  is  likely  to
           reminded [sic] of his original trauma.  In my opinion his mental
           health would suffer as  a  result  even  if  he  had  access  to
           adequate treatment."


12.   As we have said, Dr Hicks also gave the  view  that  it  was  unlikely
      that the respondent would receive adequate treatment if he returned to
      Kosovo "based on information regarding medical resources available  in
      Kosovo" (paragraph 5.2 of his report), a matter which was noted by the
      Adjudicator at paragraph 15 of his determination.

13.    The  Adjudicator  said  this  at  paragraphs  16  and   17   of   the
      determination:

      "16.  Dr Hicks' conclusions are supported by the UNHCR letter of April
           2002, in which it is indicated  that  persons  with  severe  and
           chronic mental  illness  whose  condition  requires  specialised
           medical intervention of a type not yet available in  Kosovo  are
           vulnerable individuals.  I did not have the  benefit  of  having
           heard oral evidence from Dr Hicks. However, I have no reason to
           doubt his above conclusions. In the case of Galica, the Tribunal
           had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from Dr Hicks  and  his
           opinion and conclusions were accepted.


      17.   In the ICMPD - IOM report,  it is made clear that  Kosovo  still
           faces serious difficulties in respect  of  mental  health.   The
           said report at page 5 states as follows:


                 'In summary, currently the  repatriation  of  mentally  ill
                 persons, especially  those  with  chronic  mental  illness,
                 child or adolescent psychiatric  illness  (particularly  if
                 the patients are also drug addicts) and forensic psychiatry
                 pathology, needs to be assessed carefully case by case.  It
                 is likely that most of these patients cannot be treated  in
                 Kosovo.'


           The said report also  states  at  page  6  that  returnees  from
           western countries have grave difficulties in respect  of  mental
           health treatment."


      He then went on to say at paragraph 18:

           ".... In this case the Appellant's mental  health  problems  are
           serious, so much so, that it does lead Dr Hicks to conclude,  as
           stated above, that in his opinion the Appellant's mental  health
           would suffer even if he had  access  to  adequate  treatment  in
           Kosovo.  In such circumstances, it is not appropriate to  return
           the appellant to Kosovo."


  14. We must deal  first  with  the  sustainability  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings as at the date of the hearing before him.  It was Ms Maroof's
      general submission that his findings were sustainable and  should  not
      be interfered with by the Tribunal.  The powers  of  the  Tribunal  in
      this respect were reviewed by the Court of Appeal in Borissov -v- SSHD
      [1996] Imm AR 524, where previous decisions were also considered.   In
      the principal judgment, Hurst LJ said this at page 533:


           "Thus the jurisdiction of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal is not
           limited to questions of law and it is within the scope of  their
           jurisdiction for them to review, if they see fit to do  so,  the
           Special Adjudicator's conclusions of fact, though no doubt  this
           power  will  be  sparingly  exercised,  and  in  any  event,  in
           accordance  with  general  principles,  the  Immigration  Appeal
           Tribunal will naturally be most reluctant to interfere with  the
           finding of primary fact by  the  Special  Adjudicator  which  is
           dependent on his assessment of the reliability or credibility of
           a witness who has appeared before him."


      A little later in the judgment he referred to what Kennedy LJ had said
      in Assah v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1994] Imm AR 519, that:


           "... In the final analysis an Appellate  Tribunal  such  as  the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal not only can, but should, reverse  a
           finding of fact if it is unsustainable."

15.   We approach our views as to the sustainability  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings at the date  of  hearing  before  him  on  that  basis.   The
      reliance which he placed on the ICMP-IOM Report at paragraph 17 of his
      determination appears to us to be  highly  selective.   There  was  no
      suggestion in the  medical  report  before  him  that  the  respondent
      required in-patient treatment for his  diagnosed  condition.   Indeed,
      the expressed view was that the current GP-level counselling should be
      continued.  The quotation at paragraph  17  of  the  determination  is
      taken from the end summary of the information provided by  the  Kosovo
      Ministry of Health as at July 2002, and we accept that their  view  at
      that date  was  that  mental  health  care  in  Kosovo  faced  serious
      difficulties. Nevertheless we note in particular that  they  made  the
      following comments in the body of the statement:

           "Despite  the  serious  problems,  the   Ministry   of   Health,
           Environment and Spatial Panning with support of  WHO  and  other
           donor agencies, is making  efforts  to  improve  the  situation.
           According to Strategic Plan for Mental Health in Kosovo,  future
           mental health services  shall  be  community  based  and  family
           focused and closely  linked  with  family  medicine  and  social
           services.  The opening of  the  first  Community  Mental  Health
           Centres in Gjakove/Djakovica (March 2001)  and  Ferizaj/Urosevac
           (June  2001)  is  the  first  step.   Similar  centres  will  be
           established in the five other regional  centres  by  June  2002.
           These centres will  offer  community  based  out-patient  mental
           health services.  The situation with human resources will  start
           to improve when the twenty five current residents in psychiatry,
           and  the  first  generation  of  students  in  the  Faculty   of
           Psychology (opened in the University  of  Prishtina/Pristina  in
           September  2001)  will  graduate  and  the  projected  upgrading
           training courses for psychiatric nurses (planned for 2002) begin
           to materialise".


16.   The World Health Organisation provided the  following  information  as
      at July 2002 in relation to primary care, which is what the respondent
      would require:

           "There are very few and weak services at the primary health care
           level, seven neuro-psychiatric  services  in  Prishtine/Pristina
           Podujeve/Podujevo, Kline/Klina and Gjilan/Gnjilan.  They consist
           basically in one or two neuro-psychiatrists and few nurses,  and
           provide ambulatory care and, in some cases, a home care service.




           Mainly the GPs refer patients with psychiatric disorders to  the
           hospitals.  GPs do not manage any level of psychiatric pathology
           yet  although  the   first   generation   of   Family   Medicine
           practitioners was trained."


17.   The report then goes on to analyse the facilities which are  available
      municipality by municipality throughout Kosovo.  At  page  19  of  the
      document under paragraph 3.21 they  give  details  of  the  facilities
      available in the  municipality  of  Prizren,  the  home  area  of  the
      respondent, as follows;

           "The  staff  of  local   NGO   'Kendelija'   offer   psychiatric
           consultations to patients in two health centres in  Prizren,  in
           Centre for Social Work and one health centre in  Dragash/Dragas.
           Dutch International  NGO  "Healthnet"  that  deals  with  mental
           health, like training of doctors and nurses to  work  in  family
           health centres with the aim  of  integration  of  mental  health
           care."


      It is then apparent from the further detail  given  that  there  is  a
      psychiatric ward in Prizren General Hospital on an ongoing basis; that
      the training of doctors for mental health services  in  Healthnet  has
      been in place since November 2000 and is due to end in  October  2002;
      and that mental health consultations with Kendelija commenced in March
      2000 and remain ongoing.


18.   We note also from the July  2002  briefing  note  on  repatriation  of
      Kosovo Albanians that psychiatric services were very limited, with  an
      almost total lack of community services "other than  those  associated
      with conflict trauma".  The  respondent's  condition  is,  of  course,
      wholly concerned with the results of conflict trauma.

19.   For the above reasons, it does not seem to  us  that  the  Adjudicator
      had sought objectively to assess what was likely to  be  the  improved
      position in relation to the availability of basic medical services for
      someone in the appellant's condition in his own country,  noting  that
      the July 2002 reports on which he placed his views  all  predicated  a
      continuing improvement in the situation there because of the  measures
      which had been put in train.

20.   Secondly, there is nothing to show  that  the  Adjudicator  had  given
      proper consideration to  the  European  Court's  decision  in  Bensaid
      (referred to in Galica which he quotes) in relation to whether or  not
      the high threshold required to engage Article 3 would  be  reached  on
      the facts before him.

21.   Because Ms Maroof sought before  us  to  distinguish  Bensaid  on  the
      basis that it was considered there that  the  effect  of  removal  and
      return to his own country  was  to  a  large  degree  speculative,  we
      consider it appropriate in this determination to summarise the medical
      evidence on which Mr Bensaid sought to rely before the  Court  because
      it is only on this basis that the meaning of the speculative nature of
      any adverse affect following removal in  the  later  passages  in  the
      judgment can be properly understood.

22.   At paragraph 7 of that judgment the Court  records  the  circumstances
      as follows:

      "7.   The applicant is a  schizophrenic  suffering  from  a  psychotic
           illness.  He appears first to have experienced symptoms in 1994-
           1995.  When he first came to the attention of the mental  health
           services, his condition was so  severe  that  consideration  was
           given to detaining him compulsorily in a  psychiatric  hospital.
           However, this was not required since he  responded  sufficiently
           to treatment. His illness has been successfully managed.  At the
           end of 1997,  he  was  admitted  to  hospital  for  a  few  days
           following a minor relapse which his psychiatrist  attributed  in
           part to side effects from his previous  medication.   His  anti-
           psychotic medication was changed from Sulpirade to Olanzapine.


            Schizophrenia is an illness  or  group  of  illnesses  affecting
           language, planning, emotion, perception and movement.   Positive
           symptoms often accompany  acute  psychotic  episodes  (including
           delusions, hallucinations, disordered or fragmented thinking and
           catatonic movements).  Negative symptoms, associated  with  long
           term illness, include feelings of emotional numbness, difficulty
           in communicating with others, lack of motivation  and  inability
           to care about or cope with everyday tasks."


23.   At paragraph 15 of  the  judgment  it  is  recorded  that  the  United
      Kingdom indicated they did not wish to have  the  applicant  medically
      examined, submitting there was a hospital in  Algeria  which  provided
      treatment and which could  admit  the  applicant  and  administer  the
      medication  which  the  government  understood  the  applicant  to  be
      receiving.  The hospital was some seventy five  to  eighty  kilometres
      from the applicant's village and it was  the  government's  view  that
      there was at that time no particular danger in travelling between  the
      village and the  hospital.   As  medication  and  treatment  would  be
      available in Algeria it was concluded that his circumstances were  not
      so exceptional or compelling that he should be granted entry.

24.   The Court then dealt with the  medical  evidence  before  it  for  the
      appellant at paragraphs 16 and 21 of the judgment.  Paragraph 16 is as
      follows:

      "16.  The applicant obtained opinions from his psychiatrist as to  the
           likely effect of removal to Algeria.  In a letter dated 24 March
           1998, Dr Johnson stated that there was  a  high  risk  that  the
           applicant would  suffer  a  relapse  of  psychotic  symptoms  on
           returning.  The requirement regularly to  undertake  an  arduous
           journey through a troubled region would  make  the  risks  still
           higher.  She pointed out that when  individuals  with  psychotic
           illness relapse, they commonly have great  difficulty  in  being
           sufficiently organised to seek help for themselves or to travel.
            For this reason, it was necessary for the  management  of  such
           illnesses to be local and readily accessible.  It was  therefore
           very unlikely in these circumstances that  any  relapse  of  the
           applicant would be  effectively  treated.   In  a  supplementary
           report of 7 July 1998, Dr  Johnson  stated  that  any  suffering
           which  might  accompany  a  relapse  would  be  likely   to   be
           substantial.  When the applicant's illness had been  severe,  he
           had lost all insight into the fact that he was ill and  believed
           the  persecutory  delusions  and  abuse  which  he  experienced,
           including voices telling him  to  harm  other  people.   He  had
           previously felt sufficiently  depressed  and  helpless  that  he
           contemplated suicide."


25.   The Court continued at paragraph 21 as follows:

           "In  a  further  opinion  dated  20  May  1999  sought  by   the
           Immigration Service with the  applicant's  consent,  Dr Johnson
           reported that, when seen in February 1999, the applicant  showed
           some signs of deterioration, with  his  auditory  hallucinations
           having become more intrusive and  with  thoughts  about  harming
           himself and  voices  telling  him  to  harm  himself  ("positive
           symptoms").  He had been unable to sleep because of  this.   His
           Olanzapine had been increased and  he  had  responded  to  this.
           However, he continued to  have  considerable  difficulties  with
           motivation and social  withdrawal  ("negative  symptoms").   The
           applicant's mental illness was likely to be  a  long  term  one.
           She would  expect  that  he  would  continue  to  have  positive
           symptoms,  which  would  persist  and   could   worsen,   though
           controlled to a substantial degree by Olanzapine.  At  times  he
           might require urgent help for these symptoms.  There had been  a
           significant deterioration in his  level  of  social  functioning
           likely to be attributable to negative  symptoms  and  which  was
           likely to be significantly handicapping  in  the  coming  years.
           With continuing medication and support from  the  mental  health
           services, however, he would be likely  to  remain  at  the  same
           level and not require very long periods of institutionalisation.
            Nor was he at a very serious risk of suicide.  If, however, the
           applicant was returned to Algeria, she stated that she would  be
           more uncertain of the prognosis.  She thought it was:

                 'highly  likely  that  stressful  life   events   such   as
                 deportation together with the more stressful environment he
                 would be likely  to  encounter  in  Algeria  would  trigger
                 exacerbation of his systems as occurred on his  last  visit
                 to Algeria.....  His fearfulness when unwell and  also  the
                 motivational difficulties and flatness of affect  makes  it
                 very difficult for him to seek  appropriate  help  when  he
                 does  become  unwell...   If  he  were  unable  to   obtain
                 appropriate help, if he began to relapse I think that there
                 would be a great risk that his deterioration would be  very
                 great and he would be at risk of acting in obedience to the
                 hallucinations telling himself to harm himself or others...
                 Thus I do think that there is a substantial likelihood that
                 forcible  repatriation  would  result  in  significant  and
                 lasting adverse effect.'


           She  further  advised  that  any  change  of   medication   from
           Olanzapine to Sulpirade would risk deterioration in his negative
           symptoms and diminish the control of the positive symptoms."


26.   It will be seen from this that in the  case  of  Bensaid  the  medical
      evidence was that removal and repatriation would be reasonably  likely
      to exacerbate Mr Bensaid's  symptoms  and  to  lead  to  a  regressive
      situation in  which  self  harm  and  harm  to  others  could  not  be
      eliminated.  It is now appropriate to record how the Court dealt  with
      this factual situation at paragraphs 37 to 40 of the judgment:

      "37.  The  difficulties  in  obtaining  medication  and  the  stresses
           inherent in returning to this part of Algeria,  where  there  is
           violence and active terrorism, are alleged to endanger seriously
           his health.  Deterioration in the applicant's  already  existing
           mental illness could involve  relapse  into  hallucinations  and
           psychotic delusions involving self harm and harm to  others,  as
           well as restrictions in social functioning (e.g. withdrawal  and
           lack of motivation).  The Court  considers  that  the  suffering
           associated with such a relapse could, in principle, fall  within
           the scope of Article 3.


      38.   The Court observes, however, that the applicant faces  the  risk
           of relapse even if he stays in the United Kingdom as his illness
           is long term and requires  constant  management.   Removal  will
           arguably increase the risk, as will the differences in available
           personal support and accessibility of treatment.  The  applicant
           has argued, in particular, that other drugs are less  likely  to
           be of benefit to his condition, and  also  that  the  option  of
           becoming an in-patient should be  a  last  resort.   Nonetheless
           medical treatment is available to the applicant in Algeria.  The
           fact that the applicant's circumstances in Algeria would be less
           favourable than those enjoyed by him in the  United  Kingdom  is
           not decisive from  the  point  of  view  of  Article  3  of  the
           Convention.


      39.   The Court finds that the risk that the applicant will  suffer  a
           deterioration in his condition if he is returned to Algeria  and
           that, if he did, he would not receive adequate support  or  care
           is to a large extent speculative.  The arguments concerning  the
           attitude of his family as devout Muslims,  the  difficulties  of
           travel to Blida and the effects on his health of  these  factors
           are also speculative.  The information provided by  the  parties
           does not indicate that travel to  the  hospital  is  effectively
           prevented by the situation in the region.  The applicant is  not
           himself a likely target of  terrorist  activity.   Even  if  his
           family  does  not  have  a  car,  this  does  not  exclude   the
           possibility of other arrangements being made.


      40.   The Court accepts the seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
           condition.  Having regard, however, to the high threshold set by
           Article 3, particularly where the  case  does  not  concern  the
           direct  responsibility  of  the  Contracting  States   for   the
           infliction of harm, the Court does not  find  that  there  is  a
           sufficiently real risk that the  applicant's  removal  in  these
           circumstances would be contrary to the standards of  Article  3.
           It does not disclose the exceptional circumstances of the D case
           (cited above) where the applicant was in the final stages  of  a
           terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical  care  or
           family support on expulsion to St Kitts."


27.   In our view, a proper consideration of the evidence before him and  of
      the guidance in Bensaid v United Kingdom to which he should  have  had
      regard, render the Adjudicator's decision for  the  reasons  which  he
      gives  in  paragraph  18  of  his  determination  unsustainable.    It
      therefore follows that it is appropriate  for  us  to  reconsider  the
      Article 3 claim on the basis of the evidence  before  the  Adjudicator
      and of the additional evidence  now  before  us.   This  comprises  an
      addendum psychiatric report from Dr Hicks dated 27 June 2003  and  the
      Home Office CIPU Serbia and Montenegro  Country  Assessment  of  April
      2003.

28.   Dr  Hicks  records  at  paragraph  3  that  the  respondent  has  been
      prescribed Paroxetine (an anti-depressant) at a dose of 20mg  per  day
      by his GP since November 2002 which he still takes and is on no  other
      medication.   We  note  from  the  respondent's  bundle   before   the
      Adjudicator that it contains a letter of  24 October  2002  from  his
      General Practitioner confirming that he first registered as a  patient
      on 29 October 1999, which was shortly after his arrival in the  United
      Kingdom, but that it was not until 20 August 2001 that he sought  any
      treatment when he was put on anti-depressants and  tranquilisers  with
      arrangements for him to see the practice counsellor.  Dr Hicks records
      that the respondent has continued to see  his  counsellor  at  his  GP
      practice once or twice a month and found the sessions  of  some  help.
      Further, that he continues occasionally to see his social  worker  who
      continues to help him claim his benefits.  His mood remained  variable
      and his anxiety has been perpetuated  by  continuing  worry  over  his
      asylum  claim  and  his  current  Court  appearance.   He  records  at
      paragraph 3.1.16:

            "Mr Olluri told me that he is  still  fearful  of  returning  to
           Kosovo, as he believes that his life would be in danger from the
           Serb Army and police because of the events  documented  [in  the
           doctor's earlier  psychiatric  report].   He  told  me  that  he
           believed that  he  would  suffer  from  further  persecution  if
           forcibly returned  to  Kosovo  and  would  consider  suicide  if
           returned to that country."

29.   At 3.2.1 it is recorded that the respondent is still suffering in  the
      way which he had previously set out and said that he recently woke  at
      night in a panic and punched the wall causing a fracture in his  right
      hand.  He remained worried about the outcome of his asylum  claim  and
      found it difficult to imagine a future for himself, preferring his own
      company and generally feeling detached and estranged from others.   He
      had developed occasional thoughts of deliberate self harm when he felt
      particularly low in mood.  He remained in  rented  accommodation  with
      his cousin in Swindon and still has had no  contact  with  his  family
      whom he said he feared  might  have  been  killed.  He  had  not  been
      referred to his local (secondary care) psychiatric services in Swindon
      and was otherwise medically fit and well.  Dr Hicks again observed (at
      paragraph 3.6.2) that the respondent did not describe any symptoms  or
      show any  signs  suggestive  of  a  psychotic  illness;  that  he  was
      orientated in time, place and person and thought his current  problems
      were psychological in nature and caused by his experiences in  Kosovo.
      He added that he expressed thoughts of self harm and suicide  although
      he had made no plans at the time of interview.

30.   At paragraph 4 he gave as  his  opinion  that  the  symptoms  remained
      consistent with the diagnosis of PTSD and  that  in  his  opinion  the
      respondent would benefit from continuing to take  his  anti-depressant
      medication to treat his PTSD.  He anticipated that he  would  need  to
      remain on that for at least another six to twelve  months  effectively
      to treat his symptoms.  He was of the view that the  respondent  would
      continue to benefit from contact with his social workers in  order  to
      continue to access benefits, housing and help in gaining employment in
      the future.  He would also benefit from psychological  treatment  such
      as cognitive behaviour therapy  involving  imagined  exposure,  graded
      self exposure and/or cognitive therapy for beliefs about the  symptoms
      or  the  trauma  and  the  subsequent  dropping  of  excessive  safety
      behaviours.  He was of the view that it was likely that the respondent
      would need the services of a psychologist in secondary care  (hospital
      based) in order to effectively treat his symptoms, which would require
      twelve to sixteen sessions of treatment.  What is considered there  is
      clearly out-patient treatment.

31.   It is appropriate to set out the whole of  paragraph  5  dealing  with
      the prognosis:

      "5.1  In my opinion Mr Olluri continues to suffer from the  effect  of
           PTSD which has only been partially treated  so  far  with  anti-
           depressant medication, counselling  and  primary  care.   In  my
           opinion his current symptoms of PTSD  are  unlikely  to  improve
           whilst he experiences further worry  over  the  outcome  of  his
           asylum claim.  In my opinion he needs to continue with his anti-
           depressant  medication  but  would  also  benefit  from  further
           psychological therapy as recommended above in order  to  benefit
           from an improvement in his symptoms.


      5.2   In my opinion Mr Olluri is likely to suffer chronic  (long-term)
           symptoms if he does  not  receive  psychological  treatment  and
           medication as detailed above.  In my opinion if  such  treatment
           is not provided he will suffer from worsening symptoms  of  PTSD
           and require treatment provided  by  secondary  (hospital  based)
           services rather than primary (GP based) services alone.


      5.3   In my opinion Mr Olluri will be at increased risk of  self  harm
           and suicide in the future if he is returned to Kosovo.   He  has
           documented thoughts of self harm at 3.1.6, 3.2.1 and  3.6.2  due
           to his continuing mental illness and in my opinion he is  likely
           to harm himself with the associated risk of suicide if  he  were
           forcibly returned to Kosovo.


      5.4   In my opinion it  is  unlikely  that  Mr  Olluri  would  receive
           adequate treatment if he returned to Kosovo based on information
           regarding medical resources available in Kosovo (appendices 4  &
           5).


      5.5   In my opinion Mr Olluri's recovery from  his  symptoms  will  be
           helped by his perception of physical safety and social  support.
           The importance of social support in  improving  mood  in  asylum
           seekers has been confirmed by research findings.  In my  opinion
           his current perception of physical safety has helped him lead  a
           relatively normal life since his  arrival  in  the  UK.   In  my
           opinion Mr Olluri has little social support in Kosovo as he  has
           had no contact with his family and fears that they are dead."

32.   It will be immediately apparent from that prognosis that once more  Dr
      Hicks strays outside the proper areas of his competence in  paragraphs
      5.4 and 5.5.  The appendices to which he refers have not been produced
      before us in any event  but  the  question  of  whether  there  exists
      medical care facilities in Kosovo is a matter for us to judge  on  the
      basis of the objective evidence produced before us.

33.   So far as paragraph 5.5 is concerned, the  only  evidential  basis  on
      which Dr Hicks bases his non-medical opinion that the  respondent  has
      little social support in Kosovo is that he says he has had no  contact
      with his family and fears that they are  dead.   As  we  have  already
      observed, the evidence before us is that at the date of his  departure
      from Kosovo, which was after the arrival of the UNMIK and KFOR forces,
      the arrangements for his departure were  made  by  his  immediate  and
      extended family in the persons of his father and uncle who  were  then
      living with relatives in Kosovo.   The  respondent's  claims  in  this
      respect amount to no more than  an  assertion  that  he  has  not  had
      contact with his immediate or extended  family  in  Kosovo  since  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom.  Given that the only  fear  claimed  on
      the part of himself and his family was of the Serbs,  and  given  that
      there can now be no rational basis for such a fear either  in  respect
      of himself or his family,  the  position  remains  that  there  is  no
      credible evidence before us that there does not continue to  exist  in
      Kosovo immediate and extended family support should he now be returned
      there.  That is a matter in respect of which the burden of proof is on
      the respondent and he has failed to discharge it  even  to  the  lower
      standard of a reasonable likelihood relevant to an Article 3 claim.

34.   That is not, however, to discount the relevance  of  the  first  three
      paragraphs in the prognosis and we accept that  these  show  that  the
      situation of the respondent has, if anything, deteriorated between the
      first and second psychiatric reports, and that the respondent has  now
      for the first time expressed views as to self harm which have arguably
      been partially exemplified  in  the  recorded  injury  which  he  said
      resulted from his having punched a wall.  There is also, as Ms  Maroof
      emphasised before  us,  the  fact  that  he  is  currently  undergoing
      treatment for his condition in the United Kingdom.  In none  of  these
      respects, however, is  his  situation  markedly  different  from  that
      revealed by the medical evidence in the case of Mr Bensaid with  which
      we have already extensively dealt.

35.   Ms Maroof placed her submissions to us essentially  on  three  further
      matters:  firstly, the views of Dr  Hicks  as  to  potential  suicidal
      ideation;  secondly,  that  the  respondent  was  currently  receiving
      treatment for his condition in the United Kingdom and that removal was
      considered as likely to lead to a deterioration even if his  treatment
      could be continued in Kosovo; and  thirdly,  that  the  facilities  in
      Kosovo were in any event arguably inadequate.

36.   The position of somebody said to be likely to  commit  acts  of  self-
      harm was recently fully considered by the  tribunal  in  the  reported
      decision of [2003] UKIAT 00017 P (Yugoslavia) promulgated  on  1 July
      2003 and on which Ms Giltrow has relied on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State.  In that case the Tribunal summarised his claim at paragraph  4
      in the following terms:

           "The appellant based his claim on submissions that  if  he  were
           now to return to Kosovo, he would be at high risk of taking  his
           own life in order to avoid reliving traumatic  experiences.   At
           fourteen years old he had escaped from his family home when Serb
           militia men had set it on fire.  He has subsequently learnt that
           his parents had been killed then or later.   He  had  been  told
           they were buried in a mass grave.  Before he left Kosovo he  had
           survived begging on the streets doing his best  to  avoid  being
           harmed or used by criminal gangs."


      It will be seen that his position was arguably worse than that of  the
      respondent  in  the  present  appeal.   After  briefly  reviewing  the
      treatment of self harm by Strasbourg jurisprudence  at  paragraphs  17
      and 18 of the determination, the Tribunal turned to  consideration  of
      the current medical approach to suicide cases, noting by reference  to
      the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of  Mental  Disorders  (American
      Psychiatric  Association,  fourth  edition  (DSM-IV),  Text  Revision,
      Washington DC, American Psychiatric Association 2000, that there is  a
      clinical basis for diagnostic criteria of the likelihood  of  suicidal
      tendencies.  This depends on diagnosis of a major  depressive  episode
      and can be clinically evaluated.   We  note  that  there  is  no  such
      evaluation made by Dr Hicks in either of his reports.


37.   The  Tribunal  then  considered  whether  there  existed  satisfactory
      relevant medical facilities in Kosovo.  The Adjudicator in P had found
      that such facilities did exist.  It had been noted that in the October
      2000 CIPU Assessment at paragraph 5.39 it was said that:

           "Although  mental  health  provision  in  Kosovo  is  relatively
           undeveloped, treatment for  psychological  conditions  including
           post traumatic stress disorder is available in Kosovo.   Details
           of the 'Kosovo Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims (KRCT)'
           which provides treatment for PTSD are  included  in  the  source
           materials."


      It was further noted that paragraph 5.38 in that assessment  mentioned
      a review of the EDWHO mental  health  project  in  July  2002  made  a
      positive evaluation of the progress in mental health sector in Kosovo,
      stating that "The WHO mental health  programme  has  impacted  on  the
      development of a comprehensive mental  health  strategy  developed  in
      collaboration with local mental health professionals..."  We  note  at
      this point that, although apparently not produced to the  Adjudicator,
      this was current evidence at the date of the hearing before him.   The
      Tribunal in P continued at paragraph 34:


           "Certainly there is no current evidence we have been made  aware
           of that mental health facilities have been  considered  of  poor
           quality or as seriously  deficient  or  as  unlikely  to  ensure
           intensive treatment of a mental health condition when  that  was
           required.  Furthermore, it appears that  particular  steps  have
           been taken to cater for the  needs  of  persons  who  have  been
           victims of trauma."


      We interpolate here that the April 2003 CIPU  Assessment  produced  to
      us, giving the most  up  to  date  sourced  information,  maintains  a
      similar position.  What was quoted from paragraph 5.39 of the  October
      2002 assessment in P is repeated  at  paragraph  5.48  in  the  latest
      assessment.   The  passage  formerly  at  paragraph  5.38  is  now  at
      paragraph 5.47 and adds that, "also a  Mental  Disability  and  Mental
      Health  Policy  Implementation  Task  Force  has  been   established",
      sourcing this statement from a UN Report of October  2002.   It  notes
      also  at  paragraph  5.49,  based  on  a  Kosovo  Information  Project
      information request answer of October  2002  that,  "As  with  medical
      treatment,  the  range  of  medical  drugs  available  in  Kosovo   is
      constantly  developing.   Many  standard  drugs  are  now   available,
      including Fluoxetin and Sertralin from the selective  Sertonin  Uptake
      Inhibitors group (SSIs) often used for the treatment of PTSD."


38.   The evidence as to medical treatment available in Kosovo on  which  Ms
      Maroof based her submissions was that which was before the Adjudicator
      and did not take into account what is said in the current CIPU Report.
       On the basis of  the  evidence  before  us  we  are  satisfied  that,
      although it may not duplicate the medical treatment available  in  the
      United Kingdom, there  does  exist  in  Kosovo  at  the  present  time
      adequate medical treatment for people suffering from the condition for
      which the respondent has been diagnosed.

39.   Turning to the Tribunal decision in P, the  Tribunal  then  considered
      the issue of the risk of suicide, which is at least  partially  relied
      upon by Ms Maroof in the instant appeal.  The Tribunal noted that  the
      medical evidence fell  short  of  stating  that  the  appellant  in  P
      represented a real suicide risk regardless  of  his  location,  noting
      that it maintained that his current environment in the United  Kingdom
      assisted him in maintaining the level of psychological equilibrium  he
      had.  It noted also that in alluding to problems P would  face,  there
      were suggestions that the mere fact of return  to  his  country  would
      psychologically destabilise him.  But the Tribunal  pointed  out  that
      the underlying logic that return to his own country was seen  to  give
      rise to a real risk of suicide was for the following  reasons:  first,
      that within that country he had suffered events which  caused  him  to
      become traumatised; secondly, that having to return to  such  a  place
      would compel him to re-experience that trauma in a way  he  could  not
      cope with; and, thirdly, that he would not have the necessary  medical
      and social support in  order  to  ensure  that  he  could  cope.   The
      Tribunal then dealt with the first two issues at paragraphs 43 and  44
      of its determination as follows:

      "43.  As regards (i) and (ii), we would not question  that  return  to
           Kosovo would cause the appellant to record dramatic events in  a
           different way than he does at present: he will be  back  in  the
           country where his traumatic experiences occurred.  But we do not
           see that the mere fact of  return  to  the  country  of  Federal
           Republic of Yugoslavia or to the region of Kosovo  entails  that
           the appellant will be compelled to  revisit  the  scene  of  his
           trauma in the village of Matcan, north east  of  Pristina.   For
           one thing the appellant, whatever he subjectively believes  now,
           will see for himself upon arrival in Kosovo that  the  Serbs  no
           longer pose a threat to ethnic  Albanians  in  Kosovo  and  that
           there had been a considerable improvement in the  political  and
           security situation in Kosovo.   None  of  the  medical  evidence
           suggests  that  he  would  be  incapable  of   perceiving   such
           realities.  For another it will be entirely  a  matter  for  him
           whether he chooses to visit his old  house  or  the  village  of
           Matcan: indeed, it is implicit in what is said  in  the  medical
           reports that he will not want to revisit the scene of his trauma
           for some considerable time, if ever.


      44.   Viewed in this light it is  clear  that  the  principal  medical
           reports wrongly equated return to a country  with  return  to  a
           scene of trauma.  Thus, to the extent that the  medical  reports
           postulated a re-exposure to the scene of  the  trauma,  they  go
           well beyond the limits of a realistic appraisal.  So long as the
           appellant seeks medical help when  he  returns,  and  again  the
           medical evidence does not suggest  he  would  not  seek  medical
           help, his return will not be to the scene of his trauma but into
           the hands of medical and related services whose focus  would  be
           on  treating   his   trauma,   not   reactivating   it.    Those
           administering the medical help will  be  persons  very  familiar
           with victims of trauma arising out of the Kosovo conflict."


40.   Dealing with the third issue, the Tribunal said this at  paragraph  45
      of its determination:

           "As regards (iii),  we  would  accept  the  appellant  currently
           enjoys medical and social support to a good standard.  But it is
           sufficiently clear that he has managed to cope well enough  with
           his trauma to attend college, train as a chef and conduct social
           relationships.  When he returns to Kosovo he will not  have  (so
           far as we are aware) any family support network.   But  when  he
           returns, no longer as a minor, we consider that his demonstrated
           ability to engage with the external world will stand him in good
           stead there.  Indeed, since he will  be  returning  to  his  own
           culture to live among people of the same ethnic background, and,
           in addition, will be able to access adequate medical  facilities
           and receive assistance with finding housing and  employment,  we
           do not consider that he will in fact  have  to  face  conditions
           anywhere near as adverse as  those  which  the  medical  reports
           appear to presuppose."


41.   Ms Maroof  sought  valiantly  to  distinguish  the  situation  of  the
      respondent from that of P.  She submitted that he would no longer have
      the support of his cousin which he has enjoyed here, or of the  social
      services, and said that he was  a  vulnerable  persons  who  would  be
      displaced.  In P, the claimant had been  coping  well  in  the  United
      Kingdom but she said that the  respondent  was  in  a  very  different
      category since whilst he had previously had a job and  had  undertaken
      educational courses, it appeared from Dr Hicks report that he  was  no
      longer working and had become withdrawn and  that  his  condition  had
      worsened since the first psychiatric report.

42.   We accept that there does appear to have been some  worsening  of  his
      situation looking at the latest medical report.  Dr Hicks  takes  the
      view that he has long term problems of post traumatic stress  disorder
      which are capable of being treated. As we have seen,  in  Bensaid  the
      medical opinion, couched in very similar  if  not  stronger  terms  of
      deterioration in Mr Bensaid's condition were he returned,  and  in  P
      that the risk of suicide might be  increased,  were  nevertheless  not
      considered to  reach  the  high  threshold  set  in  Bensaid  for  the
      engagement of Article 3 harm.

43.   We are satisfied on the objective evidence not only that there  is  no
      risk of harm to the appellant for the reasons which he fears - and  it
      seems to us that the point taken in P that this will  become  apparent
      on return is a valid point - but that there will be  adequate  medical
      treatment available to him in his own country, albeit perhaps  not  to
      the same standard as would apply in  the  United  Kingdom.   Moreover,
      there is no evidence, as existed in P, that this respondent  would  be
      returning to a situation where there was no family  support  available
      to him.  The evidence is that  his  family  were  alive  and  well  in
      September 1999 when arrangements were  made  for  his  departure  from
      Kosovo.  His immediate family had been displaced from their  own  home
      by the actions of the Serbs who had ultimately burned  it  down.   His
      brother was at that  time  a  member  of  the  KLA  according  to  his
      evidence.  Given that KFOR and UNMIK had then arrived  in  Kosovo  and
      that any fear of the Serbs had  thereby  been  removed,  there  is  no
      reasonable likelihood on the evidence  that  his  immediate  or  wider
      family do not remain in Kosovo albeit that  he  says  he  has  had  no
      contact with them since his arrival here.   There  is,  therefore,  no
      reason to believe that a family support network does not exist for him
      there. For those reasons we are satisfied that there is no  reasonable
      likelihood that the respondent will suffer treatment in breach of  his
      protected human rights under Article  3  if  he  is  now  returned  to
      Kosovo.

44.   It has never been his case that return would infringe  his  rights  to
      private life in the sense of  his  moral  and  physical  integrity  by
      reason of the conditions which  exist  there  but,  for  the  sake  of
      completeness, we note that such a claim by  Mr  Bensaid  was  rejected
      also and the Court dealt with  that  issue  at  paragraph  48  in  the
      following terms:


           "Turning to the present case, the  Court  records  that  it  has
           found above that the risk of damage to  the  applicant's  health
           from return to his  country  of  origin  was  based  on  largely
           hypothetical factors and that it was not substantiated  that  he
           would suffer  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.   Nor  in  the
           circumstances has it been established that his  moral  integrity
           will be substantially affected to a degree  falling  within  the
           scope of Article 8 of the Convention.  Even  assuming  that  the
           dislocation caused to the applicant by removal from  the  United
           Kingdom where he has lived for the last eleven years was  to  be
           considered by itself as  affecting  his  private  life,  in  the
           context of the relationships  and  support  framework  which  he
           enjoyed there, the Court considers that such interference may be
           regarded as  complying  with  the  requirements  of  the  second
           paragraph of Article 8, namely as a measure 'in accordance  with
           the law' pursuing the aims of the  protection  of  the  economic
           well-being of the country and the  prevention  of  disorder  and
           crime, as well as being 'necessary in a democratic society'  for
           those aims."


45.   Bensaid is, accordingly, also authority for the fact that there  is  a
      high threshold to be reached before Article 8 can be engaged and  that
      even if that high threshold is reached it  will  be  unlikely  that  a
      claimant can show that removal  would  not  be  proportionate  in  the
      public interest, given the wide margin of appreciation allowed to  the
      state in its consideration of proportionality of  removal.   Had  this
      been an issue raised before us, we would have been in  no  doubt  that
      removal of the respondent would not have led to a breach of his  right
      to private life under Article 8 either.

46.   The question of whether removal would breach any right to family  life
      under Article 8 was  not  before  us.   We  agree  with  Ms Giltrow's
      submission that it was open to the respondent to have sought leave  to
      appeal to the Tribunal on the basis that the Adjudicator had erred  in
      law by failing to deal with the Article 8 limb  of  the  claim  before
      him.  The respondent did not seek to do  so  either  within  the  time
      limits applicable under the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)
      Rules 2000, which then applied, or to raise  the  matter  subsequently
      after leave to appeal had been granted to the Secretary  of  State  on
      17 February 2003.  For that reason  we  were  not  prepared  to  hear
      argument in relation to the Article 8 issue as  to  interference  with
      family life which had been canvassed before the Adjudicator,  although
      we are bound to say that since it rested on the  respondent's  claimed
      right to exercise family life with his cousin here, we do not see that
      there was any arguable basis having a real prospect  of  success  that
      the unexplained treatment of his cousin by the Secretary of  State  in
      granting four years exceptional leave to remain would, on  the  facts,
      render it disproportionate to remove the respondent on the basis  that
      his rights to family life here would thereby be breached when there is
      no evidence that he would be unable to resume  a  family  life  of  at
      least equal standing in his own country.

47.   For the reasons which we have thought it proper to  set  out  at  some
      length, so that Adjudicators  may  realise  the  full  effect  of  the
      European decision in Bensaid, the Secretary of State  is  entitled  to
      succeed in his appeal.

48.   This appeal is accordingly allowed.







                                                                    J Barnes
                                                              Vice President
