
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |AK (Risk - UDPS) DR Congo CG|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00136          |
|On 12 September 2003       |        |                            |
|Prepared: 12 September 2003|        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|...11th November 2003.                                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Rachel Dunbavin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr T Khan,Counsel, instructed by,
                 Charles Napp, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator, Miss L Astle, in which she allowed the respondent's
      appeal against the decision made on 27 February 2001 giving directions
      for the respondent's removal, following the refusal of his  claim  for
      asylum.

   2. In this determination the Tribunal will refer  to  the  respondent  to
      this appeal as the applicant.

   3.  The applicant's claim can briefly  be  described  as  follows.    His
      family is from the Luba tribe, a tribe traditionally coming  from  the
      Kasai region in the DRC.   His uncle is Maitre Mukendi, an advisor  to
      the leaders of the UDPS.  The applicant  was  a  member  of  the  UDPS
      University branch and was in charge of public relations, having joined
      the University in 2000.

   4.  On  17  May  2000,  the  anniversary  of  President  Kabila  becoming
      President, the conditions in the University  were  not  good  and  the
      students saw the anniversary as a good opportunity to demonstrate.   A
      group of them organised by the appellant stopped a bus and took it  to
      the city centre to disrupt  celebrations.    After  the  demonstration
      they drove it back to the campus and left the bus so  that  the  owner
      could claim it.

   5. Four days later the  police  came  to  the  campus  and  arrested  the
      applicant. He was told that he was organising a rebellion and  was  at
      the centre of it.  The police took him to a place which the  applicant
      was not able to identify for about 3 weeks.    He was then transferred
      to the Kin-Maziere Police Station in Kinshasa.  He was held in a  cell
      on his own for one week and  was  beaten  with  cord  and  truncheons.
      The police wanted him to confess that he was organising a coup d'etat.
       The Chief of the Armed Forces was directing the  investigation.   One
      of the results of the beating was that he now has a problem  with  his
      nose.  In warm weather he suffers from nose bleeds.   He also has  two
      scars on his leg.

   6. However, a commander took pity on the applicant who  appealed  to  his
      better nature.   He spoke  to  the  commander  in  his  own  language,
      Swahili, saying that the hopes of his family rested on him.   This man
      went away for 2 or 3 hours and then returned.  It was  early  evening.
      He opened the cell door and gave the applicant directions. He went  to
      the outside wall, climbed it and ran away.  As he did so he heard  the
      commander cry out that he had escaped.  A shot was fired in  the  air.
      The applicant hid in the bush.   He heard people  searching  for  him,
      but they did not find him.   In the morning he found a  fisherman  who
      helped him to cross to Brazzaville.  He thinks now that  the  man  who
      helped may  be  dead.    The  applicant  then  lived  rough  in  Congo
      Brazzaville from June until December 2000.   He  told  a  man  of  his
      plight and was allowed to use his phone  card  to  call  his  friends.
      His brother sent him money.  He contacted an agent and a passport  was
      arranged.  The applicant travelled back to  Kinshasa  on  22  December
      2000, and from there to  Lubumbashi  and  on  to  Johannesburg  before
      travelling to the United Kingdom arriving on 23 December 2000.

   7. His claim for asylum was based on  a  fear  of  persecution  from  the
      authorities and security forces in the DRC, because of  his  political
      opinions.  The Secretary of State did  not  find  the  account  to  be
      credible for the reasons which he has set out in his  decision  letter
      dated 24 February 2001.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal against this
      decision on 17 March 2003.  She has set out her findings in paragraphs
      29 to 34 of her determination.  The applicant had produced a newspaper
      article in evidence  containing  an  article  about  the  protest  and
      referring to him.   The Adjudicator  did  not  attach  any  particular
      importance to it saying the article may or may not be  genuine.    She
      commented that it gave  different  dates  to  those  supplied  by  the
      applicant and was published some 9 months after the event.   The  only
      person it named was the applicant, although others  were  arrested  at
      the time and the applicant on his own  account  had  escaped  by  that
      stage.   She was sceptical about the paper but took it into account as
      part of the evidence in the round.

   8. She went on to comment that the applicant's account of his part in the
      protest and his arrest had been consistent.   It was perhaps a  little
      jumbled at interview, but she felt that some allowance  must  be  made
      for the fact that  the  applicant  was  interviewed  immediately  upon
      arrival.  This might also account for the discrepancy over his  travel
      details.   He had demonstrated some knowledge about the UDPS and  that
      he had become a student at  the  University  in  2000.   Overall,  the
      Adjudicator found that he was a student and a member of the  UDPS  and
      that there was a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he  had  been
      involved in a protest about conditions at the University.

   9. As such, the Adjudicator  considered  that  it  was  likely  that  the
      applicant had been detained and the background  information  indicated
      that anyone who was detained was likely to be  ill-treated.   However,
      she did not find it credible that the chief of the armed forces  would
      be involved in investigating a student protest, nor did she  find  his
      account of escaping from detention to be credible.  She did  not  find
      it at all believable even to the  lower  standard  of  proof,  that  a
      commander of police would risk his  life  and  his  job  as  a  simple
      humanitarian gesture to a stranger who spoke Swahili to him.  She  did
      not believe that the applicant was at large on account of his escape.

  10. The Adjudicator went on to consider whether the applicant would be  at
      risk upon return as a failed asylum seeker.  She had  before  her  the
      Tribunal determination in Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05308.  She commented that
      she did not have the benefit of reading Dr Kennes' report herself  and
      must therefore rely on the Tribunal's analysis of it.   She noted  the
      reference to two government officials saying that  there  was  a  real
      risk to returnees on political grounds.  On this  basis,  she  allowed
      the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

  11. In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Adjudicator's  findings
      are speculative and that she has not applied  the  correct  test  when
      dealing with the risk on return for  a  failed  asylum  seeker.    She
      relied on the Tribunal's analysis of Dr Kennes' report referred to  in
      the case of Mozu.   This was not a  starred  decision  and  each  case
      turned on its own  merits.   The  grounds  annex  a  letter  dated  22
      November 2002 from the British Ambassador in Kinshasa indicating  that
      since his appointment in May 2000 he has not come across any  evidence
      of failed asylum seekers facing persecution from the  DRC  authorities
      on return.   The Adjudicator had not explained why she considered  the
      applicant would face a reasonable  likelihood  of  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason on return.

  12. Ms Dunbavin adopted these grounds in  her  submissions.    She  argued
      that the Adjudicator's findings were insufficiently explained.  It was
      clear  that  she  had  not  believed  the  account  of  escaping  from
      detention.   Given her findings she failed to explain how or  why  the
      applicant would be at risk on return.   She placed too much weight  on
      Mozu which turned on its own facts at the date  of  decision.    There
      was no proper analysis of the evidence.   She referred the Tribunal to
      the decisions in L DRC [2003] UKIAT 0046 and K [2003] UKIAT 0032.   In
      paragraph 8 of L there was a reference to the UNHCR position that only
      those who had a military or political profile or sought asylum  abroad
      owing to a political or military  background,  would  be  at  risk  on
      return.

  13. Mr Khan submitted that the Adjudicator's  findings  on  the  issue  of
      credibility were  properly  open  to  her.   The  applicant  had  been
      arrested because of his political opinion.  He had been  detained  and
      the Adjudicator found there was a likelihood  of  ill-treatment.    In
      these circumstances, her assessment of the risk on return was properly
      open to  her.   The  background  evidence  showed  that  there  was  a
      continued risk of ill-treatment by those who were detained.  There was
      a risk that the authorities would discover that the applicant had been
      detained in the past.  There would be a real risk of ill-treatment  in
      any future detention.

  14. The Tribunal will deal firstly with the  issue  of  the  Adjudicator's
      findings of facts and the circumstance in which the applicant left the
      DRC.   Applying the lower  standard  of  proof,  the  Adjudicator  did
      accept  that  he  had  been  arrested  following  the  protest   about
      conditions at the University.  He was detained and the likelihood  was
      that he had been ill-treated.   The Adjudicator went  on  to  consider
      whether there would be a  real  risk  on  return.  It  is  clear  from
      paragraph 33 that she took the view that the risk would arise from the
      applicant being returned as a failed asylum  seeker.   She  based  her
      decision on the Tribunal determination in Mozu.

  15. That case was determined in  October  2002.    It  concerned  a  woman
      asylum seeker with two young children.  On the basis of  the  evidence
      before the Tribunal, it found that the DRC was  in  a  very  unsettled
      condition and the evidence of the reception of return  asylum  seekers
      particularly from the UK, was such that her return did indeed,  expose
      her to a  serious  risk  of  imprisonment  and  with  it  rape.   This
      determination was considered in K where in paragraph 17  the  Tribunal
      held that Mozu was clearly confined to the specific situation  of  the
      appellant in that case as someone in poor mental  health  at  risk  on
      imprisonment and rape and returning  with  small  children.    In  our
      judgment, the Adjudicator placed undue weight on this  one  authority,
      which  in  any  event  is  by  no  means  representative  of  Tribunal
      jurisprudence on the issue of returns to the DRC.

  16. In both L and K, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that there was no
      real risk of serious harm for failed  asylum  seekers  per  se.    The
      Tribunal agrees with these views for the  reasons  set  out  in  those
      determinations.   We take into account the letter  dated  22  November
      2002 from the British Ambassador who says that he has not come  across
      any evidence that DRC nationals forcibly  returned  to  Kinshasa  have
      faced persecution from the authorities.   Neither  have  the  Belgian,
      French or Dutch governments.  In our judgment  there  is  no  adequate
      evidential basis for a finding that this appellant would be at risk on
      the sole grounds that he would be returned as a failed asylum seeker.

  17. Mr Khan argued that there was a risk to the appellant arising from his
      individual circumstances.   The Adjudicator had found that he had been
      a student and a member  of  the  UDPS  who  had  been  involved  in  a
      demonstration, detained and ill-treated.   It is the applicant's claim
      that he was involved in the December 2001  demonstrations  Lubumbashi.
      The CIPU Report at paragraphs  5.74-5  confirms  that  more  than  400
      students were  arrested and detained at the police headquarters.  Many
      were subjected to beatings and whippings with military belts.   Almost
      all of the students were released the  following  day.   The  Tribunal
      certainly does not condone any such behaviour.   However, the issue is
      whether this applicant would now be at a real risk of  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to Article 3 on return.   Even if he  was  detained
      and ill-treated as he describes, this was because he had been involved
      in a student demonstration.   The Tribunal are not satisfied  that  he
      would be regarded by the  DRC  authorities  as  having  any  political
      profile, nor that he would be of any adverse interest  to  them.    He
      would be of no more interest to them than any of  the  other  students
      who had taken part in that demonstration.

  18. For these reasons, the Tribunal are satisfied that  the  Adjudicator's
      assessment of the risk on return  was  wrong  and  that  there  is  no
      reasonable degree of likelihood that the applicant would  be  at  risk
      either of persecution or of treatment contrary to Article 3.

  19. In these circumstances, the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
      allowed.




                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President
