
H-MGM-V3

|Heard at Field House       |        |MB (Homosexual - Military   |
|                           |        |Service) Latvia CG [2003]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00209                 |
|On 3 June 2003             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.4TH August 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr C P Mather - Chairman                                          |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Mr Martins BUVMANIS                                               |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Storey of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, Martins Buvmanis is a citizen of Latvia.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 7 July 1998.

2.    The Appellant appeals,  with  permission,  the  determination  of  an
    Adjudicator (Mrs S M Charlton Brown) in which she dismissed his  appeal
    on both asylum and human rights grounds.  That appeal was  against  the
    decision, made on 16 February 2001 by the Respondent, to refuse to vary
    his leave to remain in the United Kingdom following the refusal of  his
    asylum claim.

3.    The Appellant is gay.  He came  to  the  United  Kingdom  because  he
    feared what might happen to him, as a gay, when he was conscripted into
    the Latvian army for his military service.  He made  it  clear  in  his
    application and in the subsequent witness statement  that  although  he
    had been subject to discrimination as a gay, it was not simply for that
    reason that he claimed asylum.  He gives a history  of  being  verbally
    abused and tells how he was forced to leave a job as a  shop  assistant
    because of abuse from customers.  He said that he was beaten by  police
    on one occasion.

4.    The Appellant said that he received call-up papers and went  for  one
    interview as part of the process of conscription.  He did not  turn  up
    for the second interview and left the country.  Further call-up  papers
    had been received since and he had one visit from the police asking why
    he had not done his military service.

5.    The Adjudicator did not find the  Appellant  to  be  credible  for  a
    number  of  reasons  which  she  set  out  in  some   detail   in   her
    determination.  She was dismissive of evidence provided by the "Lesbian
    and Gay Association in Latvia" which she said  did  not  appear  to  be
    objective.  She dismissed the appeal because, finding  the  Appellant's
    account lacked credibility, and  that  it  was  not  supported  by  the
    objective evidence, there was no basis for a claim  that  he  would  be
    persecuted, or subjected to mistreatment amounting to a breach  of  his
    Article 3 (ECHR) rights, either on the grounds that he feared  military
    service or due to his homosexuality.

6.    Before us, Ms Storey emphasised that the appellant was  not  claiming
    that he would be persecuted, or put at the risk of treatment subject to
    Article 3 because of his homosexuality and the  general  discrimination
    and abuse that he had  experienced  in  Latvia.   His  claim  is  that,
    because he is a homosexual,  he  will  be  subjected  to  violence  and
    mistreatment by fellow conscripts during his military service or, if he
    refuses to do his military service he will experience similar  problems
    when serving a sentence of imprisonment.  She said,  although  we  have
    not seen any evidence, that  the  penalty  for  refusing  to  undertake
    military service is twelve months imprisonment.

7.    The first Ground of Appeal refers to the Adjudicator's  finding  that
    the  International  Lesbian  and  Gay  Association  evidence   is   not
    objective.  Ms Storey submitted that the Adjudicator had preferred  the
    Respondent's objective evidence in the CIPU Bulletin.    But, she said,
    much of the section headed "homosexuals"  at  section  6  of  the  CIPU
    Latvia Bulletin 01/02 is sourced to the very same association  and  its
    report.  The Adjudicator had given no basis for saying that  she  found
    the report was not objective.   Ms Storey suggested that she was  wrong
    to dismiss it without considering it.  We agree that she was  wrong  to
    dismiss it altogether  and  certainly  to  do  so  without  giving  any
    satisfactory  reasons.   In  considering  this  appeal  we  propose  to
    consider it.

8.    The rest of the  grounds  relate  to  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
    findings.  We do not need to examine those grounds in detail because we
    do not accept, even on his own account, that this  Appellant  has  made
    out his assertion that he is at real risk of persecution or of  conduct
    which would breach Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    if he were to be returned to Latvia.

9.    Both representatives agreed that homosexuals were, dependent  on  the
    conditions in a particular country, capable  of  forming  a  particular
    social group.  We, for the purposes of the determination,  accept  that
    proposition, in relation to Latvia.

10.   Ms Storey said the Appellant has been subject  to  discrimination  in
    the past.  It is not in dispute that he is a homosexual.  It is not  in
    dispute that he is of an age making him  liable  to  be  called-up  for
    military service, as he says  he  has  been.   According  to  the  CIPU
    Bulletin male Latvians are liable to twelve months of military  service
    between the ages of 19 and 27.  This Appellant is  now  aged  24.   She
    made  some  very  generalised  and  unsupported  submissions  that   as
    homosexuals suffered discrimination generally  in  Latvian  society  it
    would be very much worse for them either in the army or  in  a  prison.
    Presumably to illustrate the fact that there was intolerance within the
    army, she reminded us that it was only recently that the  UK  had  been
    forced to recruit gay men; and  that  the  US  army  operate  what  she
    described as a 'don't ask, don't tell policy'.  We did not  find  those
    two examples were relevant to a case concerning the Latvian  army.   In
    further support of her assertion  she  referred  to  the  International
    Lesbian and Gay Association World Legal Survey, which had been rejected
    by the Adjudicator.  She wished us to, and we have, read the  whole  of
    the document.  In particular, she  relied  on  one  item  concerning  a
    Latvian police officer who was dismissed in 1997 after admitting  being
    a homosexual in a newspaper interview.  He and his lover were seriously
    assaulted, because of their homosexuality,  in  April  1998.    It  was
    believed, by the  homosexual  community,  that  attack  may  have  been
    related to their complaint to the National Human Rights Office  and  to
    the  police  officer's  many  appearances  on  television.   Those  who
    assaulted them were arrested but released.  Also, it is said the victim
    was advised by police officers that if he  were  considering  making  a
    report, with a view to initiating a criminal case, it would better, and
    in his interest, not to do so.  Ms Storey said that  illustrated  there
    was no sufficient protection for gay men if they were  assaulted.   She
    said that if somebody with such a high profile could not get protection
    then this Appellant did not have a hope.  We think the matter may  also
    be looked at the other way.  It could be that it  was  because  of  his
    profile that the ex-police officer got little sympathy.  However it  is
    not possible to draw a conclusion either way.

11.   For the Respondent Mr Gulvin took us to the  CIPU  Bulletin.   It  is
    clear  homosexual acts have now been decriminalised and laws have  been
    passed  which,  at  least  in  theory,  will  provide  protection  from
    discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.  There  is  now  a
    National Human Rights  Office.   That  office  found  that  the  police
    officer referred to by Ms Storey was  dismissed  in  violation  of  his
    rights.  Mr Gulvin submitted the  democratisation process in Latvia has
    allowed the establishment of gay and lesbian  organisations,  bars  and
    clubs.  That is all apparent from the Appellant's  objective  material,
    including the report to which we have already referred.     We  do  not
    doubt that there is still discrimination by the general population  but
    that is not the basis of this Appellant's claim.

12.    Section  4  of  the  CIPU  Bulletin  deals  with  military  service.
    Postponement of military service is possible  for  full-time  students,
    sole breadwinners or individuals who wish to postpone their service for
    any valid reason.  This is contrary to the assertion by  the  appellant
    in interview that military service  takes  precedence  over  all  else.
    Exemption is granted for health reasons or specific  domestic  reasons.
    The Bulletin says that many postponements and exemptions  are  granted.
    As many as 87% of all liable conscripts were entitled  to  postponement
    or exemption in 1995.

13.   The bulletin goes on to say that  draft  evasion  and  desertion  are
    punishable under the criminal code.  It also says that draft evasion is
    widespread.  It is rarely actually punished, because there  are  enough
    voluntary applicants to achieve the required number  of  recruits.   In
    1995, although 2000 people were charged as draft evaders only two  came
    to be sentenced.  The Adjudicator  is  criticised  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal for reliance on that particular section of the CIPU Report.  She
    had commented  that  those  statistics  'spoke  for  themselves'.   The
    assertion in the Grounds of Appeal is that there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence to say that the 2000 who were charged were not detained before
    trial and that it  would  be  unusual  if  persons  charged  with  such
    offences were not detained.  There is  no  basis  whatsoever  for  that
    assertion.  There is no evidence that these people either were, or were
    not, detained.

14.   The Bulletin goes on to say that it was expected that a law  allowing
    for alternative service for conscientious objectors would  take  effect
    in July 2002.  It is intended to apply to  individuals  who  refuse  to
    bear arms for either religious or moral reasons.  It was expected  that
    the alternative service would last for two years and be served in state
    or municipal institutions.

15.   Finally, in the Bulletin, there is reference to "Hazing".  Ms  Storey
    submitted that the practice of Hazing  (beating  up  new  recruits)  is
    something which would be very much worse for the Appellant,  as  a  gay
    man, than it would be if he were not gay.  The section in the  Bulletin
    makes it clear that action is being taken to eliminate Hazing following
    the death of a conscript in April 2001.  The new programme to eliminate
    Hazing was introduced in May 2001 and, on 11 May 2001  twelve  soldiers
    were charged with Hazing 28 recruits.

16.   No evidence has been provided by the Appellant that a gay man, either
    in the military, or in prison, would receive worse treatment than a man
    who is not gay.  We have been asked to simply accept that as true.   We
    are not prepared to do that.  Evidence is required and there  is  none.
    Had there been a serious problem we would have expected evidence to  be
    forthcoming, in particular  from  the  International  Lesbian  and  Gay
    Association.  In any event,  it is unlikely that  the  Appellant  would
    have to do his military service.   As  Mr  Gulvin  said  there  is  the
    possibility of claiming an exemption.   It  cannot  be  said  that  the
    Appellant could not perform the alternative service.  We have not  seen
    the rules for that service and it has not been shown  that  it  is  not
    open to the Appellant.   It is  clear  that  large  numbers  of  people
    successfully evade military service.  Of those who are  caught  evading
    military service the statistics show they are rarely sentenced for  it.
    We have no evidence as to what  the  normal  sentence  for  evasion  of
    military service is.

17.   We were referred to the poor prison conditions  set  out  in  the  US
    State Department Report.   There  is  nothing  there  to  suggest  that
    serving a sentence of  imprisonment  would  engage  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights  or  amount  to  persecution.   The
    National Human Rights Organisation deals  with  complaints  and  it  is
    clear that there is a mechanism in place to protect prisoners' rights.

18.   In our view there is no sufficient evidence, even on the  Appellant's
    own account, that he is at real risk of persecution,  or  ill-treatment
    amounting to a breach of Article 3 when he is returned to  Latvia.   We
    have found that there is little likelihood that he will be required  to
    do his national service, or if he were, but refused, that he  would  be
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  Even if we are wrong  about  that
    there is no evidence before us that the treatment the Appellant,  as  a
    gay man, would receive, either in the army or in prison,  would  amount
    persecution or a breach of his  rights  under  Article  3.   We  cannot
    assume, with no evidence, that to be the case.

19.   Ms Storey submitted that, even if the treatment this Appellant  would
    receive in the army or in prison did not amount  to  a  breach  of  his
    rights under Article 3, it would amount to a breach at the  higher  end
    of  possible  breaches  of  physical  and  moral  integrity  under  the
    provisions of Article 8.  We reminded her  of  the  decision  in  Ullah
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1856. She sought to  argue  that  authority  conflicted
    with Bensaid ECHR 6.2.01 which was higher authority.  We do not need to
    consider this submission  because  we  have  found  that  there  is  no
    reasonable likelihood  of  this  Appellant  either  having  to  perform
    military  service  or  being  sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment.
    Further, there is no evidence that he will be treated  any  differently
    from any other individual.  There is therefore no question of Article 8
    being engaged.

20.   We do not regard the example of the dismissed gay policeman, who  had
    no recourse when he sought protection, as evidence the Appellant  would
    not, even if there were an objective basis for his fear, be  unable  to
    obtain protection from  the  authorities.   The  gay  policeman  is  an
    example of something that has gone wrong.   That  is  all  it  is,  one
    individual's experience.  The objective evidence of the improvement  of
    conditions for homosexuals in Latvia; of the existence of the  National
    Human Rights Organisation; and the legalisation of homosexual relations
    all point to a much improving situation.

21.   The appeal is dismissed.





                                                                  C P Mather
                                                              Vice President



