
H-DS-V2
                                                              DG (Risk -
                   Nepalese) Bhutan CG [2003] UKIAT 00205



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  24 January 2003                         |                             |
|Dictated : 6 February 2003                    |...................15/07/2003|
|                                              |..................           |


                                   Before:


                       MR. H. J. E. LATTER (CHAIRMAN)
                                MISS K. ESHUN


between
                             DHAN BAHADUR GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. O. Ramlogan of Counsel, instructed by Alliance
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by Dhan Bahadur Gurung against the determination  of
    an Adjudicator (Mrs. J. C. Olivier) who dismissed  his  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision giving directions for his removal to  Bhutan.



2.    The Appellant left Bhutan in April 1998 and then  lived  for  about  a
    year in India.  He arrived by air in the United Kingdom on 2 April 1999
    with a false passport.  He claimed asylum on 7 April 1999.

3.    His claim for asylum was based on two elements.  The  first  was  that
    he would be at risk of persecution in Bhutan because he  was  a  Hindu.
    He also asserted that he was  at  risk  of  persecution  as  an  ethnic
    Nepalese.

4.    The background to this appeal is as  follows.   The  Appellant  is  an
    ethnic Nepalese who follows the Hindu religion.   He  lived  in  Bhutan
    until his departure for India in April 1998.  He  lived  in  a  village
    which had a mixed population of  Hindus  and  Buddhists.   It  was  his
    assertion that in 1985 there was a Citizenship Act which led to  ethnic
    Nepalese who practised the Hindu religion not being listed as Bhutanese
    nationals.  In 1987 the government issued  an  order  requiring  people
    only to speak the Jhong-Kha language and requiring people to follow the
    Buddhist religion.  The claimant says that his  mother  died  in  March
    1998.  This required him to perform  a  Hindu  funeral  ceremony.   The
    Bhutanese police intervened  and  he  was  warned  to  stop  practising
    Hinduism.  On 2 April 1998 his father died.   He  again  performed  the
    Hindu funeral ceremony.  He was warned that the police were  coming  to
    arrest him.  He escaped to the forest with his wife, staying there  for
    about ten to fifteen days.  On 15 April 1998 he and his  wife  went  to
    India.  He stayed there for a number of months but could not remain  as
    the Indian authorities did not recognise refugees.  He had never held a
    Bhutanese passport.  An agent arranged for his passage  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

5.    The Adjudicator's findings are set out in  paragraphs  11.5-6  of  her
    determination.  She did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  According to the background evidence Hindus  enjoyed  freedom
    of worship but  were  not  permitted  to  proselytise.   There  was  no
    evidence before her to indicate that Hindus in  Bhutan  were  prevented
    from performing Hindu funeral rights.  She noted from the annual report
    on International Religious Freedom for 1999 that there were no  reports
    of religious detainees or prisoners in Bhutan.  She noted from  the  US
    Department of State Report that the King of Bhutan had  declared  major
    Hindu  festivals  to  be  national  holidays  and  the   Royal   Family
    participated in them.  She was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    been persecuted for religious reasons nor  that  he  would  be  of  any
    adverse interest  to  the  authorities.   In  these  circumstances  she
    dismissed the appeal.

6.    In granting leave the Tribunal the Vice-President was  satisfied  that
    the Adjudicator gave sound reasons based squarely on the  evidence  for
    concluding that the claim based on religious belief was  not  credible.
    However, he granted leave in relation to the issue of the  consequences
    of the Appellant not being accepted as a national of Bhutan because  he
    was an ethnic Nepalese.  It was arguable that an  Adjudicator  had  not
    given any adequate consideration to the issue of  whether  difficulties
    facing ethnic Nepalese amounted to persecution in Bhutan.

7.    Before the  Tribunal  Mr.  Ramlogan  argued  that  the  Appellant  was
    stateless because of the decrees issued in Bhutan which deprived him of
    citizenship.   There  was  no  elected  government  in  Bhutan  and  no
    constitution.  The position of Hindus  was  untenable.   The  Appellant
    would not be able to return there.  He  would  not  be  regarded  as  a
    citizen and would have no right to return.

8.    Mr. Sheikh submitted that the  Adjudicator's  findings  were  properly
    open to him.  The evidence shows that  he  had  citizenship  before  he
    left.  He had never expressed disloyalty to the King of Bhutan.   There
    was no reason to believe that he would not be regarded  as  a  citizen.
    Mr. Sheikh referred to the judgment of the Court of Session in Bradshaw
    [1994] Imm AR 359 and the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Tecle
    [2002] EWCA CIV 1358.

9.    Bhutan  is  a  Himalayan  country  bordering  India  and  China.   The
    population comprises 35% Nepalese.  There is no  written  constitution.
    It is clear from the CIPU  report  of  October  2002  that  the  ethnic
    Nepalese are discriminated against  institutionally  and  individually.
    Ethnic identity is an over-arching issue.   The  Bhotes,  the  majority
    ethnic group, are encouraged by the King to defend  their  culture  and
    Bhutan's uniqueness.   There  have  been  persistent  attempts  by  the
    Bhutanese  government  to  pressurise  the   Nepalese   minority   into
    assimilation.  In 1985 the Government enacted  a  new  Citizenship  Act
    which required individuals to prove their existing citizenship.  In the
    1988 census tens of thousands of South  Bhutanese  of  Nepalese  ethnic
    origin were declared illegal residents.  In 1990 ethnic unrest  erupted
    in the south of Bhutan and refugees started flowing in two  directions:
    non-Nepalese internally to North Bhutan and Nepalese south  across  the
    border into India and then on to eastern Nepal.  After these expulsions
    the situation in south Bhutan has been described as one that  is  harsh
    towards new Nepali migrants.

10.   This assessment is confirmed by the  US  Department  of  State  Report
    2001.   Citizens  face  significant  limitations  on  the  freedom   of
    religion.  One-third of the population, the  ethnic  Nepalese  most  of
    whom are Hindus, live in the country's  southern  districts.   Tens  of
    thousands of ethnic Nepalese left Bhutan in 1991-92 many of  whom  were
    expelled forcibly.  There are over  98,000  ethnic  Nepalese  in  seven
    refugee camps in eastern Nepal.  It  is  recorded  that  the  King  has
    declared major Hindu festivals to be national holidays.  During the mid
    to late 1980s, citizenship became a  highly  contentious  matter.   The
    1985 Citizenship Act provided for the revocation of the citizenship  of
    any naturalised citizen who had shown by act or speech to  be  disloyal
    in any manner  to  the  King,  country,  and  people  of  Bhutan.   The
    government has maintained that many of those who left  the  country  in
    the early 1990s were Nepalese or Indian citizens  who  came  after  the
    enactment of the 1958 Citizenship Act but were  not  detected  until  a
    census in 1988.  The government has begun  a  programme  of  resettling
    Buddhist Bhutanese from other regions  in  the  southern  part  of  the
    country vacated by ethnic Nepalese living in refugee camps in Nepal.

11.   It is against this background that the claim  made  by  the  Appellant
    must be assessed.  He did not leave Bhutan until April 1998.  He  lived
    in India until his arrival in the United Kingdom in April 1999.  On the
    basis of the evidence before the Adjudicator, the  Appellant  fails  to
    establish that he is stateless. The authorities of Bradshaw  and  Tecle
    deal with different issues which do not assist us in this  appeal.   We
    note that the Appellant has  described  himself  as  Bhutanese  in  his
    notice of appeal.  He has substantially based his claim on  a  fear  of
    persecution on religious grounds.  The Adjudicator  rejected  this  for
    reasons which are clear from  her  determination  and  with  which  the
    Tribunal agree.  The remaining issue is whether the appellant would  be
    at risk of persecution because of his Nepalese ethnic identity.

12.   The Tribunal accept from the background evidence that there  has  been
    considerable             tension between the  Bhote  majority  and  the
    Nepalese minority.  However, we are not satisfied that the appellant is
    able to show that he would be at risk of persecution on return.  In our
    view it cannot be argued that the Nepalese minority are  persecuted  by
    reason of their Nepalese origins alone.  Each case must be looked at on
    its own individual circumstances.  If the Appellant is permitted to re-
    enter Bhutan, we are not satisfied that  he  will  be  treated  in  any
    different way from any other member of the Nepalese minority.   We  are
    not satisfied the Appellant would not be recognised  as  a  citizen  of
    Bhutan.  If  he  had  been  deprived  of  his  citizenship  we  do  not
    understand why he would continue to describe himself as  a  citizen  of
    Bhutan.  In our view the discrimination  faced  by  those  of  Nepalese
    ethnic origin does not amount to persecution.  There is nothing in  the
    Appellant's own particular circumstances which would put him at risk of
    persecution.

13.   In these circumstances in our view the Adjudicator's conclusions  were
    correct for the reasons which she has given.

14.   It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.






                                                             H. J. E. Latter
                                                              Vice President
