
ST (Article 8: Family Life - Proportionality) Iran [2003] UKIAT 00110

Heard at Field House on 4 July 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                 Date determination notified


          29.10.03

                                   Before:
                                Mr J Perkins
                                 (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe
Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER TEHRAN

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Before us Mr R Toal of counsel, instructed by Noden &  Co,  solicitors,
    appeared for the appellant and Mr A Sheikh , a Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer appeared for the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He was born on 5 July 1982 and  so
    is now aged 21 years.  He appeals a decision of an adjudicator, Mr J  R
    L G Varcoe CMG, who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision that he was not entitled to entry clearance to settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appeal before us is limited  to  deciding  if  the
    decision was contrary to the appellant's rights under article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.



 3. The appellant's parents and two younger brothers  are  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His younger brothers were minors when they were  given
    permission to settle in the United Kingdom.  The appellant had achieved
    his majority before he made the application that is the subject of this
    appeal.  The appellant's father and sponsor is recognised as a refugee.
     It is accepted that the  appellant's  father  cannot  be  expected  to
    return to Iran so that the appellant can enjoy  family  life  with  him
    there.

 4. Mr Toal drew to our attention the case of ECO Dhaka v Box [2002]  UKIAT
    02212 in which Dr Storey's  tribunal  considered  the  approach  to  be
    followed by a decision maker considering the impact of article 8  in  a
    case involving an application for entry to (rather than  removal  from)
    the United Kingdom.  The case is not "starred" but it is, if we may say
    so, a careful review of relevant jurisprudence and we intend to  follow
    it.

 5.      The appellant must prove his case on the balance of probabilities.
     The "substantial grounds for believing" test does not apply  to  entry
    cases.  Further  the  test  is  not  "has  there  been  an  unjustified
    interference with the right  to  family  life?"  but  "is  the  act  in
    accordance with the positive obligation on the United Kingdom  to  show
    respect for family life?"  The  distinction  is  important  because  in
    entry cases it is arguable that it is the decision of a relative to  go
    and live in the United Kingdom (rather than the decision of the  United
    Kingdom to refuse entry clearance to the applicant) that has interfered
    with an applicant's family life.   It  may  well  be  that  it  is  the
    relative's decision that has interfered with family life but  in  entry
    cases European jurisprudence shows that "interference with family life"
    is not the test.  Under the convention the  state  must  actively  show
    respect for family life.  Nevertheless if a "lack of respect for family
    life" has been established then when conducting the balancing  exercise
    to determine if it is proportionate to the proper purpose of  enforcing
    immigration control the decision maker must remember  that  the  United
    Kingdom does not have a general obligation to  respect  an  immigrant's
    choice of country or residence and it is relevant to  consider  whether
    there are insurmountable obstacles to the family enjoying  family  life
    elsewhere.



 6. At the hearing before us Mr  Toal  emphasised  that  the  existence  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" is relevant to the  proportionality  of  the
    decision, and not to whether the  decision  shows  respect  for  family
    life.  Put like that the point seems trite but that is not fair  to  Mr
    Toal.  It is arguable, but, in the light of Box, wrong  to  claim  that
    there can be no lack of respect for family life if the family life  can
    continue elsewhere.  It was Mr Toal's concern that the adjudicator  did
    not appear to consider "insurmountable obstacles" when considering  the
    balancing exercise in his determination and the  fact  that  there  are
    insurmountable  obstacles  should,  he  said,  count  heavily  in   the
    appellant's favour when the balance is struck.  He based  this  on  the
    well known formulation of Lord Phillips  in  R  (ota  Mahmood)  v  SSHD
    [2001]INLR at 55(3) "exclusion of one family member from a state  where
    other members of the family are lawfully resident will not  necessarily
    infringe Art 8 provided that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the family living together in the  country  of  origin  of  the  family
    member excluded."  Mr Toal submitted that where the  proviso  does  not
    apply then there is a strong inference that article 8 is  breached  and
    that the lack of respect shown to family life is disproportionate.

 7. Mr Toal further submitted that the adjudicator should have  regard  for
    the whole family, and not just the appellant.  He relied  for  this  on
    Sen v The Netherlands (Case No 31465/96), a decision  of  the  European
    Convention  of  Human  Rights.   We  do  not   find   the   proposition
    controversial but it must not be overstated.  There  is  one  appellant
    before us.  It is his human rights that have to be considered  but  his
    exclusions will (or can be expected to) impinge on the rights of others
    and to that extent only their rights must be considered too.   This  is
    probably what the adjudicator has in mind at paragraph 19 where he said
    "It has been held in  Kehinde  that  to  succeed  under  article  8  an
    applicant must be subject of an immigration decision and  that  it  was
    only his human rights that fell to be considered, even  though  it  was
    possible to take  into  account  the  suffering  of  the  other  family
    members."  Sen concerned the rights of an infant child and  members  of
    her family who were parties to  the  appeal.   It  gives  only  limited
    guidance to us in this case.



 8.  Mr Toal then criticised  the  adjudicator  for  his  approach  to  the
    evidence of how the appellant's exclusion affected other members of the
    family.

 9.      We have seen a medical report from Dr  Judith  Edwards  who  is  a
    consultant psychiatrist  with  the  Surrey  Oaklands  NHS  Trust.   She
    prepared a report dated 28  January  2002  concerning  the  appellant's
    parents.  The appellant's mother in particular has been rather  poorly.
    Dr Edwards concluded "It is clear  that  the  ongoing  separation  from
    their sons is having a very detrimental effect upon them  individually,
    and as a couple and as a family.  It is clear that reunions with  their
    sons would have a positive impact, although it is likely that there are
    other factors contributing to the couple's depression".  She then  went
    on to say how the appellant's mother felt "imprisoned and  tortured  by
    the separation from her culture of her two sons".  We see no reason  to
    go behind this conclusion although of course one of those two sons  has
    now rejoined her in the United Kingdom.

10.      Mr Toal then criticised the adjudicator for his  approach  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's brother, Sina.  He said, rightly, that  the
    adjudicator ought not to have discouraged him to give evidence and then
    rejected some of his account.  However this criticism is only  relevant
    to the extent that the evidence was relevant.  The issue before  us  is
    not "is the appellant safe in Iran" but rather "is excluding  him  from
    the United Kingdom contrary to the appellant's right to  a  family  and
    private life" and we do not find the  evidence  of  Sina  very  helpful
    about that.  We accept that he is part of the  appellant's  family  and
    that there is an important relationship between the brothers.

11. For similar reasons we reject any criticism of the adjudicator for  not
    giving more attention to the evidence about  the  conditions  that  the
    claimant will face in Iran.  They do not bear on the issue.

12.      We find that the adjudicator's approach to the  issue  before  him
    was wrong.  He did not follow Box, which is scarcely surprising as  no-
    one seems to have told him about it, although we  do  not  accept  that
    this has led the adjudicator into any material error.



13. We find that excluding the appellant from the United Kingdom does  show
    a lack of respect for his family life and to that extent is contrary to
    his rights under article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.



14. We must now decide if excluding him  is  proportionate  to  the  proper
    purpose of achieving immigration control.

15.    Against this is the fact that he has close ties with his parents and
    brothers in the United Kingdom and they cannot be expected to live with
    him in Iran because his parents are refugees.  That is an important but
    not decisive point.  Further his absence is a significant  contributory
    cause of his parents' ill health.  We have to consider the  appellant's
    rights and we find that it must be distressing for him to be  upsetting
    his family in this way.

16.     However we must not lose sight of the fact that the  appellant  has
    achieved his majority.  He was born on 5 August 1981.  He  applied  for
    entry clearance on 12 November 1981 when he was aged 20 years.  In  the
    absence  of  evidence  of,  for  example,  exceptional  immaturity   or
    dependency he must be expected to make his own way in the  world.   His
    absence is not causing so much distress  to  his  parents  that  it  is
    contrary to the appellant's right to a private and family life to  keep
    them apart.

17.      It follows that we agree with the adjudicator's conclusion and  we
    dismiss this appeal.




Jonathan Perkins
Vice President

9 September 2003
