
KH

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|on  17 January 2003        |        |TE (Persecution -           |
|                           |        |Sufficiency of Protection)  |
|                           |        |Georgia [2002] UKIAT 00070  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10.09.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr F Jamieson                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                         RULING ON PRELIMINARY ISSUE


1.     The  appellant  appeals  with  leave  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs A K Simpson,  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  27  June  2000  issuing
      directions for his removal from the United Kingdom, asylum having been
      refused.

2.    The appeal was listed for  hearing  before  us  on  17  January  2003.
      Miss F Webber for A S Law appeared on behalf of the  appellant,  and
      Mr M Blundell appeared on behalf of the respondent.

3.    On this occasion we were concerned solely with the  preliminary  issue
      of whether Miss Webber could expand or extend her grounds  of  appeal.
      We  have  benefited  from   very   helpful   submissions   from   both
      representatives in this regard.  At the time we heard the  submissions
      we considered that it would not be appropriate to deal with the matter
      immediately and therefore  adjourned  the  hearing  to  enable  us  to
      provide  a  preliminary  ruling  on  this  particular  matter   as   a
      consequence of which the appeal could take whatever  course  commended
      itself to the representatives in the light of our ruling.

4.    The Adjudicator found the core elements of the  appellant's  claim  to
      be credible.  He claimed to be at risk of persecution by the  Georgian
      authorities because of the Zviadist activities of his brother and  his
      attempted  assassination  of  President  Eduard   Shevardnadze.    The
      Adjudicator considered the  objective  evidence  in  this  regard  and
      concluded that the claim was not made out.

5.    The appellant also claimed that if he were to be returned  to  Georgia
      he would be at substantial  risk  of  persecution  by  ultra  orthodox
      extremists.  The Adjudicator considered  the  objective  evidence  and
      concluded  that  the  ill-treatment  feared  by  the  appellant   from
      individual members  of  the  ultra  orthodox  extremists  was  not  of
      sufficient severity as to cross  the  threshold  of  persecution,  and
      additionally concluded that there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      available to the appellant from the state authorities.   At  paragraph
      45 of her determination she stated the following:

      "Religious intolerance and ill-treatment does not cross the  threshold
      of severity and persecution, even if taken cumulatively, unless  there
      are particularly strong and credible elements."


6.    Leave to appeal was sought essentially on two grounds.  The  first  of
      these, under the heading "Definition of  Persecution"  challenged  the
      Adjudicator's  finding  that  the   feared   ill-treatment   was   not
      sufficiently severe to cross the threshold  of  persecution.   It  was
      argued  that  the  finding  that  for  ill-treatment  on  grounds   of
      persecution to  cross  the  threshold  of  severity  into  persecution
      required there to be particularly strong and credible elements implied
      the need for stronger elements of such a claim than those involved  in
      persecution for any other Convention reason.  It was argued  that  the
      expert evidence before the Adjudicator from Robert Chenciner  had  not
      been properly taken into account and that the Adjudicator  had  failed
      to take into account the subjective element when considering  risk  of
      persecution.  It was also argued that the Adjudicator had  adopted  an
      excessively narrow interpretation of what comprised persecution.

7.    The other ground was concerned with  sufficiency  of  protection.   It
      was argued that the Adjudicator was in error in finding that there was
      a sufficiency of protection for the appellant from the Georgian  State
      authorities and set out reasons for this, in  part  quoting  from  the
      objective evidence from such sources as the Human Rights Watch  Report
      and the US State Department Report.

8.    Leave  to  appeal  was  granted  in  a  determination  promulgated  on
      1 November 2002.  In the light of the argument as it is set out before
      us we consider that it is proper to quote this in full.

      "This is an application for leave to appeal  from  a  decision  of  an
      Adjudicator (Mrs A K Simpson), dismissing an asylum and  human  rights
      appeal by a citizen of Georgia.  Dealing so far as necessary with each
      of the grounds of the application which raises any reasoned  complaint
      against the adjudicator's decision


      1     It is not clear why the adjudicator should have said  (paragraph
           45) that "Religious intolerance and ill-treatment does not [sic]
           cross the threshold of severity into persecution, even if  taken
           cumulatively, unless there are particularly strong and  credible
           elements";  whether  she  meant  that  as  expressing  a  higher
           standard than for other types of claim, or how far  it  affected
           her decision.  The Tribunal can consider these points."


9.    Miss Webber put before us a skeleton argument  which  deals  not  only
      with this preliminary matter but also with  the  substantive  matters,
      and also attached various authorities.  She explored these in  further
      detail in her submissions before us.  The main reason for Miss  Webber
      wishing to expand the grounds of appeal or perhaps more  precisely  we
      should describe it as  relying  on  an  actual  ground  of  appeal  in
      relation to which leave was not granted was that she wishes  to  argue
      with the sufficiency of protection point.  One of the points she  made
      to us was  that  if  the  Adjudicator's  findings  on  sufficiency  of
      protection cannot be reconsidered by the Tribunal  then  it  nullifies
      the effect of the grant of  leave  on  the  other  point.   There  was
      therefore on the face of it particular  significance  in  Miss  Webber
      being able to argue this point if she is right that the essence of any
      argument before the Tribunal is precluded by the restriction, if it is
      a restriction, on the grant of leave.

10.   A starting point is the  very  terse  provision  in  rule  21  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000.  This states as
      follows:

      "The grounds of appeal may be varied by the appellant with  the  leave
      of the Tribunal.


10.   This provision was considered by the Tribunal in its determination  in
      Wondemagegn [2002] UKIAT 05496.  Again it is appropriate to quote  the
      terms of the grant of leave in that case.


      "In my judgment the Adjudicator was clearly correct to proceed to hear
      the appeal.  There is nothing in the grounds or material  enclosed  to
      cause me to question his assessment of credibility or his findings  in
      relation to the  asylum  appeal.   It  is  however  arguable  that  he
      misdirected himself in relation to the  human  rights  aspect  of  the
      appeal.  Any representative should be fully  prepared  to  argue  that
      aspect before the Tribunal.  Leave  to  appeal  is  granted  as  above
      stated".




11.   Before the Tribunal Counsel sought to  renew  orally  the  application
      for leave to appeal in respect of the first of the grounds  of  appeal
      considered by the Vice President who granted leave and  it  was  dealt
      with as a preliminary issue.  The Tribunal was of  the  view  in  that
      case that rule 21 applied to variation  of  grounds  submitted  in  an
      application for leave in respect of which leave has been  granted  and
      the word "varied" did not cover reinstatement  of  grounds  which  had
      been rejected in  a  determination  considering  the  application  for
      leave.  The Tribunal saw a  clear  difference  between  variation  and
      reinstatement and considered that rule 21 made  it  quite  clear  that
      grounds which had been accepted by  the  Tribunal  in  granting  leave
      might be varied by the appellant with the leave of  the  Tribunal  but
      the jurisdiction of the Tribunal did not extend to reinstating grounds
      that had already been rejected by a previous Tribunal  in  considering
      the application for leave.  The Tribunal  was  of  the  view  that  if
      Parliament had intended to give the Tribunal  such  jurisdiction  this
      would have been expressed in the rules, and it had not been.

12.   Miss Webber took two alternative  approaches  to  this  determination.
      On the one hand she argued that in Wondemagegn leave was  specifically
      refused on a particular ground, whereas in the instant appeal the Vice
      President had seen merit in ground one and did not necessarily  go  on
      to consider the other grounds.  She also made the  point  that  if  it
      were  right  that  rule  21  allowed   for   variation   rather   than
      reinstatement as indicated by the Tribunal in  Wondemagegn  then  this
      effectively benefited the  lazy  representative  who  had  not  put  a
      particular  matter  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  as  opposed  to  the
      industrious representative who had given thought to  matters  and  yet
      had had a particular matter ruled out expressly when applying for  the
      grant of leave.

13.   Mr Blundell argued that it would be odd and disrespectful  to  suggest
      that the Vice President who granted leave in the  instant  appeal  did
      not consider ground two albeit that he did not refer to it.  He argued
      that the Vice President had considered it and decided to refuse  leave
      on it.  The Tribunal was referred to the introduction in the grant  of
      leave and the reference to "any reasoned complaints"  which  indicated
      that  the  only  matter  in  relation  to  which  the  Vice  President
      considered there was merit was the  specific  matter  in  relation  to
      which he granted leave.

14.   We consider that there is force to Mr Blundell's  contention  in  this
      regard.  It seems to us on a proper reading of the grant of leave that
      the Vice President considered that the  only  matter  in  relation  to
      which he granted leave  was  the  only  matter  raising  any  reasoned
      complaint against the Adjudicator's decision.  It  must  be  taken  by
      implication therefore that he did not consider that ground  2,  if  we
      may  so  describe  it,  had  merit.  In  that  sense,  therefore,  the
      distinction which Miss Webber sought to draw from her first  line  of
      argument between the situation in this case and that in Wondemagegn is
      not one of substance.  It is true that  the  Vice  President  did  not
      expressly refuse leave in relation to ground 2, but we  consider  that
      it is clear that he considered it and did not consider it  appropriate
      to grant leave on that point.

15.   Miss Webber's alternative submission was that Wondemagegn  was  wrong.
      One point that she made concerned the decision of the Court of  Appeal
      in Akewushola [2000] 2 All ER 148 and the judgment of Sedley LJ  where
      he stated as follows:

      "For my part I do not think that, slips apart, a statutory Tribunal  -
      in contrast to a superior Court - ordinarily  possesses  any  inherent
      power to rescind or review its own decisions."


      At paragraph 16 of Wondemagegn it is clear that the Tribunal  regarded
      this as a significant matter in leading it to conclude as it did  that
      it had no jurisdiction to set aside or vary the determination  of  the
      Tribunal in granting  leave.   Miss  Webber  argued  in  her  skeleton
      argument and before us that the remarks by  Sedley  LJ  in  Akewushola
      were not meant to apply  to  a  situation  such  as  that  before  the
      Tribunal, in that the "decision" was  the  grant  of  leave,  not  the
      specific reasons for grant, which the procedure rules expressly  allow
      the Tribunal to vary.


16.   The decision in Akewushola was a decision by a Vice President  of  the
      Tribunal, sitting alone, to rescind the determination  of  a  Tribunal
      chaired by him which had determined an appeal subsequent to which  the
      Chairman was informed that an adjournment application had been made in
      connection with the hearing before the Tribunal and had been  entirely
      overlooked.  We consider that there is force in Miss Webber's point in
      this  regard.   The  decision  which  was  purportedly  rescinded   in
      Akewushola is different in kind from any amendment to or amplification
      of grounds of appeal.  We consider that Miss Webber is  right  to  say
      that the decision is the grant of leave rather than  the  reasons  for
      that grant.  As she pointed out, the grounds of appeal may  be  varied
      by the appellant with leave to the Tribunal under rule 21.

17.   Miss Webber also prayed in aid the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
      Kulek [2002] EWCA Civ 1408 which emphasised the point contained in the
      definition section of the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
      Rules  2000  at  paragraph  2  providing  a  definition  of  the  word
      "determination" as meaning the decision of the Appellate Authority  to
      allow or dismiss an appeal and the reasons for that decision.  As  had
      been pointed out by the Court  of  Appeal  at  paragraph  28  in  that
      judgment, the determination of the result of an appeal is by no  means
      the same thing as determination of any issue arising  on  the  appeal,
      and Miss Webber concluded from this that although the  Tribunal  could
      not and should not rescind a determination it could review the grounds
      upon which it was taken.

18.   To a significant extent the problems that have arisen in  this  appeal
      arise from the relative opacity of the  wording  of  rule  21  of  the
      Procedure Rules.  In interpreting it as we are required to do  we  are
      among other things conscious of a further point made  by  Miss  Webber
      concerning the need for  a  purposive  construction  of  the  rule  in
      accordance with the need to give it effect to  the  intentions  behind
      the Refugee Convention.  She argued that a meritorious  ground  should
      not be precluded from being argued in a substantive hearing  before  a
      Tribunal that could have a significant effect on  the  ability  of  an
      appellant to argue that he faced a real risk on return on account of a
      particular matter raised in that ground.

19.   We do not consider that rule 21  has  the  effect  of  precluding  the
      opening or reopening before the Tribunal of a matter  in  relation  to
      which leave has not been granted  by  a  Vice  President  when  giving
      leave.  It seems to us that on  a  proper  construction  of  rule  21,
      provided that a matter has indeed formed part of the grounds of appeal
      when leave is sought, that the Tribunal has a discretion as to whether
      or not it will enable the matters before it as defined by the grant of
      leave to be varied to that extent.  We are conscious of the point made
      by Miss Webber that  it  would  be  unfortunate  if  the  alternative
      interpretation  of  this   rule   effectively   benefited   the   idle
      representative who brought a point afresh to the Tribunal on  the  day
      of the hearing as opposed to the more conscientious representative who
      had argued that point in his  or  her  grounds  and  had  it  refused.
      Clearly, there can be no assumption properly made by or on  behalf  of
      an appellant before the Tribunal that the Tribunal will be prepared to
      entertain argument on a point in relation  to  which  leave  had  been
      refused or not expressly granted.  The  assumption  must  be  that  if
      leave has not been granted on a matter as clearly on the one hand  if,
      as in Wondemagegn, it has been expressly excluded, or  as  if  in  the
      appeal before us by implication it was not  regarded  as  meritorious,
      then that appellant will face an uphill  struggle  in  persuading  the
      Tribunal at the substantive hearing that the point has merit.   We  do
      not consider that there is anything in the authorities we  have  cited
      or in the wording of rule 21 that precludes us from reaching the  view
      that either in a case where a matter is specifically excluded  by  the
      Vice President granting leave or by implication excluded as not  being
      specifically  dealt  with,  that  the  matter  can   nevertheless   be
      ventilated  before  the   Tribunal   at   the   substantive   hearing.
      Representatives must, however, be aware of  the  standard  directions,
      and representatives who arrive at an  appeal  hearing  without  giving
      notice of their intention to seek to raise a point  in  this  sort  of
      manner are likely to  find  the  Tribunal  unsympathetic  to  such  an
      attempt.  With some trepidation we find ourselves in disagreement with
      the conclusions of the Tribunal in Wondemagegn,  in  that  we  do  not
      consider that what we are proposing  involves  the  setting  aside  or
      variation of a determination of another Tribunal bearing in  mind  the
      points made in Kulek, nor do we interpret the reference in Akewushola,
      as we have stated above to apply to a grant of leave  rather  than  to
      the particular reasons for that grant.

20.   The effect of this ruling is that it is open to Miss  Webber  to  seek
      to persuade us that ground two is properly arguable before  us.   This
      appeal will accordingly be listed for hearing to enable  her  to  make
      that argument and Mr Blundell to challenge it if he so wishes, and  as
      a consequence of our ruling on that  matter  the  appeal  will  either
      proceed with us hearing that point or if we are  against  Miss  Webber
      she will be required to make such argument as she can on  ground  one.
      We understood her in her submissions  to  indicate  that  that  ground
      would not get her very far if she were not able to argue  ground  two,
      but that is a matter for her at the renewed hearing.





                                                                 D  K  Allen
                                                              Vice President




