
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |     |RN (Credibility - Background   |
|                           |     |Material) Zimbabwe [2003] UKIAT|
|                           |     |00086                          |
|On 16 September 2003       |     |                               |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.24th September 2004                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                           |     |                               |
|                           |Befor|                               |
|                           |e:   |                               |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |     |APPELLANT                      |
|                           |     |                               |
|                           |and  |                               |
|                           |     |                               |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |     |RESPONDENT                     |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, appeals the determination of an
      Adjudicator (Mr D M  Page)  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  his  application  for
      asylum.

2.    The appellant was represented by Miss E Shaw while Miss Hart appeared
      for the Secretary of State.

3.    The appellant's claim was that  he  was  involved  with  the  MDC  in
      Zimbabwe.   He had had problems with ZANU-PF but  had  been  able  to
      escape from them on three occasions.   On one occasion the  appellant
      had offered to pay for some beer for his guards while  the  appellant
      was having a shower.   On another occasion, the guard had been  using
      the toilet.   On the third occasion the appellant had been taken in a
      truck and had had large heavy stones tied to him - two  at  the  back
      and two at the front.  He was taken to a  river  which  was  infested
      with crocodiles.   He was thrown into the river which  was  generally
      very deep but in the place where the ZANU-PF men threw him, the water
      only came up to his knees.   The  appellant  managed  to  remove  the
      stones from his body and made his way to the  opposite  bank  of  the
      river and climbed out.

4.    The Adjudicator's assessment of the  facts  in  this  case  reads  as
      follows:

      "42.  It is agreed that the issue in this appeal is  the  appellant's
           credibility.  I did not find the appellant credible as a witness
           and I certainly did not find any part  of  his  story  credible.
           The standard of proof may be low but it cannot be met with badly
           invented fiction like this.   It  was  plain  to  me  that  this
           appellant was making up his evidence as  he  went  along.   This
           whole story beggars belief.

       43.  The appellant did not know who  the  MDC  chairman  was  but  he
           claims to be a chairman of the youth wing in his area.   In  his
           interview he did not know who the treasurer of the MDC  was.   I
           accept that the appellant had some knowledge of the MDC but this
           was information that was in the public  domain  and  could  have
           been learned by anybody.  If he had the profile that  he  claims
           to have had, then I would have expected him to  have  known  who
           the MDC chairman was and who the treasurer was.


        44. The appellant's evidence about MDC policy which I have  set  out
           above was vague in the extreme and demonstrated quite plainly in
           my view  that  this  appellant  has  not  been  engaged  in  the
           political process at any level.


        45. I accept that the appellant may have some injuries  recorded  in
           the photograph which is before me.  However, the photograph does
           not prove the cause of any injury that the appellant  may  have.
           It is interesting to note that Dr Nhau's report that  was  faced
           recently  for  us  in  this  appeal  makes  no  mention  of  the
           appellant's jaw being wired.  I would expect this report to have
           mentioned the fact that the appellant's jaw was  wired  for  one
           month.  She has not mentioned anything about  referring  him  to
           the dental section for this operation  t  take  lace.   If  this
           report is genuine then the injuries that are described must have
           another cause than that which the appellant  has  claimed.   The
           injuries recorded in this document are fairly minor injuries  in
           any event.  I do not accept that these injuries were  caused  by
           an assault with a blunt object  as  Dr  Nhau  concludes.   These
           injuries could have many accidental and  indeed  non  accidental
           causes.


         46.      The MDC  cards  that  the  appellant  has  produced  could
           equally have been obtained very easily.  His evidence  was  that
           his mother obtained these for him.  I did not find  it  credible
           that the appellant's mother went to the trouble of obtaining his
           MDC card from his house to give him to leave the  country  with.
           The appellant appears to  be  claiming  that  he  fled  Zimbabwe
           because of his MDC membership and I do not find it credible that
           he would have left carrying his MDC card and MDC T-shirt  if  he
           genuinely had this fear.  I would have though  that  his  mother
           would have left those things behind.


         47.      All of the above escapes that the appellant has  described
           in evidence are so unlikely that  they  are  preposterous.   The
           respondent in his refusal letter had  made  this  point  to  the
           appellant and pointed out how unlikely these escapes  are.   The
           appellant's post refusal witness statement dated  20th  February
           2003 deals with these refusal issues and it makes comic  reading
           and provides some light relief in considering  what  is,  in  my
           view, a manifestly false claim.


         48.      The appellant has added in  that  witness  statement  that
           since he has been in the United Kingdom he has learned from  his
           mother that the ZANU-PF members are still looking for  him  even
           though he is in the United Kingdom.


         49.      I have  reached  the  clearest  conclusion  upon  all  the
           evidence before me, including the evidence to which I  have  not
           specifically referred to above, that this appellant's claim is a
           false claim  and  that  he  would  be  of  no  interest  to  the
           authorities upon return to Zimbabwe should he be returned there.


         50.      For the reasons I have set out  above  I  find  that  this
           appellant has not shown a well-founded fear of  persecution  for
           any Convention reason but is falsely claiming asylum as a  means
           to obtain an immigration status in this  country.   I  therefore
           dismiss this appeal as brought on asylum grounds."


5.    The Adjudicator then dealt with the human rights aspect and  concluded
      that the appellant would be of  no  interest  to  the  authorities  on
      return and that there was no evidence before him to  suggest  that  he
      would be at risk on inhuman or degrading treatment as a failed  asylum
      seeker.

6.    Miss Shaw in her submissions relied on the grounds of appeal  and  the
      skeleton argument.    She  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not
      referred to the objective material at all and  it  was  wrong  for  an
      Adjudicator to make a credibility assessment  without  regard  to  the
      background evidence.   The situation in  Zimbabwe  was  poor  and  had
      recently deteriorated as appeared from the material contained  in  the
      appellant's bundle.   Although the events relied on by  the  appellant
      might appear fictitious, it was necessary to look at matters from  the
      stand point of the refugee and not from a western perspective.   While
      the account of the escapes were not directly  supported  by  effective
      material the general country situation should  have  been  taken  into
      account by the Adjudicator.   In particular the Adjudicator was to  be
      criticised for failing to make reference to a letter from the Zimbabwe
      Association dated  18  February  2003.   The  Adjudicator  could  have
      attached little weight to it but  it  was  necessary  to  mention  it.
      Miss Shaw was unable to tell us what the Zimbabwe Association  was  or
      why there were two addresses on the letter.

7.    At the conclusion of the submissions we did not trouble Miss Hart  and
      reserved our determination.

8.    The Adjudicator directs himself  appropriately  on  the  law  and  the
      burden  and  standard  of  proof  in  paragraphs  3  to   9   of   the
      determination.   He refers, for example, to Karanakaran [2000] Imm  AR
      271 and he states in paragraph 49 of the determination (which we  have
      reproduced above) that he had reached his conclusions on  all  of  the
      evidence before him  including  evidence  to  which  he  had  made  no
      specific  reference.    How  far  it  is  necessary  to  go  into  the
      background material depends very much on the  circumstances.  In  R  v
      Secretary of State ex parte Befekadu [1999] Imm AR 467 at 474  it  was
      held as follows:

      "In some instances, perhaps many cases, it will be impossible to  make
      a full and fair finding on credibility without going into a good  deal
      of detail  about  the  background  circumstances  of  the  country  in
      question.  In other cases such an exercise will be  neither  necessary
      nor, in my judgment, fruitful.  For example, if an applicant claims to
      be a member of a particular organisation which is persecuted,  if  the
      Adjudicator finds as a matter of fact, on the  evidence  that  he  has
      heard, that  the  applicant  is  clearly  not  a  member  of  such  an
      organisation, it is not necessary to explore in detail the extent  and
      circumstances to which members of such  an  organisation  are  or  not
      persecuted."

9.    The court went on to observe that it was also clear  that  great  care
      must be taken before making adverse findings of credibility in  asylum
      cases and that they should only be made when they are justified in the
      light of the circumstances of the particular case under consideration.



10.   This was a case in which the Adjudicator  had  to  make  his  judgment
      about the truthfulness  of  the  appellant's  account.    He  had  the
      advantage of hearing and seeing the  appellant  give  evidence  before
      him.

11.   We do not find that the Adjudicator's  reference  to  the  appellant's
      witness statement  dated  20  February  2003  making  "comic  reading"
      indicates that he did not  give  the  appellant's  claim  the  anxious
      scrutiny required or that he had pre-conceived motions about it.

12.   We do not accept that the Adjudicator overlooked the letter  from  the
      Zimbabwe Association.   Miss Shaw was unable  to  tell  us  what  this
      association was.   The writer of the letter expressed  the  view  that
      the appellant's  account  about  the  rocks  and  the  crocodiles  was
      perfectly credible.  The appellant's family were truthful  people  and
      practising Christians.   Just because the events described  seemed  so
      unbelievable this did not mean that the appellant  was  lying.     The
      writer of the letter  took  the  view  that  the  account  was  to  be
      believed.

13.   The Adjudicator had the  task  of  determining  credibility.    As  he
      states in paragraph 42 of the  determination  it  was  agreed  by  the
      representatives before him that  the  issue  in  the  appeal  was  the
      appellant's credibility.   He had properly  directed  himself,  as  we
      have observed, on the burden and standard of proof and  he  had  heard
      the appellant's evidence.  He took the view  that  the  appellant  was
      making up his story as the case progressed and that he  had  given  an
      entirely untruthful account.  We are  not  satisfied  that  a  lengthy
      recitation of the background material was necessary or appropriate  in
      this case.   The Adjudicator states, and we have no reason  to  doubt,
      that he had taken all the evidence before him into account.    It  was
      not necessary for him to spell out that evidence or to make a specific
      reference  to  any  particular  part  of   it.     The   Adjudicator's
      determination is  sufficiently  reasoned  and  we  find  no  flaws  or
      misdirections in it.   The Adjudicator determined that  the  appellant
      would not be at risk as a failed asylum seeker on  return  having  not
      made out any aspect of his case before the Adjudicator.  We  have  not
      been referred to any material that would indicate that simply being  a
      failed asylum seeker would expose  a  returnee  to  risk  of  harm  or
      persecution.

14.   For the reasons we have  given,  the  Adjudicator's  determination  is
      affirmed and this appeal is dismissed.

                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President






