
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |            |                                            |
|                  |            |CC (Roma - Return - Minor) CG [2003] UKIAT  |
|                  |            |00212                                       |

|Heard at:         |Field House           |Decision number:|[2003] UKIAT      |
|Heard on:         |15th December 2003    |Appeal number:  |CC / 00321 / 2003 |
|Date typed:       |18th December 2003                                       |
|Date promulgated: | 16th March 2004                                         |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|MS D K GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                      |
|MR. A. JEVANJEE                                                             |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |


|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. N.  Atreya,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by   Arona
                          Sarwar & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Mr. A. Sheikh, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                          Officer.

1.1   The Appellant is a national of Romania, born on  24th  November  1986.
     He arrived in the United Kingdom as  an  unaccompanied  minor  on  15th
     September 2002. At the date of the hearing before the Adjudicator (Mrs.
     V. Woolf) on 26th March 2003, he was 16 years old. At the date  of  the
     hearing before the Tribunal, he was 17 years old. He appeals with leave
     against the determination of the Adjudicator dismissing his  appeal  on
     asylum and human rights grounds against the  Respondent's  decision  of
     6th November 2002 to give directions for his removal to Romania  as  an
     illegal entrant.

1.2   The Appellant's asylum and human rights claims were certified.   These
     were withdrawn at the hearing before the Adjudicator.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted on human  rights  grounds  only,  and
     refused on asylum grounds. However, our comments in relation to (a) and
     (b) in paragraph 3 below are equally relevant  in  appeals  brought  on
     asylum grounds.

3.    This decision is being reported because:

      (a)   we consider the approach to be taken in a  human  rights  appeal
           where the Secretary of State declines to grant exceptional leave
           to  remain  to  an  unaccompanied  minor  but   undertakes   (in
           accordance with his published policy) not to  remove  the  minor
           until he has made adequate arrangements for  the  reception  and
           care of the minor (see paragraphs 18.1 and 18.2 below);

      (b)   we consider whether  the  objective  evidence  relating  to  the
           system of care in Romania for minor orphans is such  that  those
           of Roma ethnic origin are reasonably likely to face treatment in
           breach of their Article 3 rights (see paragraphs 28.2  and  28.3
           below). We also consider whether the conditions  are  such  that
           Roma orphans are reasonably likely to be forced to become street
           children (see paragraphs 29.1 to 29.3 below); and

      (c)   we consider whether family life  has  been  established  in  the
           United  Kingdom  between  the  Appellant  and  his  carer   (see
           paragraphs 38 to 46 below).

4.    Given the  terms of the grounds of application, the issues  before  us
     are:

      (a)   Whether the Adjudicator's assessment of credibility is safe  and
           whether she had applied the correct standard of proof.

      (b)   Whether the Appellant's removal to Romania would  be  in  breach
           of his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

             Before  the  Adjudicator,  an  undertaking  was  given  on  the
           Secretary of State's behalf that the Secretary  of  State  would
           not return the Appellant unless there were adequate arrangements
           for the reception of a  minor in Romania. Before us, Mr.  Sheikh
           reiterated the undertaking that, if  the  Appellant  is  removed
           whilst still under 18 years of age, the Secretary of State would
           only remove him if adequate care arrangements are in place.  The
           Appellant asserts that he would not be able to access the system
           of care in Romania and that, in any event, he would  be  exposed
           to treatment amounting to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
           punishment in Romania.  Whilst in  Romania,  the  Appellant  had
           lived in orphanages since the age of 3 years. He claims to  have
           been verbally abused, sexually assaulted  and  beaten  by  other
           boys. He is a Roma by  ethnic  origin.  Roma  children  in  care
           experience ill-treatment.

      (c)   Whether the Adjudicator's decision on the Article  8  (right  to
           family life) claim is sustainable.

            The family life claim is based on the  Appellant's  relationship
           with his carer (Mrs. Ene) in the United Kingdom. He had had some
           contact whilst in Romania with Mrs. Ene. The London  Borough  of
           Brent (LBB) have allowed her to care for him, although they have
           not formally appointed her as a carer. She herself is a Romanian
           national, of Roma ethnic origin. Her asylum appeal  was  allowed
           by an Adjudicator in May 2002. The Secretary of  State  has  not
           appealed against that determination. Although she has  not  been
           formally granted any immigration status, she would not  be  able
           to return to Romania. The Appellant's relationship with  her  is
           the only "family tie" he has ever known in his life.

      (d)   Whether the Adjudicator  adequately  considered  (or  failed  to
           consider) the Appellant's right to private life.

5.    The Determination: The Adjudicator stated (at paragraph 51)  that  she
     accepted the core of the Appellant's claim and his  life  history.  She
     stated that the only issues which arose in relation to the  Appellant's
     credibility concerned the periphery of his  account.  She  found  "most
     implausible" his explanation of his  ability  to  use  a  coin-operated
     telephone system in the United Kingdom  to  contact  Mrs.  Ene  on  the
     telephone number she had given him in a Christmas  card  she  had  sent
     him. The Adjudicator did not believe that, simply by  stating  that  he
     was near a cinema and describing his  locality  but  without  giving  a
     specific name, the Appellant would have been able to indicate  to  Mrs.
     Ene where  she  needed  to  meet  him.  She  noted  that  there  was  a
     discrepancy between the evidence of Mrs. Ene and the  Appellant  as  to
     when the Christmas card with Mrs. Ene's telephone number had been sent.
     At paragraph 53, the Adjudicator stated:

            In all I found that neither  Ms.  Ene  nor  the  Appellant  were
           being truthful about how the  arrangements  were  made  for  the
           Appellant's reception in the United Kingdom.  I  do  not  accept
           that Ms. Ene was unaware that the Appellant was coming  when  he
           telephoned her.

6.    Although this was an aspect of  the  evidence  which  the  Adjudicator
     stated remains "very much on the periphery", she considered that it  is
     a matter which "may have some significance" for his human rights claim,
     as she found that it is a matter which is intrinsically linked  to  the
     Appellant's claims about his circumstances - i.e. that his only  family
     tie is to Mrs. Ene and her husband. The  Adjudicator  did  not  believe
     Mrs. Ene's evidence about the extent of the contact she  had  had  with
     the Appellant in Romania and her explanation  that  she  had  not  been
     allowed to adopt him or look after him in Romania on account of her own
     ethnic origin as a gypsy and that that was the reason why she  had  not
     taken him out of the orphanage. She considered that there  was  nothing
     to indicate that the authorities in Romania differentiate solely on the
     grounds of race whether one is a suitable carer or not.  At  paragraphs
     56 and 57 of the Determination, she stated:

       56.    ........  I  find  Ms.  Ene's  account   of   her   continuing
           relationship with  the  Appellant  throughout  his  minority  in
           Romania to be lacking in credibility, as I am unable  to  accept
           that there was any such impediment. I find that neither Ms.  Ene
           nor the Appellant have been truthful about the duration of their
           relationship, its nature or exactly how his entry to the  United
           Kingdom was secured.

      57.   In summary, I accept that the Appellant has  been  looked  after
           in orphanages in  Romania.  I  do  not  find  that  he  has  the
           relationship with Ms. Ene that both he and she have set  out  in
           their respective witness statements. Both the Appellant and this
           witness have  attempted  to  obscure  the  truth  regarding  the
           arrangements which were made for the Appellant's journey to  the
           United Kingdom.

7.    With regard to the Article 3 claim, a report of a Ms.  Carmina  Drace-
     Francis had  been  adduced.  The  Adjudicator  considered  the  general
     background documents as well as the report  of  Ms.  Drace-Francis,  at
     paragraphs 43 to 49 of the Determination. At paragraph 43,  she  stated
     that Ms. Drace-Francis "demonstrated her expertise by the  very  nature
     and content of the report, which shows she has consulted a  wide  range
     of recent materials, and she demonstrates  a  considerable  knowledge".
     However, at paragraph 58, she rejected what she considered  to  be  the
     main thrust of Ms. Drace-Francis's report - namely, that  the  Romanian
     government has merely paid lip service to dealing with the Roma  issue.
     The Adjudicator considered that the background documents indicate that,
     as a boy of 16 years,  the  Appellant  would  not  be  returned  to  an
     orphanage but that, even if it was feared that he would be returned  to
     an institution, there had been major improvements  in  the  welfare  of
     children in such institutions and that, although not ideal, they  could
     not be described as degrading or inhuman.  She  considered  that  there
     were sufficient channels for redress for any  discriminatory  treatment
     and that there was no reasonable likelihood that the treatment which he
     had experienced in the past would be repeated now that he  has  reached
     16 years. She found that  his  removal  would  not  engage  the  United
     Kingdom's obligation under the Refugee Convention or be in   breach  of
     his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

8.    With regard to  the  Article  8  claim,  the  Adjudicator  stated,  at
     paragraphs 63 and 64:

      63.   ....... I have considered the fact that the Appellant  has  been
           cared for in the United Kingdom by Ms. Ene and her husband.  Ms.
           Ene stated that they were considering adoption  proceedings.  On
           my findings of  fact, the Appellant and Ms. Ene have  been  less
           than candid about the true nature of their relationship and  the
           involvement  of  Ms.  Ene  and/or  others  in  the   making   of
           arrangements for the Appellant's entry to the United Kingdom.  I
           have only been satisfied to  the  requisite  standard  that  the
           Appellant has been looked after by Ms. Ene since his arrival  in
           the United Kingdom since September  2002.  Thus,  it  is  not  a
           relationship of any great length. Since  neither  the  Appellant
           nor Ms. Ene has told the truth about their  relationship,  I  am
           unable to make any reliable assessment as to its true nature.

      64.   However, the fact that the Appellant  would  be  separated  from
           someone  who  has  taken  responsibility  for  his  care   since
           September 2002 does amount to an interference with  his  private
           and family life. The Appellant is 16 years of age and his  claim
           shows that the authorities in Romania responsible for  his  care
           have  acted  perfectly  properly  up  until  prevented,  by  his
           departure, from seeking a suitable family  or  other  placement.
           There is no reason to believe that they would not also undertake
           these duties properly and sufficiently were he  to  be  returned
           during his minority. When these factors  are  weighed  with  the
           Respondent's desire to maintain proper immigration  controls,  I
           find  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  proportionate.  The
           Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and there were no
           formal arrangements preliminary to any proposed adoption by  Ms.
           Ene and her husband. Although the London Borough of Brent may be
           satisfied that he is being cared for appropriately  by  Ms.  Ene
           and her husband presently, that is far from establishing that it
           is an appropriate long-term placement or that Ms.  Ene  and  her
           husband are suitable as adoptive parents.

            (our emphasis)

      Oral submissions before the Tribunal:

9.    Although we did not hear oral evidence, we  acceded  to  Ms.  Atreya's
     request for the hearing to be held in camera. Ms.  Atreya  informed  us
     that the Appellant is quite distressed and has lost quite a lot of hair
     on account of his distress. Our observation of the  Appellant's  visual
     appearance is that he does appear to have lost a lot of hair.

10.   Mr. Sheikh informed  us  that,  before  effecting  removal,  the  Home
     Office would check with the appropriate Embassy and social services and
     satisfy itself that adequate arrangements are in place  in  this  case.
     The Secretary of State  normally  only  makes  care  arrangements  when
     removal is imminent. It would be pointless for the Secretary  of  State
     to take such steps now, because the Appellant has a pending appeal.

11.   Mr. Sheikh sought to rely on a telex dated 5th  March  2002  from  "FM
     Bucharest" to "Immigration Croydon" with the  heading:  "Re-integration
     of asylum-seeking children". Ms. Atreya informed us that she  would  be
     in difficulty if we received the document in evidence because  she  had
     not had prior notice of the document. We  assured  Ms  Atreya  that  we
     received a copy of this document only so  that  we  could  record  what
     document Mr. Sheikh sought to rely on. We consider that, given the late
     production of the document and the difficulty  which  that  places  Ms.
     Atreya, it is not appropriate for us to consider the  contents  of  the
     document.

12.1  Ms. Atreya informed us that Ms. Ene still has  not  been  granted  any
     form of leave by the Secretary of State. Mr. Sheikh confirmed that  the
     Secretary of State has not lodged any  application  for  permission  to
     appeal against the  determination  of  the   Adjudicator  allowing  her
     asylum appeal. He did not know why status had not been granted  to  Ms.
     Ene but could only suppose that this was due to the backlog.

12.2  Ms. Atreya informed us that she did not accept the  undertaking  given
     on the Secretary of State's behalf that the  Appellant  would  only  be
     removed when adequate care arrangements have been made. Given that  the
     Tribunal would need to decide the human rights claims as at the date of
     hearing, then (in Ms. Atreya's submission) it was relevant to take into
     account that there  was  no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  any
     appropriate arrangements have been made for  the  Appellant's  care  in
     Romania. She confirmed that she did not seek to suggest that  the  care
     arrangements provided by the Romanian authorities for  all  Roma  minor
     orphans amount to inhuman or degrading treatment. She was at  pains  to
     point out  that  she  had  only  been  instructed  to  argue  for  this
     Appellant;  that,  given  this  Appellant's  past  experiences  in  the
     orphanage (which  had  been  accepted  by  the  Adjudicator  and  which
     included sexual abuse), the care arrangements which he would be able to
     access in Romania would expose him to inhuman or degrading treatment.

12.4  The Adjudicator accepted that orphans in Romania  live  in  orphanages
     until the age of 16 years and that there is a move away from orphanages
     in Romania. The Adjudicator's view was that, on his return to  Romania,
     the Appellant would not be returned to an orphanage (see  paragraph  58
     of the Adjudicator's Determination) but  she  did  not  say  where  the
     Appellant would be sent to. At paragraph 58, she stated that,  even  if
     it is  feared  that  he  would  be  returned  to  an  institution,  the
     background  materials  demonstrate   that   there   have   been   major
     improvements in the  welfare  of  children  in  such  institutions.  It
     appears, from paragraph 49 of the Adjudicator's Determination that  the
     Adjudicator considered that, if the Appellant is  not  returned  to  an
     orphanage, then he would be sent to a professional foster parent or  he
     would be  placed  within  a  "range  of  alternative  child  protection
     services". In Ms. Atreya's submission, the Adjudicator  had  failed  to
     take into account the expert's evidence that there are few  chances  of
     the Appellant being adopted even by another Roma family and that return
     to an orphanage would mean a return  to  on-going  exposure  to  racism
     (page 6 of the  Appellant's  bundle  A  refers).  Although  the  expert
     accepted that  there  is  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Romanian
     authorities to change and improve  the  system,  she  stated  that  the
     transition to the new system of child protection can be  difficult  and
     with few chances of immediate success.  Paragraphs 6.90 and 6.92 of the
     CIPU report dated October 2003 shows that  orphanages  in  Romania  are
     generally decreasing in number. In Ms. Atreya's submission, there is  a
     real risk, based on the expert's report, that the Appellant  will  fall
     through the net - that is, that he will not be adopted or  be  able  to
     access the new system of child protection in Romania.

12.5  Pages 20 and 21 of the Appellant's bundle B show  that  Roma  children
     in Romania suffer discrimination in terms  (inter  alia)  of  economic,
     social, cultural, civil and political rights.  Paragraph  6.83  of  the
     CIPU report  refers  to  the  sexual  exploitation  of  children  which
     continued  to  attract  press  attention  in  2001.  In  Ms.   Atreya's
     submission, this is important in this case, because the  Appellant  has
     suffered sexual abuse previously.  We were referred to pages 37  to  55
     of the Appellant's bundle B. Roma continued to be targeted  by  members
     of society and also by the state security forces. According to the USSD
     Report dated 31st March 2003, there are significant numbers  of  street
     children living in the capital because a  significant  percentage  have
     left the large institutions  with  no  skills  and  employment  and  no
     ability to earn a living and obtain housing.  There  is  no  systematic
     provision  of  labour  market  information,  skills  training  or   job
     placement services  for  these  young  persons  and  there  is  a  high
     probability that they would  gravitate  to  the  streets,  engaging  in
     prostitution or trafficking.

12.6  For the above reasons,  Ms.  Atreya  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
     removal to Romania would be in breach of his rights under Article 3  of
     the ECHR.

12.7  With regard to the Article 8  claim,  we  asked  to  be  addressed  on
     whether it can be said that the Adjudicator had found that family  life
     had been established.  Ms. Atreya submitted that  it  can  be  inferred
     from  paragraph  64  of  the  Adjudicator's  Determination   that   the
     Adjudicator had found that family life had been established. If we were
     to disagree, then she submitted that the Tribunal would have  to  remit
     the appeal on Article 8 grounds or hear oral  evidence  on  the  issue.
     Although at paragraph 63 of the Determination, the  Adjudicator  stated
     that neither the Appellant nor Ms. Ene had told the truth  about  their
     relationship, the Adjudicator had failed  to  give  the  Appellant  the
     benefit of the doubt when assessing his evidence  about  the  Christmas
     card. The fact that the Adjudicator stated that this was a  credibility
     issue which was at the periphery of his account is inconsistent with  a
     finding that he is not to be believed about his relationship  with  Ms.
     Ene. Even on the Adjudicator's findings, there was some contact between
     the Appellant and Ms. Ene in Romania. In Ms.  Atreya's  submission,  it
     would be extraordinary if there was found to be no family life  on  the
     evidence before the Adjudicator.

12.8  Accordingly, Ms.  Atreya  submitted  that  the  issue  before  us  was
     whether the interference with the Appellant's family life with Ms.  Ene
     is  proportionate.  In  Ms.  Atreya's  submission,  removal  would   be
     disproportionate because:

      (a)   Ms. Ene should  be  regarded  by  the  Tribunal  as  a  refugee.
           Accordingly, it is not reasonable to expect  her  to  return  to
           Romania to enjoy family life with the Appellant.

      (b)   the Appellant would not be able to obtain entry  clearance  from
           Romania in order to visit Ms. Ene. Once he is over 18  years  of
           age, he cannot be  adopted.  His  prospects  of  securing  entry
           clearance to return to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor,  given
           that he would be a failed asylum seeker, would be remote.

      (c)   the Appellant's only family life is in the  United  Kingdom.  If
           he is returned to Romania, he would be placed into care.

12.9  If Ms. Ene had been granted indefinite leave to remain, then there  is
     a possibility that an application could be made outside the Immigration
     Rules for the Appellant to be granted  leave  to  remain  for  adoption
     proceedings to take place.  If  the  Appellant  is  removed,  then  the
     situation in Romania is that there is  a  moratorium  on  inter-country
     adoptions in Romania, as paragraph 6.89 of the CIPU Report states.

13.1   Mr.  Sheikh  asked  us  to  uphold  the   Adjudicator's   credibility
     assessment, which he submitted could not be ignored when assessing  the
     Article 8 claim. He submitted that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  made  a
     finding that family life had been established, although it is true that
     he had found that there was a family life "of a sort".  In  any  event,
     Mr. Sheikh submitted that removal was proportionate. The  Adjudicator's
     credibility  assessment  could  not   be   ignored   when   considering
     proportionality. The  short  duration  and  precarious  nature  of  the
     relationship between Mrs. Ene and the Appellant was also  relevant,  as
     was the fact that no formal arrangements preliminary  to  any  proposed
     adoption by Mrs. Ene and her husband had been made.

13.2  With regard to the Article 3 claim, he submitted that the  Adjudicator
     was correct to reject the main thrust  of  the  report  of  Ms.  Drace-
     Francis that the Romanian authorities had only paid lip service to  the
     Roma issue. He submitted that the objective  evidence  shows  that,  if
     returned to Romania, the Appellant would not be  exposed  to  treatment
     amounting to a breach of Article  3.  There  are  orphanages  for  Roma
     children, schools and housing. In Mr. Sheikh's submission, the issue is
     not whether the housing or  schooling  provided  to  Roma  children  in
     Romania is of inferior quality to that provided to  non-Roma  children.
     The issue is whether what is provided to Roma children is of  such  low
     quality that it is to be regarded as inhuman or degrading treatment. If
     paragraph 58 of the Adjudicator's Determination is read in  conjunction
     with paragraph 49, it is clear that the Adjudicator considered that the
     Appellant would not be sent to an institution or an orphanage. We  were
     referred to paragraphs 6.81 to 6.89 and to paragraphs 6.109 to 6.130 of
     the CIPU Report. In Mr. Sheikh's submission, it is not true to say that
     the level of care provided is such that a child would be forced  to  go
     on the street. The documents at pages 25   to  36  of  the  Appellant's
     bundle B were largely irrelevant. For  example,  the  fact  that  these
     evidence complaints made by Roma parents that their children  had  been
     put up for adoption  without  their  knowledge.  In  any  event,  these
     documents show  that  the  child  protection  agency  has  a  "hands-on
     approach" to protecting Roma children.

14.1  In reply, Ms. Atreya informed us that there was  no  evidence  of  any
     formal arrangements preliminary to adoption  proceedings,  because  Ms.
     Ene is not able to take any steps  in  this  connection  until  she  is
     granted indefinite leave to remain.  Although  Ms.  Ene  has  not  been
     legally designated as a carer, she is in effect his carer.

14.2  The Adjudicator had not taken into account  the  Appellant's  evidence
     that he had had contact with Ms. Ene since he was a minor. If  she  had
     evaluated his evidence, she would have accepted  that  there  was  some
     form of contact. The Adjudicator did not deal with the fact that, as  a
     refugee, Ms. Ene could not be expected to return to  Romania  to  enjoy
     family life with the Appellant. Accordingly, her consideration  of  the
     proportionality issue was flawed.

14.3  Ms. Atreya asked us to consider the fact  that  the  Home  Office  has
     provided no evidence of any care arrangements being in  place  for  the
     Appellant against the fact that he has established his family  life  in
     the United Kingdom. She accepted that she could not go so far as to say
     that any Roma child orphan in Romania is at real risk of Article 3 ill-
     treatment. However, based on what the expert has  said,  she  submitted
     that this particular Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  access  child
     protection.  The USSD Report (page  48  of  the  Appellant's  Index  B)
     refers  to  the  number  of  street  children  who  have   left   large
     institutions.  Ms.  Atreya  asked  to  note  the  reference  to  "large
     institutions", and not orphanages.

14.4  Ms. Atreya asked us to allow the Article 3 and 8 claims. In the  event
     we dismissed the appeal, she asked to make a  recommendation  that  the
     Appellant be granted exceptional leave to remain until he  reaches  the
     age of majority, on the ground that his account of his  experiences  in
     Romania was believed by the Adjudicator. She also asked us to make  any
     statements we are able to make about the removal arrangements.

15.   We reserved our determination.

16.   We have decided to dismiss the appeal. We now give our reasons.

17.1  We deal with the issues before us in the following sequence:

      (a)   The Article 3 claim.
      (b)   The Article 8 (right to family life) claim.
      (c)   The Article 8 (right to private life) claim.

17.2  In our  view,  the  issue  taken  with  regard  to  the  Adjudicator's
     assessment of the credibility of the evidence  before  her  as  to  the
     nature, extent and duration of the contact between  the  Appellant  and
     Ms. Ene before the  Appellant's  arrival  in  United  Kingdom  is  only
     relevant in relation to the Article 8 claim.

      The Article 3 claim:

(i)   The Secretary of State's undertaking:

18.1  Ms. Atreya informed us that she did not accept the  undertaking  given
     on the Secretary of State's  behalf  that  adequate  care  arrangements
     would be made for the Appellant if he is removed to Romania during  his
     minority.  She  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  (and  therefore  the
     Tribunal) had to determine the appeal before us. That evidence includes
     the fact that adequate care arrangements had not been made. The  thrust
     of her argument before us was that, when the fact  that  adequate  care
     arrangements have not been made by the Secretary of State is considered
     alongside the objective  evidence  as  to  the  care  which  would  the
     Appellant would receive in Romania (having regard, inter alia,  to  the
     expert's report) and his past experiences in a Romanian orphanage, then
     we should find  that  his  removal  to  Romania  would  expose  him  to
     treatment amounting to inhuman or degrading  treatment.  On  the  other
     hand, Mr. Sheikh submitted that the Secretary of  State  normally  only
     makes care arrangements when removal is imminent and that it  would  be
     pointless for the Secretary of State to make any care arrangements  now
     because the Appellant has an appeal pending.  The Secretary of  State's
     position is that detailed care arrangements would only be made  if  the
     Appellant loses his appeal. In Mr. Sheikh's submission, the  system  of
     care for Roma orphan minors in Romania is not such that it can be  said
     that the Appellant would be exposed to inhuman or degrading treatment.

18.2  We are of the  opinion  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  undertaking
     relates to the practicalities of removal, whereas the Adjudicator  (and
     the Tribunal) are concerned with the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  to
     remove. If the Appellant's removal to Romania is reasonably  to  be  in
     breach of his protected rights under the ECHR, then  his  appeal  would
     succeed and the Secretary of State would not seek to remove him. On the
     other hand, if his removal to Romania is not reasonably likely to be in
     breach of his protected rights under the ECHR, then  his  appeal  would
     fail. If that happens, we are entitled to assume that the Secretary  of
     State will follow his published policy  in  relation  to  unaccompanied
     minors and only remove the Appellant when he has put in place  adequate
     reception and care arrangements in Romania  -  see  the  Home  Office's
     "Information Note"  on  "Unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children",  in
     particular paragraph 8.3 on page 8 of the Appellant's bundle B, and the
     wording of DP/4/96 at page 1 of the Appellant's bundle B.  There  would
     therefore be no question of the Appellant not being able to access  the
     system of care in Romania. If and when detailed  arrangements  for  the
     Appellant's care in Romania are made by the Secretary of State,  it  is
     considered that such arrangements are not adequate  in  his  particular
     case  or  otherwise  do  not  comply  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
     undertaking, then the Appellant may  well  have  some  judicial  remedy
     elsewhere. However, that is not for us to say and does not concern us.

(ii)  The system of care to which the Appellant  would  be  returned  to  in
     Romania:

19.   It is relevant to bear in mind, in determining the  Article  3  claim,
     the fact that the Adjudicator accepted  the  core  of  the  Appellant's
     accounts as to his experiences in care in Romania. Ms. Atreya submitted
     that the Appellant's evidence was that he  had  been  verbally  abused,
     sexually assaulted and beaten by other boys whilst  at  the  orphanage.
     According to paragraph 6 of the Appellant's witness statement dated 2nd
     October 2002 (page 3 of the Appellant's bundle A), there were "attempts
     to sexually use him a few times".

20.1  In the Adjudicator's view, the main thrust of the report of Ms. Drace-
     Francis was  that  Ms.  Drace-Francis  was  saying  that  the  Romanian
     authorities have only paid lip service to the Roma  issue.  Given  that
     the Adjudicator rejected what she saw as the main thrust of Ms.  Drace-
     Francis' report, it is illogical for her to have said that  the  expert
     has demonstrated her expertise. In  these  circumstances,  we  consider
     that she ought to have explained in greater detail why  she  considered
     that Ms. Drace-Francis had demonstrated her expertise in her report. We
     agree with  Ms. Atreya that the  Adjudicator  did  not  deal  with  the
     opinion of Ms. Drace-Francis that the Appellant "would have few chances
     of being adopted even by another Roma family and that returning  to  an
     orphanage would mean a return to ongoing exposure to  racism  and  that
     the transition of  child  protection  can  prove  difficulty  with  few
     chances of immediate success". Furthermore, the Adjudicator  stated  at
     paragraph 58 of the Determination  that  the  Appellant  would  not  be
     returned to an orphanage but she  did  not  state  what  the  objective
     evidence indicates the Appellant would be returned to. This has  to  be
     inferred by reading the last sentence of paragraph 49.

20.2   We  therefore  set  aside  the  Adjudicator's  consideration  of  the
     objective evidence and determine it ourselves. This, of  course,  means
     that we are not bound by the Adjudicator's consideration of the  report
     of Ms. Drace-Francis.

21.   With regard to the situation of Roma in Romania generally, we  believe
     that it is generally accepted that, whilst Roma  experience  widespread
     discrimination in Romania, they do not, in  general  terms,  experience
     treatment which is sufficiently severe as to amount to  persecution  or
     inhuman or degrading treatment - see, for example, the  UNHCR's  advice
     of October 2000, mentioned at paragraph 6.111 of the CIPU report  dated
     October 2003, and also paragraph 6.112 of the same report. That  advice
     relates to  the  general  situation  for  Romas  and  does  not  relate
     specifically to the situation of Roma children in care in Romania.  Our
     opinion that, in general, people  of  Roma  ethnic  origin  in  Romania
     experience discrimination  but  not  treatment  which  is  sufficiently
     severe as to amount to persecution or inhuman or degrading treatment is
     also  supported  by  the   section   entitled   "National/Racial/Ethnic
     Minorities" in section 5 of the USSD report, on pages 49 to 50  of  the
     Appellant's bundle B.

22.   Ms. Atreya relied heavily on the documents at paragraphs 20 to  36  of
     the Appellant's bundle B.  Our  comments  on  these  documents  are  as
     follows:

      (a)   pages 20 and 21: This document, issued by  ERRC  (European  Roma
         Rights Centre)  in August 2003, sets out some  of  the  concluding
         observations of the United Nations' Committee on the Rights of the
         Child in its review on Romania. The UN  Committee  refers  to  the
         discrimination of children belonging to  the  Roma  community.  It
         states that the  principle  of  non-discrimination  is  not  fully
         implemented for all children in all parts of the State  party  and
         that unequal enjoyment of economic, social,  cultural,  civil  and
         political rights persists for, inter  alia,  children  between  16
         years and 18 years, children belonging to Roma or  other  minority
         groups and children living  on  the  streets.  Whilst  noting  the
         observations  of  the  UN  committee,  this  document   does   not
         materially assist us in determining what type of care  arrangement
         the Appellant is reasonably likely to be returned  to  or  whether
         such would be in breach of his  rights  under  Article  3,  beyond
         making us aware,  in  general  terms,  that  he  would  experience
         discrimination as a Roma child.

      (b)   pages 22 to 24:       This is another document, issued  by  ERRC
         dated October 2003, which refers to the shooting of two Romani men
         by police in civilian clothes who reportedly caught the men in the
         act of breaking into a car. The ERRC claims to  have  uncovered  a
         different version of events. We are aware  that  there  have  been
         credible reports of police harassment of Roma  people  in  Romania
         (paragraph 6.112 of the CIPU Report dated October 2003)  and  that
         police officers have reportedly harassed and used excessive  force
         against the Roma (the USSD Report dated 31st March 2003,  see  the
         fourth paragraph on page 37 of the Appellant's bundle B). However,
         it cannot be said that the  attitude  of  the  police  in  Romania
         generally towards people of Roma ethnic origin is such  that  they
         in general terms pursue a campaign of persecution  against  people
         of Roma ethnicity or that there is a general denial of sufficiency
         of protection to people of  Roma  ethnicity.   Such  a  contention
         would run counter to the documents referred  to  in  paragraph  21
         above.

      (c)   pages 25 to 35:       This is another  document  issued  by  the
         ERRC dated May 2003. It refers  to  a  ten-day  field  mission  to
         Romania undertaken by the ERRC in October 2002. The report  states
         that, during the course of the ten days, the ERRC did not enter  a
         single Romani community which was not affected by a number or  all
         of the concerns which the report then goes  on  to  describe.  The
         report goes on to mention:

            (i)  instances of  Romani  children  in  state  institutions  in
                 Romania who were being put  up  for  adoption  without  the
                 knowledge or consent of their parents or being  arbitrarily
                 kept separated from their parents.

                 We do not see the relevance of this  issue  in  this  case,
                 since the Appellant has not seen his mother for many years,
                 and her  whereabouts  are  not  known.  The  issue  in  the
                 Appellant's case is that he would not  be  adopted,  rather
                 than that he would be adopted without the  consent  of  his
                 mother being properly obtained.

            (ii) that there is a disproportionately high  number  of  Romani
                 children  in  state   institutions,   compared   with   the
                 percentage of Romani people.

                 Again, we do not see the relevance of this issue, since  it
                 appears that the  reason  for  the  over-representation  of
                 Romani children in state institutions  is  because  of  the
                 actual  or  perceived  inability  of   their   parents   to
                 adequately care for them.

            (iii)      that the living standards of  Romani  settlements  in
                 Romania  is  poor.  Reference  is  made  to  the  lack   of
                 electricity,  heating  and  water,  overcrowding,  separate
                 entrances for Romani people and  for  other  Romanians  who
                 share the same block and inadequate accommodation  provided
                 to those Romani people who are forcibly evicted.

                 This is supported by paragraphs  6.122  and  6.123  of  the
                 CIPU Report dated October 2003.

                 However, we cannot see the relevance  of  these  issues  to
                 this case,  since  it  is  not  being  suggested  that  the
                 Appellant would be returned to  a  Romani  settlement.  The
                 Secretary of State has undertaken that the Appellant  would
                 only be removed if adequate care arrangements are in place.
                 The focus of our enquiry should therefore be the child care
                 system in Romania, and  not  the  situation  pertaining  in
                 Romani settlements.

            (iv) that there is discrimination against Romani people  in  the
                 allocation of social aid.

            (v)  that, in many communities in Romania, the ERRC  found  that
                 Romani children were educated in segregated schools  within
                 their communities, with  substandard  facilities  and  were
                 provided with inferior education.

                 Whilst  we  accept  that  (iv)  and  (v)  are  evidence  of
                 discrimination against Romani  people  (and  this  is  also
                 referred to in paragraph 6.112 of  the  CIPU  report  dated
                 October 2003), we are not persuaded that any discrimination
                 against the Appellant in terms of (iv) and (v) would be  of
                 such severity as to reach the threshold  for  a  breach  of
                 Article 3.

23.1  We now turn to the report of Ms. Drace-Francis, which is  at  pages  6
     to 12 of the Appellant's bundle A. Firstly, we are given no information
     about the curriculum vitae of Ms. Drace-Francis, other  than  that  the
     heading on page 6 of the Appellant's bundle A indicates that she has MA
     and MPhil qualifications. We are not told what experience or  expertise
     she  has on the subject of the situation of Roma in  Romania  generally
     or, more importantly (since this is the issue in  this  case),  on  the
     subject of  the  situation  which  Roma  children  living  in  care  in
     institutions in Romania face.

23.2  Secondly, we note that the second paragraph of  the  section  entitled
     "General Introduction" states:

            "One could say that there is hardly any sincere interest  coming
         from  the  [Romanian]  authorities  in  order  to  deal  with  the
         problematic situation of the Roma in Romania. The latest  attempts
         may look very convincing on the surface: the National Strategy for
         the Improvement of the Situation of the Roma (adopted in 2001) was
         conceived with the help  of  PHARE  funds  and  foreign  know-how.
         However, as shown below, the Strategy has been already  considered
         (by European and Romanian organisations) as a flawed  and  largely
         rhetorical document. The  government's  attempts  to  improve  the
         situation  of  the  Roma  could   therefore   be   considered   as
         superficial".

      Ms. Drace-Francis' opinion that the Romanian government has   made  no
     sincere efforts to improve the situation of Roma people in  Romania  is
     astonishing, since it is not mirrored in the reports  of  international
     bodies who are known to be impartial and objective - for  example,  the
     last sentence of paragraph 6.112 of the CIPU report states:

            ..... the European Commission  considered  that  the  [Romanian]
         Government  has  made  steady  progress  in  implementing   2001's
         National Strategy for Improving the Condition of Roma ....."

      According  to  footnote  [3],  this  is  attributed  to  the  European
     Commission's Accession Report of October 2002.

      and, further, paragraph 6.118 of the CIPU report states:

             "The  World  Bank  considers  that,  over  the   last   decade,
         significant  efforts  have  been  made  by  government,  political
         parties and non-governmental organisations towards  improving  the
         condition of Roma in Romania...

      According to footnote 39, this  is  attributed  to  the  World  Bank's
     report entitled "Roma in an Expanding Europe 2003".

      It is  inconceivable  that,  if  the  efforts  made  by  the  Romanian
     authorities  were  only  superficial,  bodies  such  as  the   European
     Commission would not say so.

23.3  Since Ms.  Drace-Francis  states,  in  the  second  paragraph  of  the
     "General Introduction", that she shows later in  her  report  that  the
     National Strategy for the Improvement of the Situation of the Roma "has
     been considered (by European and Romanian organisations)  as  a  flawed
     and largely rhetorical document", we turned to the later  part  of  her
     report to see how she demonstrates this. On page 14 of the  Appellant's
     bundle A (page 9 of the report itself) she refers to the  view  of  the
     ERRC - a body which itself has a particular axe to grind.  Furthermore,
     the footnotes numbered 32 and 34 on this page and footnote number 35 on
     the next page show that the  quotes  to  which  they  relate  are  from
     reports published in 2001. That was in  fact  the  year  in  which  the
     National Strategy was adopted. Whilst we acknowledge  and  accept  that
     there are funding problems with the  National  Strategy  (as  paragraph
     6.115 of the CIPU report states), Ms. Drace-Francis  does  not  mention
     the following signs of progress in relation to  the  National  Strategy
     which are referred to in the CIPU report:

      paragraph 6.114: One of the key features of  the  [National]  strategy
     is its decentralised nature. This is an important  consideration  since
     most  of  the  public  institutions  covered  by  the  strategy   (e.g.
     education, police and hospitals) are managed at  the  local  level.  In
     order to implement the strategy local Roma offices, with staff, who are
     themselves Roma, are being set up in each county. According to footnote
     13, this is attributed to the newsletter of the European Union,  issued
     August 2001. Although this is dated August 2001, we quote this in order
     to show the relevance of the next quote, which is:

      paragraph 6.115  Local Roma offices have been set up in  every  county
     and nearly 400 Roma experts have been hired to  carry  out  the  action
     plan for 2001-2004. According to footnote 38,  this  is  attributed  to
     Freedom House report, entitled "Nations in Transit 2003".

      paragraph 6.116  The European Commission noted, in October 2002,  that
     the structures  for  the  implementation  of  the  Roma  Strategy  were
     progressively established. At  the  country  level,  the  Roma  offices
     provided for in the strategy have become operational.  The  Roma  party
     has  been  the  main  interlocutor  when  making  these   appointments.
     According  to  footnote  [3],  this  is  attributed  to  the   European
     Commission's Accession Report of October 2002.

      paragraph 6.117  At the national level,  15  commissioners  have  been
     established in ministries or national agencies for  the  implementation
     of the Roma sector strategies...... In  the  field  of  employment  the
     Ministry  of  Labour  and   Social   Solidarity   has   promoted   Roma
     participation in labour market programmes. In additions [sic],  courts,
     for  the  first  time,  ruled  against  employers  and  newspapers  for
     publishing discriminatory job vacancies.  According  to  footnote  [3],
     this is attributed to the European  Commission's  Accession  Report  of
     October 2002.

23.4  Ms. Drace-Francis may or may not have  expertise  to  comment  on  the
     subject of the situation of the Roma. As we have said, we have not seen
     her curriculum vitae. Whatever her expertise, we can and do say that we
     consider that her sweeping statements about the Romanian government not
     being sincere in its efforts to  address  the  situation  of  the  Roma
     people in Romania and the fact that she has not provided a balanced and
     objective account of  views  about  the  National  Strategy  throw  her
     objectivity and impartiality into question. We do not accept  that  she
     is impartial and objective.

23.5  This means  that  we  view  what  Ms.  Drace-Francis  says  about  the
     situation in  Romanian  children's  institutions  and  orphanages  with
     caution. We would expect to see  any  general  observations  she  makes
     about the system of care which the Appellant  would  return  to  to  be
     substantiated not only with source material but source  material  which
     is recent and from organisations known to be impartial and  to  produce
     objective reports. We found  that  what  she  does  say  on  this  very
     important issue is unclear (see paragraphs 27(a)  and  (b)  below)  and
     that  what  she  does  say  about  this   issue   is   un-sourced   and
     unsubstantiated (see paragraph 27(a) below).

24.   At pages 6 to 10 of the Appellant's bundle A (pages  1  to  5  of  the
     report itself), Ms. Drace-Francis refers to  children  of  Roma  ethnic
     origin experiencing discrimination or degrading treatment from non-Roma
     pupils and teachers. Teachers allegedly  are  guilty  of  placing  Roma
     children at the back of the class and of  using  "occasional"  physical
     abuse against Roma children.  Roma  children  are  "often  exposed"  to
     verbal abuse by non-Roma children  which  goes  uncorrected  by  staff.
     Although this is quoted in a report by the ERRC,  we  are  prepared  to
     accept this as a reasonably true picture of  the  situation  since  the
     picture which this creates of the discrimination  which  Roma  children
     experience in schools in Romania conforms with the general  picture  of
     discrimination against Roma generally which we gain from other  reports
     on the situation of Roma in Romania. However, we stress that  there  is
     nothing contained in Ms. Drace-Francis' report which shows that  it  is
     reasonably likely that the level of  discriminating  treatment  or  the
     level of abuse the Appellant would experience would be such as to reach
     the severity level for a breach of Article 3.

25.   On page 8 of the Appellant's bundle (page 3  of  the  report  itself),
     Ms. Drace-Francis states that another problem  which  institutionalised
     children are widely confronted with is sexual abuse. Reference is  made
     to data presented by Save the Children Organisation, which were  quoted
     in a Romanian newspaper in March  2002.  However,  we  note  that  this
     states that sexual abuse in Romanian orphanages is  perpetrated  either
     by older children or by the staff members themselves. As we have stated
     above, the Appellant said that he  experienced  attempts  "to  use  him
     sexually" "a few times" by a group of boys.  He has  never  claimed  to
     have been sexually abused by the staff. The report of Ms. Drace-Francis
     produced on the Appellant's behalf itself states that the sexual  abuse
     perpetrated by children at the orphanages is perpetrated by  the  older
     children. Accordingly, we are of the view (and we so find) that if,  on
     the Appellant's return to Romania, he is cared for by  an  institution,
     it is not reasonably likely that he would experience sexual  abuse.  As
     he is already 17 years old, he would (on his return to any institution)
     be amongst the older children in the institution. Of course, guarantees
     cannot be given but  we  make  it  clear  that  we  have  assessed  the
     likelihood of  sexual  abuse  on  the  low  standard  of  a  reasonable
     likelihood. Accordingly, whilst we have  noted  that  the  USSD  Report
     dated 31st March 2003 (6th paragraph of Section 5: "Children"  on  page
     48 of the Appellant's bundle B) refers to legal provisions  to  protect
     children from abuse and neglect being inadequate  and  there  being  no
     consistent policy and procedure for reporting child abuse and  neglect,
     we consider that this is  not  relevant.  Furthermore,  this  paragraph
     indicates that this appears to  relate  to  families  who  abuse  their
     children and, in  any  event,  this  paragraph  also  states  that  the
     National Authority for Child Protection  and  Adoption  monitors  abuse
     cases and that a task force was established at the end of  2002  -  co-
     ordinated by the National Authority for Child Protection and Adoption -
     which is developing standards, training, policies  and  procedures  for
     child abuse and neglect. However, as we have said, it is not reasonably
     likely that the Appellant will experience sexual abuse.

26.1  With regard to the  living  conditions  in  orphanages,  the  Romanian
     government is in the process of closing down the large and  dilapidated
     institutions or orphanages under the Ceausescu's era and replacing them
     with the establishment  of  smaller  foster  homes  and  rehabilitation
     centres providing education and specialist care. This is referred to at
     page 7 of the Appellant's bundle  A  (page  2  of  Ms.  Drace-Francis's
     report) and also at paragraph 6.86 of the  CIPU  report  dated  October
     2003 - which refers to the strategy as the 2001-2004 strategy  for  the
     protection of children. This is the "transition" to  which  Ms.  Drace-
     Francis refers. At paragraph 49 of the Determination,  the  Adjudicator
     states that the number of children in orphanages appears to be steadily
     declining - a figure of 50,000 in 2001 has been reduced  to  43,000  in
     2002. The move away from large institutions is said to be paralleled by
     substantial increases in the number of professional foster parents  and
     the range of alternative child protection services.

26.2  We consider the Romanian government's strategy  of  closing  down  the
     large and dilapidated orphanages  of  the  Ceausescu  era  and  instead
     providing care  by  the  establishment  of  smaller  foster  homes  and
     rehabilitation centres as a positive move, rather than a negative  one,
     given that the living conditions in  many  of  the  orphanages  of  the
     Ceausescu era were appalling.

27.   The grounds of application assert that the Adjudicator did not  engage
     with the opinion of the expert as to the situation which would face the
     Appellant on his return to Romania. We have therefore  considered  very
     carefully what Ms. Drace-Francis says about the system  of  care  which
     the Appellant would return  to.  We  find  the  report  disappointingly
     unclear about this. We note:

      (a)   Ms. Drace-Francis' opinion about the transition is that it  "can
         prove difficult and with few chance  of  immediate  success  (even
         when new directors are appointed ...." (page 8 of the  Appellant's
         bundle A, on page 3 of the report  itself).  Firstly,  Ms.  Drace-
         Francis does not indicate what this opinion is based on.  We  have
         already given our reasons above for  treating  Ms.  Drace-Francis'
         unsupported assertions with caution. Secondly, we  note  that  Ms.
         Drace-Francis does not actually say that the Appellant  would  not
         be   given   a   place   in   one   of   these   smaller    foster
         homes/rehabilitation centres. Neither does she say where he  would
         be sent to, if he is not sent to one of these smaller foster homes
         or rehabilitation centres. We are left to infer (from  (b)  below)
         that, in such event, he would be sent to  an  orphanage.  Thirdly,
         Ms. Drace-Francis does not  explain what she means when  she  says
         that  the  transition  "can  be  difficult  with  few  chances  of
         immediate success" or what effect such difficulties  have  on  the
         conditions in  the  smaller  foster  homes/rehabilitation  centres
         which replace the orphanage which has closed down.

      (b)   Ms. Drace-Francis also states that: "There are  few  chances  of
         [the  Appellant]  being  adopted  (even  by  a  Roma  family)  and
         returning to an orphanage would mean a return to ongoing  exposure
         to racism".  The Appellant's evidence was that he was told by  the
         "Centru de Placement" that it would be difficult to  find  someone
         to adopt a Roma child. The Adjudicator appears  to  have  accepted
         his evidence in this respect. Furthermore, the  Appellant  is  now
         already 17 years old. The fact that  he  will  reach  the  age  of
         majority in less than one year may well reduce further the chances
         of finding anyone prepared to adopt him. For these reasons, we are
         prepared to accept that it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
         Appellant would be adopted, despite  the  fact  Ms.  Drace-Francis
         does not indicate what this opinion is based on.

28.1  Prior to his departure from Romania, the Appellant  was  looked  after
     in care by the Romanian authorities. There  is  no  reason  to  suppose
     that, if returned in his minority, the Romanian system  of  child  care
     would not be available to him. Indeed, even Ms.  Drace-Francis  appears
     to proceed on the basis that he would return to the Romanian child care
     system. However, for the reasons we have given above, we are unclear as
     to  what  particular  arrangement  Ms.  Drace-Francis   considers   the
     Appellant is reasonably likely  to  return  to.  It  is  therefore  not
     surprising, in our view, that the Adjudicator dealt with this issue  in
     the way she did at paragraph 58 of the Determination.

28.2  After considering all of the evidence before us, it seems to us  that,
     on return to Romania, the Appellant may be:

      (a)   placed, on a temporary basis, with a  family  (as  he  had  been
         just  before  his  departure  from  Romania)  until  a   permanent
         arrangement can be made. However, if he is placed temporarily with
         such a family, he may well end up spending the  remainder  of  his
         minority in such temporary placement, given that he will reach the
         age of majority in less than one year; or

      (b)   placed in one of the  smaller  foster  homes  or  rehabilitation
         centres which are replacing the old orphanages  of  the  Ceausescu
         era; or

      (c)   sent to an orphanage, such as the orphanage in Vaslui  where  he
         was placed until he reached 15 years.

28.3  We now turn to consider the evidence before us as  to  the  conditions
     of each of the above,  in  reverse  order.  With  regard  to  (c),  the
     Appellant's evidence about the conditions of the orphanage in Vaslui is
     set out at paragraph 4 of his witness statement dated 2nd October  2002
     (page 2 of the Appellant's bundle A). He described  the  conditions  as
     "awful". The children slept in dormitories with 14 or more in a   room.
     He says the building was really cold, the heating  was  terrible;  they
     all fell sick in winter. There was  a  shortage  of  water;  they  were
     allowed showers only once a week. The bathroom was  a  huge  room  with
     many showers; two people had to share a shower at any one time and they
     were  only  allowed  to  stay  in  the  shower  for  15   minutes.  The
     Adjudicator has accepted the  Appellant's  evidence  in  this  respect,
     which is broadly consistent with the first paragraph on page 3  of  Ms.
     Drace-Francis' report (page 8 of the Appellant's bundle  A).  According
     to the footnote, this paragraph has been quoted  from  a  report  dated
     27th November 2002 relating to a visit to Romania from 5th-9th  October
     2002 by Mr. Alvaro Gil-Rhodes, Commissioner for  Human  Rights  at  the
     Council of Europe. The orphanage which Mr. Gil-Rhodes  visited  appears
     to be less crowded (with 62 children sharing 8  dormitories)  than  the
     orphanage the Appellant lived in in Vaslui. We note that Mr  Gil-Rhodes
     describes the material conditions in the orphanage he visited as  being
     "far from ideal" but "dignified in the main". We  allow  for  the  fact
     that some orphanages may be more overcrowded  than  the  one  Mr.  Gil-
     Rhodes visited. The USSD Report dated 31st March  2003  refers  to  the
     conditions of these orphanages as being "unacceptable in terms of basic
     infrastructure as well as hygiene, medical care nutrition  and  general
     assistance" (third paragraph of  the  Section  entitled  "Children"  of
     Section 5 of the report, on page 48 of the Appellant's  bundle  B).  On
     the whole of the evidence before us, we are satisfied that  it  is  not
     reasonably likely that the Appellant would be sent to an orphanage with
     living conditions so bad that they reach the severity threshold  for  a
     breach of Article 3.   We have already stated that it is not reasonably
     likely that the Appellant would be subjected to sexual  abuse.  He  may
     well be subjected to verbal abuse, on account of  his  ethnicity,  from
     non-Roma children.  He  may  well  also  experience  discrimination  by
     teachers, such as being required to sit at the  back  of  a  classroom.
     However, the threshold for Article 3 is high. We  appreciate  that  the
     Appellant is very anxious at the prospect of being returned to Romania,
     to such an extent that it appears he has lost much  hair.  However,  we
     are satisfied that, having regard to the high threshold for Article  3,
     it is not  reasonably  likely  that,  if  sent  to  an  orphanage,  the
     cumulative effect of the conditions or treatment he would be  subjected
     to would reach the severity level for a  breach  of  his  rights  under
     Article 3.

28.4  With regard to (b), it seems to us  a  reasonable  inference  to  draw
     that the conditions in the replacement homes /  rehabilitation  centres
     would  be  an  improvement  on  the  orphanages  they  are   replacing.
     Furthermore, the report of Ms. Drace-Francis makes no  mention  of  the
     conditions in the replacement  homes  or  rehabilitation  centres.  The
     Appellant's bundles contain no  reports  of  the  conditions  in  these
     places. What are we to make of the lack of such  information?  We  draw
     the inference that, if the conditions  were  bad  (or  worse  than  the
     orphanages they replace), this would have  been  reported.  Given  that
     there are reports of the conditions in the orphanages which  are  being
     closed down, it is reasonable to assume  that  the  conditions  in  the
     replacement homes / rehabilitation centres  are  being  monitored.  The
     fact that there are no  reports  relating  to  the  conditions  in  the
     replacement homes / rehabilitation centres means  that  the  conditions
     are acceptable. The lack of such reports supports  our  inference  that
     the conditions in the replacement homes / rehabilitation centres  would
     be an improvement on the orphanages they replace. However,  we  do  not
     make our decision simply on this basis. We also note that, according to
     the European Accession report of October  2002,  living  conditions  in
     most placement centres (that is, decentralised childcare  institutions)
     are adequate (paragraph 6.90 of  the  CIPU  report).  On  the  evidence
     before us, we are satisfied that, if the Appellant is placed in one  of
     the replacement smaller foster homes and/or rehabilitation centres,  it
     is not reasonably likely that the cumulative effect of the treatment he
     would be subjected  to  (including,  for  example,  any  discriminatory
     treatment) would reach the severity level for a breach  of  his  rights
     under Article 3.

28.5  With regard to (a) above, the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his  life
     during the period when he was temporarily placed with the gypsy  family
     when he reached the age of 15 years is set out at paragraphs 10 and  11
     of his witness statement dated 2nd October 2002. He says that they were
     a rich family; they had a big house, cars, a big  farm  with  pigs  and
     horses. He slept in a room with other staff who worked on the farm.  He
     says he was not really there to work but  helped  around,  doing  minor
     jobs like watering the garden, cleaning the pigs and washing the  cars.
     He described it as easier than living in the  orphanage.  He  does  not
     claim to have been ill-treated in any way.  There is nothing before  us
     to indicate that the living  conditions  in  such  temporary  placement
     homes for children in care in Romania are in any way  unacceptable,  or
     even unpleasant. On the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  us,  we  are
     satisfied that it is not reasonably likely that the  cumulative  effect
     of the treatment he would be subjected  to  would  reach  the  severity
     level for a breach of his rights under Article 3.

29.1  Ms Atreya relied on  the  fifth  paragraph  of  the  Section  entitled
     "Children"  in Section 5 of the USSD report (page 48 of the Appellant's
     bundle B) which refers to the problem of street  children  in  Romania.
     This states:

            Large numbers of impoverished and apparently homeless,  but  not
         necessarily orphaned, children were seen on  the  streets  of  the
         larger cities.  A 1998-1999 study by UNICEF and Save the  Children
         estimated that there were 2,500 children living on the streets  of
         the capital in the summer when the number generally peaks, but the
         Government did not have  statistics  defining  the  scope  of  the
         problem  nationwide.  A  significant  percentage  had  left  large
         institutions with no skills and employment and no ability to  earn
         a living or obtain housing. There was no systematic  provision  of
         labour market  information,  skills  training,  or  job  placement
         services for these young persons, and there was a high probability
         that they would gravitate to the streets, engaging in prostitution
         or trafficking. Although the  Government  took  some  initiatives,
         including  the  creation  of  emergency  receiving  facilities  to
         address these problems, there has been  no  systematic  effort  to
         prevent new children from joining  the  street  population  or  to
         integrate children living on the streets.  In  November  2001  the
         Social Assistance Law took effect; it targets more  assistance  to
         children in poverty.

29.2  This passage appears to suggest that there  are,  amongst  the  street
     children population, persons who are both over and under the age of  18
     years.  Those who are under  the  age  of  18  years  include  orphans.
     However, as we have stated above, the Appellant would be received  into
     the Romanian system of child care on his return. It follows that  there
     is no reasonable likelihood that, upon his return to Romania, he  would
     become a street child. At paragraphs 28.1 to 28.5  above,  we  examined
     the conditions he is reasonably likely to return to. We found  that  it
     is not reasonably likely that he would  have  to  endure  treatment  in
     breach of Article 3. Accordingly, he would not need to leave the system
     of care he is returned to, whilst in his minority. There  is  therefore
     no reasonable likelihood that he would be a street child, whilst in his
     minority.

29.3  Furthermore, if one examines the statistics we have  before  us,  they
     also show that there is no reasonable  likelihood  that  the  Appellant
     would become a street child whilst in his minority. In this regard,  we
     noted  that  the  Adjudicator  referred  at   paragraph   49   of   the
     Determination to the fact that the CIPU  report  before  her  indicates
     that there were 50,000 children in orphanages in 2001, which reduced to
     43,000 in 2002. The USSD report refers to 2,500 children living on  the
     street according to the 1998-1999 study, which we appreciate  does  not
     cover the same period. Nevertheless,  on  these  figures,  we  consider
     that, even if one  assumes  that  all  of  the  2,500  street  children
     referred to in the USSD Report are under 18s and  are  from  orphanages
     (which the report does not suggest), the  number  of  children  on  the
     street is a very small proportion of the total  number  in  orphanages.
     This further shows that it is not reasonably likely, and speculative to
     suggest, that  the  Appellant  would  become  a  street  child  in  his
     minority.

30.   Once the Appellant reaches his age of majority, he may  well  find  it
     difficult to obtain housing and employment, although the fact  that  he
     has been receiving some education in the United  Kingdom  should  place
     him in better stead than others of his age leaving the system of  child
     care in Romania. It is possible that he may  end  up  on  the  streets.
     Paragraph 6.87 of the CIPU report refers to the existence  of  national
     programmes  dealing,  inter  alia,  with  the  social  and   vocational
     integration of young persons leaving care institutions.  We  appreciate
     that there are funding problems  with  these  programmes  and  we  also
     appreciate that there is little by way of evidence before  us  to  show
     the success of such programmes. However, we make  two  further  points.
     Firstly, the total number of "street children" indicated  by  the  USSD
     Report is 2,500. This, as we have said,  includes  children  under  and
     over the age of 18. Accordingly, the total number  of  "young  persons"
     (those 18 years old and over) would be lower than 2,500. Even  assuming
     that all of these young persons are of Roma ethnic origin,  this  still
     represents a very small percentage  of  the  total  Roma  population  -
     estimated to be between 1.8 million and 2.5 million (paragraph 6.109 of
     the CIPU report).  On these figures, the likelihood  of  the  Appellant
     being forced into the streets when he reaches  majority  is  far  below
     that of a reasonable likelihood. It is speculative to suggest that  the
     Appellant would be forced to live on the streets. Secondly, he would be
     an adult by then. An Article 3 claim by a  Romanian  national  of  Roma
     ethnic origin based simply on the  risk  of  homelessness  and  general
     discrimination on  account  of  ethnic  origin  would  be  unlikely  to
     succeed, given the high threshold for Article 3. We see  no  reason  to
     take a different view in this case, simply because  the  assessment  of
     the Article 3 claim is taking place at a time  when  the  Appellant  is
     still a minor.

31.   For all of the above reasons, we find that the  Adjudicator's  finding
     that the Appellant's removal to Romania would  not  engage  his  rights
     under Article 3 is sustainable on the whole of the evidence  which  was
     before her. We make the same finding on the whole of the evidence which
     is before us.  Based on the objective evidence, there is no  reason  to
     suppose that the Secretary of State will not be able to  make  adequate
     arrangements for his reception and care in Romania as he undertakes  to
     do.

32.   With regard to paragraph 9 of the grounds  of  application,  we  would
     comment that the Adjudicator was concerned with whether the Appellant's
     removal is reasonably likely to be in breach of his  rights  under  the
     Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the ECHR, rather  than  whether  his
     past experiences amounted to persecution. There may be occasions when a
     finding as to past persecution may be relevant.  This  is  not  one  of
     those occasions, given that the Appellant would be returning as a minor
     but one who would reach the age of majority in less than a year and, if
     returned, he is not reasonably likely to be subjected to  sexual  abuse
     (for the reasons we have given).  The  Adjudicator  came  to  the  same
     conclusion,  at  paragraph  60,  when  she  stated  that  there  is  no
     reasonable degree of likelihood that the  Appellant's  past  treatment,
     experienced in the orphanage, would be repeated now that he has reached
     the age of 16 years (meaning, as at the  date  of  the  hearing  before
     her). However, in case we are wrong about this, we consider whether the
     Appellant's past experiences did amount to persecution. He referred  to
     boys having "a few times attempted to sexually use him". We  appreciate
     that he would have found this distressing. Without in any way condoning
     or trivialising his distress, we nevertheless note that these  attempts
     were made towards the end of the 15 minutes allocated for the  boys  to
     shower so that, on the Appellant's own evidence, the boys had to  leave
     him because they knew that the duty officer would be coming  around  to
     chase them out of the  showers.  This  evidence  shows  that,  although
     distressing for the Appellant, the boys did not succeed  in  what  they
     tried to do. It also shows that the boys were wary of being  caught  by
     the duty officer. The Appellant therefore had the option  of  reporting
     these incidents to those in authority  in  the  institution.  There  is
     nothing to indicate that he availed himself of that option. Taking  his
     evidence about these attempts to sexually use him in  conjunction  with
     his failure to report the incidents  and  his  other  evidence  (as  to
     verbal abuse, beatings, being made to sit at the back of the  classroom
     and the living conditions), we are not persuaded  that  he  experienced
     treatment sufficiently severe as to reach the  severity  threshold  for
     persecution or Article 3.

      The Article 8 claim

(i)   The Adjudicator's assessment of credibility:

33.1  Various challenges have been made to the Adjudicator's  assessment  of
     credibility. In this particular case, we are satisfied (for the reasons
     we give below) that credibility is not determinative of the outcome  of
     this appeal. Even if the Appellant's claims  concerning  the  level  of
     contact he had with Ms. Ene are taken at their face value, his  Article
     8 claim cannot succeed, for the reasons we give below.

33.2  However, we deal with the challenge  to  the  credibility  assessment,
     given the terms of the grounds of application and  the  submissions  we
     heard.

34.   There is no substance in the assertion in the grounds  of  application
     (paragraph 4 thereof) that it is unclear what  standard  of  proof  the
     Adjudicator had applied when assessing the evidence.  She  referred  to
     the low standard of proof  at  paragraph  42,  before  considering  the
     background  materials  at  paragraphs  43  to  49  and  credibility  at
     paragraphs 50 to 58. At paragraph 60 (where she set out her conclusions
     in relation to the appeal on asylum grounds), she said that  there  was
     "no  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood"  that  the  Appellant's   past
     treatment experienced in the orphanage in  Romania  would  be  repeated
     now. In considering the Article 8 claim at  paragraph  63,  she  stated
     that she had only been satisfied "to the requisite standard" that   the
     Appellant has been looked after by Ms. Ene  since his  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom. This follows her re-iteration of her finding  that  the
     Appellant and Ms. Ene have been less than candid about the true  nature
     of their relationship. When the Determination is read as  a  whole,  we
     are satisfied that the Adjudicator did apply the low standard of  proof
     when assessing the evidence before her.

35.   Furthermore, we are satisfied  that  there  is  no  substance  in  the
     assertions in the grounds of application that the Adjudicator had erred
     in her assessment of the evidence of Ms. Ene. The Adjudicator gave  the
     following reasons for doubting Ms. Ene's credibility:

      (i)   that Ms. Ene had been inconsistent in her accounts  as  to  when
           she had sent the  Christmas  card  to  the  Appellant  with  her
           telephone number;

      (ii)  that the account of Ms. Ene (as well as that of  the  Appellant)
           as to how Ms. Ene was  able  to  locate  the  Appellant  on  his
           arrival in the United Kingdom was utterly implausible;

      (iii) that the claim of Ms. Ene that she was not allowed to adopt  the
           Appellant in Romania was not credible, because  the  Appellant's
           own account of his history undermined her claim that  she  would
           not have been considered as a carer by the Romanian  authorities
           on account of her Roma origin and because there was  nothing  in
           the  objective  evidence  which  indicates  that  the   Romanian
           authorities differentiate solely on the grounds of race  whether
           one is a suitable carer or not.

      Whilst the Adjudicator correctly noted that (i) and  (ii)  related  to
     the periphery of  the  Appellant's  account,  (iii)  went  towards  the
     strength or nature of the relationship between the  Appellant  and  Ms.
     Ene prior to his arrival in the United  Kingdom,  given  that  Ms.  Ene
     claimed that the reason why she reduced her visits to the Appellant  in
     Romania is because of the attitude of the Romanian authorities  towards
     her. There is no substance in the assertion in paragraphs 6  and  7  of
     the grounds of application that, in  considering  this  aspect  of  Ms.
     Ene's accounts, the Adjudicator had failed to  take  into  account  the
     fact that the CIPU report  indicated  that,  from  2001,  there  was  a
     substantial change in policy in Romania, with the reduction in  numbers
     of institutions and a parallel increase in the number  of  professional
     foster parents and a range of alternative  child  protection  services.
     The Adjudicator was  clearly  aware  of  this  -  she  referred  to  it
     specifically at paragraph 49.  There is no reason to suppose  that  she
     did not have it in mind when considering the credibility of  Ms.  Ene's
     accounts. As the Adjudicator correctly noted, there is no evidence that
     the  Romanian  authorities   discriminate   in   the   appointment   of
     professional foster parents on the basis of ethnicity,  whether  before
     the change of policy or afterwards.

      We are satisfied that the Adjudicator's assessment of the  credibility
     of Ms. Ene is fully sustainable, for the reasons she gave.

36.   It is also asserted that the Adjudicator erred in  her  assessment  of
     the Appellant's credibility in that:

      (i)   Having accepted that the matter of how  the  Appellant  and  Ms.
           Ene met in the  United  Kingdom  was  a  peripheral  matter  the
           Adjudicator failed to give the  Appellant  the  benefit  of  the
           doubt in relation to his evidence of how he met up with Ms.  Ene
           (paragraph 8 of the grounds of application).

            This  assertion  is  not  only  illogical,  it  is  based  on  a
           misconception of the "benefit of the doubt" principle.

      (ii)  That the peripheral matter (concerning  how  the  Appellant  and
           Ms. Ene met up in the United Kingdom) has adversely affected the
           entire outcome of the appeal (paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  of
           application).  We  make  two  points.  Firstly,   although   the
           Adjudicator stated at paragraph 54 that this issue  was  at  the
           periphery of the Appellant's account, she then immediately  went
           on to state that it is a matter which may have some significance
           in relation to the human rights claim since it was intrinsically
           linked to the Appellant's claim about his only family tie  being
           with Ms. Ene and her husband. We see no error in this  approach.
           It is clear, when the Determination  (in  particular,  paragraph
           54) is read as a whole, that, in referring to the "periphery  of
           his account", the  Adjudicator  meant  that  this  issue  was  a
           peripheral matter in relation to that aspect of his claim  which
           is based on his past experiences in care in  the  orphanage  and
           his fear of returning to  the  same  situation.  Secondly,  this
           assertion is based on the assumption that,  if  the  Appellant's
           accounts of his relationship with Ms. Ene prior to  his  arrival
           in the United Kingdom had been accepted, this would have led  to
           the appeal being allowed. We do not find this to  be  the  case,
           for the reasons we give below.

      (iii) That the Adjudicator failed to consider whether the  Appellant's
           evidence as to when  the  Christmas  card  was  sent  should  be
           preferred to Ms. Ene.

            This assertion ignores the fact that the  evidence  of  Ms.  Ene
           was offered in order to  support  the  Appellant's  claim.  This
           assertion is tantamount to the Appellant  saying  that,  if  his
           supporting witness is found to be lacking in  credibility,  then
           his evidence should nevertheless be accepted simply  because  he
           is a minor. We have no hesitation in rejecting  this  assertion.
           In offering Ms. Ene's evidence in his appeal, the Appellant took
           the chance that Ms. Ene's  evidence  may  be  found  lacking  in
           credibility and that this would in turn bring his  own  evidence
           into question.

       (iv)   That  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  make  a  finding  on   the
           Appellant's "undisputed" evidence that he knew Ms.  Ene  from  a
           young age in Romania and that she failed to consider whether the
           Appellant's evidence was  sufficient  on  the  low  standard  to
           establish that he had known Ms. Ene from a young age in Romania.



            However, it is clear, from paragraph 57  of  the  Determination,
           that the Adjudicator rejected the accounts of both the Appellant
           and Ms. Ene as to the relationship they said they had with  each
           other before the Appellant's  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.
           Since the Adjudicator found the evidence of Ms.  Ene  about  the
           contact she said she had  had  with  the  Appellant  lacking  in
           credibility, she was entitled to reject the Appellant's accounts
           in this respect.

37.   For these reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  challenges  to  the
     Adjudicator's credibility assessment do not stand up to examination. We
     are  satisfied  that  the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator   are   fully
     sustainable, for the reasons she gave.

(ii)  Whether family life has been established:

38.   Ms Atreya submitted that the Adjudicator had made a finding  that  the
     Appellant has established family life in the United  Kingdom  with  Ms.
     Ene since his arrival in the United Kingdom. We do not agree. The first
     sentence of paragraph  64  of  the  Determination  cannot  be  read  in
     isolation from the last three sentences of paragraph 63. In stating  at
     paragraph 63 that the relationship was not any great  length,  she  was
     referring to the relationship in the United Kingdom. She then  went  on
     to state that she was unable to make any reliable assessment as to  the
     nature of  the  relationship.  When  paragraphs  63  and  64  are  read
     together, we are of the view that the Adjudicator did not find that the
     Appellant had established family  life  within  Article  8(1).  It  was
     therefore not necessary for her to go  on  to  consider  whether  there
     would  be  interference  and  whether  such   interference   would   be
     proportionate.

39.   Ms Atreya submitted that, if we were of the view that the  Adjudicator
     had not made a finding that the Appellant had established  family  life
     in the United Kingdom, then we would have to remit  the  appeal  for  a
     fresh hearing on the Article 8 claim so  that  evidence  can  be  given
     about the nature of the relationship between the Appellant and Ms. Ene.
     We do not consider a remittal necessary, because, even if the Appellant
     has formed family life in the United Kingdom (and even if  he  had  had
     such contact with Ms. Ene whilst in Romania as has  been  claimed),  we
     are satisfied that removal is proportionate, for the  reasons  we  give
     below.

40.   We have not heard  full  legal  argument  on  whether  a  relationship
     between a carer and a child is capable of leading  to  a  finding  that
     family life exists.  If, contrary to  our  view,  the  Adjudicator  did
     make a finding that family life exists between the  Appellant  and  Ms.
     Ene, it seems to us that her examination of the facts (as found by her)
     in arriving at such a finding was too limited.   She  appears  to  have
     considered only the following - the length of  time  Ms.  Ene  has  had
     "responsibility" for the Appellant's care  since  his  arrival  in  the
     United Kingdom in September 2002. It is true that  she  noted,  in  the
     later part of paragraph 64:

      (a)   that there  were  no  formal  arrangements  preliminary  to  any
           proposed adoption by Ms. Ene and her husband; and,

      (b)   that she considered that the fact that  the  London  Borough  of
           Brent (LBB) may be satisfied that the Appellant is  being  cared
           for appropriately by Ms. Ene and her husband is a  matter  which
           is far from establishing that it  is  an  appropriate  long-term
           placement or that Ms. Ene and her husband would be  suitable  as
           adoptive parents

      but it is clear, from paragraph 64, that she took factors (a) and  (b)
     into account only in deciding proportionality.  It  seems  to  us  that
     these factors are also relevant to the  question  whether  family  life
     exists.

41.   Whether or not family life exists is a question of fact in each  case.
     In the case  of  natural  parents  and  their  minor  children,  it  is
     generally the case that there is a  presumption  of  the  existence  of
     family life.  In the case of other  blood  relationships,  there  would
     need to be a closer examination of the relationship. Cohabitation is an
     important factor. There is no blood relationship between the  Appellant
     and Ms. Ene. However, the Appellant lives with Ms. Ene and her husband.
     This goes in his favour.  It is also necessary to  consider  whether  a
     psychological bond and dependency has developed. In this case, we fully
     appreciate that the Appellant is someone who has never before  had  the
     benefit of being in a "family-type"  environment  and  has  lived,  for
     almost the whole of his life, in  institutional  care  in  Romania.  We
     fully appreciate that this is a factor which is more likely to lead  to
     the development, on his part, of a dependency and a bond with  Ms.  Ene
     and her husband. We fully appreciate that, in his  eyes,  this  is  the
     only "family tie" he has ever had. We bear this in mind but it does not
     mean that this tie constitutes "family life" within  Article  8(1).  We
     fully appreciate that Ms. Ene does not have children and is  unable  to
     have children. We appreciate that  she  had  promised  the  Appellant's
     mother that she would look after the  Appellant  (paragraph  2  of  her
     witness statement). We fully appreciate that  these  factors  are  more
     likely, in the situation she found herself of being allowed by the  LBB
     to care for the Appellant, to lead to the development on her part  (and
     perhaps even that of her husband, although there is  no  evidence  from
     him) of a dependency and bond with the Appellant.

42.   However, the fact is that the Appellant has only been living with  Ms.
     Ene since September 2002 and such mutual  dependency  as  there  exists
     between them has only developed since then. Even if  his  evidence  and
     that of Ms. Ene as to the amount of contact  they  had  had  with  each
     other in Romania is accepted (see paragraph 47 below),  it  has  to  be
     remembered that that contact was in the nature of  visits  only.  There
     has been no suggestion that any emotional  or  psychological  or  other
     form of dependency developed between them then.

43.   Furthermore,  such  dependency  as  exists  cannot  be  considered  in
     isolation from the fact that Ms. Ene is  only  the  Appellant's  carer,
     with the consent of the LBB. Ms. Atreya informed us that  Ms.  Ene  has
     not been legally designated as the Appellant's carer, but that  she  is
     in effect his carer. However, Ms. Ene is not  able  to  make  important
     decisions relating to the Appellant (such as to move the Appellant away
     from the area under the  control  of  the  LBB  without  obtaining  the
     consent of the LBB), nor does she have  full  financial  responsibility
     for the Appellant; the LBB pays a weekly subsistence to  the  Appellant
     of 26 (see the letter from Social Services Department of  the  LBB  at
     page 30 of the Appellant's bundle  A).  Indeed,  in  this  letter,  the
     Social Services Department makes this statement:

            This is to confirm that London  Borough  of  Brent  looks  after
           [the Appellant]. He is accommodated  under  section  17  of  the
           Children's Act and is receiving a weekly subsistence of 26.

            (our emphasis)

44.   We emphasise that this letter makes clear that the LBB regards  itself
     as  being  the  party  which  is  looking  after  the   Appellant   and
     accommodating the Appellant. Such relationship as  exists  between  the
     Appellant and Ms. Ene and her husband is subject, on their part, to the
     tacit acceptance of the overriding  right  of  the  LBB  to  make  such
     decisions and take such steps in connection with the  Appellant  as  it
     sees fit in order to discharge its  legal  responsibilities  towards  a
     child under its care. For example, the LBB may take the Appellant  away
     from Ms. Ene's care and place him elsewhere, if this would  be  in  the
     interests of the Appellant. We agree with the Adjudicator that the fact
     that the LBB is satisfied to have Ms. Ene care  for  the  Appellant  at
     present does not mean that this is an appropriate long-term  placement.
     Ms. Ene, as de facto carer, is responsible to the LBB for the discharge
     of her duties. She is obliged to comply with whatever requirements  the
     LBB has imposed, or may impose, on her for the care of  the  Appellant.
     These factors  distinguish  this  relationship  from  the  relationship
     between a natural parent and a child  living  together  or  between  an
     adoptive parent and child living together.  Even  in  cases  where  the
     relationship between a natural parent and a child  living  together  is
     interfered with by some legal process, this would normally be in  order
     to give rights of access etc to the other natural parent. This  is  not
     the case here. The party with ultimate responsibility for the Appellant
     is the state.

45.   The dependency between the Appellant and Ms. Ene and her  husband  has
     to be seen against the fact that the LBB has overriding  responsibility
     for the Appellant and the fact that the  Appellant,  Ms.  Ene  and  her
     husband all tacitly accept this overriding responsibility. Furthermore,
     it is relevant to consider such dependency as exists has only developed
     in the short period since September 2002.

46.   Accordingly, whilst we acknowledge that some  psychological  bond  and
     dependency would have developed between the Appellant and Mrs. Ene, the
     relationship does not bear the appearance, substance and permanence  of
     "family life".

47.   We also take  into  account,  at  face  value,  the  evidence  of  the
     Appellant and Ms. Ene as to the level of contact  they  had  with  each
     other in Romania. In this regard, we noted that the Appellant refers to
     seeing Ms. Ene in 1999 (paragraph 5 of his statement on page 2  of  the
     Appellant's bundle A). He says that, after this, Ms. Ene  went  to  the
     orphanage to see him "a number of times". The last time he saw her  was
     in August 2000 (paragraph  14  of  his  statement  at  page  5  of  the
     Appellant's bundle A). This does not entirely  accord  with  Ms.  Ene's
     evidence (paragraph 3 of her statement  at  pages  18  and  19  of  the
     Appellant's bundle A). She says she first saw the Appellant when he was
     3 years old and, at that stage saw him "almost every month".  She  says
     that "later on" (she does not say when) she was only able  to  see  the
     Appellant once a year, until her last visit in August 2000.  Ms.  Ene's
     evidence appears  to  suggest  a  higher  level  of  contact  than  the
     Appellant's. We take her evidence at its highest.  However,  as  stated
     above, her visits to  the  Appellant  in  Romania  were  "visits";  the
     Romanian authorities had legal responsibility for him; there  has  been
     no suggestion that there was any dependency between them in Romania.

48.   Taking all of these circumstances into account, we are satisfied  that
     the relationship presently enjoyed between the Appellant  and  Ms.  Ene
     and her husband does not have the appearance or  substance  of  "family
     life" such that it falls for protection under Article 8(1).

(iii) If family life exists, whether removal is proportionate:

49.   Even if the Appellant  has  established  family  life  in  the  United
     Kingdom with Ms. Ene and her husband such as falls for protection under
     Article 8(1), there is still Article 8(2) to consider.  It  is  not  in
     dispute that any interference with his right to family life would be in
     accordance with the law and would come within one of  the  (exhaustive)
     list  of  reasons  in  Article  8(2).  The  Respondent   asserts   that
     interference  would  be  proportionate  in  the   legitimate   aim   of
     immigration control. We turn to the issue of proportionality.

50.   The reasons the Adjudicator gave for finding  that  removal  would  be
     proportionate are set out at paragraph 64  of  the  Determination.  Ms.
     Atreya submitted that the Adjudicator ought to have taken into  account
     the fact that the Appellant and  Ms. Ene had had some contact prior  to
     the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom. She  also  submits  that
     the Adjudicator failed to take into account the fact that, as  Ms.  Ene
     has had her asylum appeal allowed, she should be considered a  refugee,
     albeit that the Respondent has not yet  formally  granted  her  refugee
     status. This means that Ms. Ene would not be able to return to Romania,
     which in turns means that the Appellant would not be able to enjoy  his
     family life in Romania. Since Romania has  in  place  a  moratorium  on
     international adoptions, this means that Ms. Ene would not be  able  to
     apply to adopt the Appellant in Romania. Ms. Atreya  submits  that  the
     Appellant would not be able to return to Romania and  apply  for  entry
     clearance from there to visit Ms. Ene because he would be regarded as a
     failed asylum seeker. The  Appellant  would  be  returned  to  care  in
     Romania and would therefore have  to  endure  the  conditions  in  care
     there. Ms. Atreya submits that removal would permanently terminate  the
     only family tie the Appellant has ever known.

51.   In considering these issues, we guard ourselves against  assuming  the
     role of a judge in the County Court. We  are  not  concerned  with  the
     welfare  of  the  child,  which  of  course,  would  be  the  paramount
     consideration for the County Court. We are concerned with  whether  his
     removal would be proportionate  to  the  right  of  the  state  in  the
     legitimate aim of immigration control. If we were  concerned  with  the
     former question, it is easy to see that many claims by  minors  in  our
     jurisdiction would be likely to succeed  for  the  simple  reason  that
     conditions in many of the countries we deal with in  asylum  and  human
     rights cases do not compare with the United Kingdom.

52.   We accept that the Appellant's removal is reasonably likely  to  bring
     to an end any prospect of the Appellant living with  Ms.  Ene  and  her
     husband, for the following reasons:

      (a)   We agree that we  should,  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,
           regard Ms. Ene as a refugee, given that her  asylum  appeal  has
           been allowed, that the  Respondent  has  not  lodged  an  appeal
           against that determination and that Mr. Sheikh informed us  that
           it would appear that the delay in granting her refugee status is
           due to the backlog. Since the adjudicator who heard  her  appeal
           allowed the appeal fairly recently in May 2002, we  accept  that
           she would not be able to Romania so  that  the  Appellant  could
           enjoy family life with her.

      (b)   We  are  prepared  to  proceed  on  the  footing  that,  if  the
           Appellant were to make an entry clearance application in Romania
           in order to re-join Ms. Ene and her husband, such an application
           is highly  unlikely  to  succeed  (not  least,  because  of  the
           difficulty of establishing that the  right  to  family  life  is
           engaged on the  facts).

      (c)   We agree that Ms. Ene would not be able to adopt  the  Appellant
           in Romania, because Romania still has in place a  moratorium  on
           international adoptions (see paragraph 6.89 of the CIPU report).
           Romania imposed the moratorium until it enacts  new  legislation
           which puts the  interests  of  the  child  first  and  which  is
           complaint with the Hague Convention on  Inter-Country  Adoption,
           the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
           European Convention on Human Rights.

53.   If the Appellant were to be allowed to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
     he would have a chance (and we put it no higher  than  that)  of  being
     adopted by Ms. Ene - assuming, of course, that she is  granted  refugee
     status before he reaches the age of majority.  We  have  no  reason  to
     doubt that the lack of her formal status is the only reason why Ms. Ene
     has not formally applied to adopt the Appellant.  However,  before  she
     can make an application to  adopt  him,  there  would  have  to  be  an
     application to  the  Home  Office  for  the  Appellant  to  be  granted
     exceptional leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules  for  such
     adoption proceedings to take place (per  Ms  Atreya's  submission,  see
     paragraph 12.9 of this Determination refers). It would be inappropriate
     for us to speculate whether, if an application for adoption were to  be
     made within the Appellant's minority, Ms. Ene and her husband would  be
     granted an adoption order. We do not have any expertise in this area of
     law but it seems to us that there are several  issues  which  a  County
     Court judge may well wish to examine which go  beyond  enquiring  about
     the suitability of  Ms.  Ene  and  her  husband  as  adoptive  parents.
     Notwithstanding the fact that  the  Appellant  is  now  in  the  United
     Kingdom and says that the whereabouts of  his  mother  are  unknown,  a
     County Court judge may well wish to be satisfied that the Appellant  is
     legally free to be adopted (especially given his recent arrival in  the
     United Kingdom) and it may well be  that  the  views  of  the  Romanian
     authorities (from whose care he absconded) would be required. These are
     some of the reasons why it would be inappropriate for us  to  speculate
     on the outcome of any adoption application.  Furthermore, the Appellant
     is already over the age of 17 years. Any adoption proceedings  may  not
     reach finality by the time the Appellant reaches his age of majority.

54.    We  have  already  reviewed  the  objective  evidence  before  us  in
     considerable detail in  deciding  whether  the  Appellant's  return  to
     Romania would mean that he would be subjected to treatment in breach of
     Article 3. We have concluded that it would not. We appreciate that life
     is much more comfortable and pleasant for him in the United Kingdom, as
     compared to Romania.  We  do  not  repeat  our  observations  above  in
     relation to the Article 3 claim, but we make it clear that we take them
     into account.

55.   We take into account the contact between the  Appellant  and  Ms.  Ene
     prior to the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom.  We  take  into
     account the evidence of elements of mutual dependency  which  exist  in
     this case, but note that it has only developed  since  the  Appellant's
     arrival in September 2002. Ms. Ene has not been legally  designated  as
     the  Appellant's  carer.   She   does   not   have   the   rights   and
     responsibilities of a natural parent, or an adoptive parent. The LBB is
     entitled, in the exercise of its legal duties, to remove the  Appellant
     and place him elsewhere, thus bringing an end to cohabitation. This  is
     a factor we are entitled to take into account. We are conscious of  the
     fact that the Appellant is  very  anxious  at  the  prospect  of  being
     removed - so much so that it seems he has lost much hair.

56.   The interests of the  state  in  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
     control is a very weighty consideration. This has been stated often. In
     deciding whether removal is proportionate, the question which has to be
     addressed is whether the interference strikes a  fair  balance  between
     the interests of the state  and  the  wider  community  in  immigration
     control and the rights of the individual.

57.   As we have said, we appreciate that removal will effectively bring  an
     end to the Appellant's relationship with Ms. Ene, which he sees as  his
     only family tie, and that he will lose "a  chance"  of  being  adopted.
     However, when this is considered alongside the fact  that  cohabitation
     has only taken place for a short time, that Ms. Ene does not  presently
     enjoy the rights and responsibilities of a natural parent together with
     the fact that removal  is  not  reasonably  likely  to  expose  him  to
     treatment  in  breach  of  Article  3,  we  are  satisfied   that   the
     Adjudicator's finding that removal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
     aim of immigration control is sound. We make the same finding.

58.   Given the Adjudicator's rejection of Ms. Ene's evidence that  she  did
     not know that the Appellant was coming to the United Kingdom  until  he
     telephoned her and that both  the  Appellant  and  Ms.  Ene  have  been
     untruthful about the arrangements for his journey, there  is  also  the
     concern in this case that Ms. Ene had advance  knowledge  of  the  fact
     that a minor was about to  abscond  from  care  in  Romania  and  place
     himself at risk of a perilous journey to the United Kingdom in the back
     of a lorry. We have not based our decision on this concern,  since  the
     Adjudicator's findings do not go far enough. However, if there were  to
     be a clear finding in a future case (which would have to be made  on  a
     high  standard  of  proof),  we  may  need  to  consider  whether   the
     proportionality exercise should involve considerations as to whether we
     ought to allow our human rights legislation to be  used  to  circumvent
     laws imposed in another country to protect children.

(iv)  The private life claim:

59.   It is not clear whether the Adjudicator found that the  Appellant  has
     developed such private life as falls for protection under Article 8(1).
      She dealt with this in the first sentence of paragraph 64. However, we
     have explained above that, when the last three sentences  of  paragraph
     63 and the first sentence of paragraph 64  are  read  together,  it  is
     clear that she did not find that family life had been formed. If we are
     right about this, this also calls into question that part of the  first
     sentence of paragraph 64 in which she refers to private life.

60.   In the event that the Appellant's relationship  does  not  qualify  as
     family life within the meaning of Article 8(1), it can  be  taken  into
     account in considering whether he has developed such  private  life  in
     the United Kingdom as falls for protection within Article 8(1). We take
     into account all the factors we have  mentioned  above,  such  as,  for
     example, such dependency as he has developed in his  relationship  with
     Ms. Ene and her husband. Again, we are mindful of  the  fact  that  the
     relationship is permitted by the LBB which has the legal responsibility
     for him. It is also necessary to bear in mind the short period of  time
     for which they have been living in the same  household.  The  level  of
     contact they have had in Romania is also relevant.  The  fact  that  he
     would lose "a chance" of being adopted is relevant. We also  take  into
     account the fact that he is studying in the United Kingdom and has made
     many friends (paragraph 7 of Ms. Ene's statement  at  page  20  of  the
     Appellant's bundle A). The nature, extent and duration of  his  private
     life in the United Kingdom is limited, although we are prepared to  say
     that he has established a form of private life within  the  meaning  of
     Article 8(1).

61.   However, we are satisfied that, for the reasons we have already  given
     above,  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
     immigration control.

      Conclusion:

62.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied that  the  findings  of
     the Adjudicator that the Appellant's removal to Romania would not be in
     breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention
     or in breach of his rights under Article  3  or  Article  8  are  fully
     sustainable, and we make the same findings.

63.   It follows that we must dismiss the appeal.

      Other remarks:

64.   It seems to us appropriate that we make some comment on the  terms  in
     which permission to appeal was granted in this case. The mere fact that
     the Secretary of State has not granted the Appellant exceptional  leave
     to remain does not, of itself (even arguably) give rise to a breach  of
     Article 3 and/or  8.  We  have  already  dealt  with  the  Respondent's
     undertaking  to  remove  the  Appellant   only   when   adequate   care
     arrangements have been  made.  The  function  of  the  Adjudicator  was
     limited to considering the issues which were raised on appeal to  her -
     i.e. whether removal  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
     obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  of  the   Appellant's
     protected rights under the ECHR.  The  same  restraints  apply  to  the
     Tribunal. It is no part of the function of this  Tribunal  to  consider
     whether the Appellant should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom
     pending any adoption proceedings.

      Request for recommendation:

65.   We have considered carefully Ms.  Atreya's  request  that  we  make  a
     recommendation that the  Appellant  be  granted  exceptional  leave  to
     remain in the United Kingdom until he  reaches  his  majority,  on  the
     ground that his account of his experiences in Romania was  believed  by
     the Adjudicator. We decline to do so. It is not appropriate for  us  to
     make any statements about the removal arrangements which the  Secretary
     of State should make pursuant to his undertaking.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.







Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 11th March 2004
