
Heard at Field House
                                  AD (Risk- Illegal Departure) Iran CG
                                  [2003] UKIAT 00107
On 13th June 2003

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                          Date Determination
notified:

29/10/2003


                                   Before:

                       Mr Richard Chalkley - Chairman
                              Mr C A N Edinboro

Between



                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  RESPONDENT


Miss L Elliot, a clerk with Halliday Reeves, Solicitors appeared  on  behalf
of the Appellant and Mrs R Aslam, a Home Office Presenting Officer  appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran,  who  appeals  with  leave  of  the
    Tribunal against the Determination of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  Michael  D
    Oakley, sitting at Durham Magistrates' Court who,  in  a  Determination
    promulgated on 5th September 2002, following a hearing on  28th  August
    2002, dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent on 15th January 2002, to direct his removal from the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

 2. Leave was granted on the  basis  that  it  may  be  arguable  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of persecutory harm on his  return  to  Iran
    having left the country illegally.

 3. It is the Appellant's claim that he was  brought  up  by  a  family  of
    Monarchists and following military service, while he was at university,
    he   joined   a   pro-Monarchist   political   group   and    undertook
    responsibilities including the distribution  of  leaflets  and  slogans
    about political leaders, which led  to  him  being  identified  by  the
    security forces and being warned that  he  could  face  expulsion  from
    university.  In March 1995 he was arrested and interrogated  about  his
    activities and taken to court and sentenced to one  year  imprisonment.
    He was poorly treated in prison and on his release in  March  1996,  he
    signed an undertaking not to become involved again in further political
    activity.  On his release he was required to report monthly and to sign
    the undertaking monthly thereafter.  He had no  further  problems  with
    the authorities until 1999 when, he with  a  number  of  students  were
    arrested.  The Appellant escaped, but he believed that he would come to
    the attention of the authorities, because the  demonstration  had  been
    filmed.  He moved to Bander Anzaly and stayed with a cousin in hiding.

 4. In early January 2000, it came to the Appellant's  attention  that  the
    authorities were looking for him and he moved to Bandr  Turkaman  where
    the Monarchists have a secret house.  He wished to  continue  with  his
    activities, but when the house was raided  on  11th  January  2001,  he
    escaped by swimming through a water canal and then went to a friend who
    took him to Makou where arrangements were made for  him  to  cross  the
    border and to travel to the United Kingdom where he claimed  asylum  on
    25th September 2001.

 5. For the Appellant, Miss Elliott told us that she relied on  her  bundle
    of documents and on the Tribunal decisions in Foladzadeh  [2002]  UKIAT
    0043063 and Kiani [2002] UKIAT  01328.   Miss  Elliott  said  that  the
    Appellant in Foladzadeh had signed an  undertaking  not  to  leave  the
    country but had then left.  The Appellant in the case of  Kiani  had  a
    history of political activity, as did this Appellant.  Having left  the
    country illegally, when he returns, his past will be examined  and  the
    undertaking he signed will come to light.  She conceded that there  was
    no  evidence  that  the  authorities  had  become  aware  of  his  1999
    activities.  Miss Elliot submitted that  on  his  return  he  would  be
    detained and questioned and that at that stage,  the  authorities  will
    undertake research into his background.  That would place him at severe
    risk.

 6. For the Respondent, Mrs Aslam drew our attention to the fact  that  the
    Appellant in the case of Foladzadeh was found to be credible and had  a
    history of contact with the authorities.  He  had  actually  signed  an
    undertaking not to leave Iran.  This Appellant did not.   The  case  of
    Kiani did not assist  either;  she  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator's
    findings were supported by the authorities and drew  our  attention  to
    paragraph 5.105 of the Country Information and Policy Unit Report.  She
    also drew our attention to a letter dated 5th September 2002  from  the
    visa section of the British Embassy in Tehran.  Based on this evidence,
    Mrs Aslam submitted that it was  clear  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    questioned on his return, but there was no real risk that he  would  be
    prosecuted.  Even if he were to be  prosecuted  and  sentenced  to  the
    maximum term of imprisonment, it could not  be  said  that  this  would
    cause a breach of his protected Article  3  rights.   As  it  was,  the
    Adjudicator found that he was of no interest to the  authorities.   She
    invited us to dismiss the appeal.

 7.  Miss  Elliott  declined  to  address  us  further.   We  reserved  our
    Determination.

 8. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant had been amongst  a  number
    of students who had come to  the  attention  of  the  authorities.   He
    accepted that the Appellant had been interrogated and sentenced  as  he
    had described.  The Adjudicator also accepted that  the  Appellant  may
    have been asked to sign an undertaking not to become involved in future
    political activities.

 9. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant had  embellished  his  account
    where it concerned having had to report every month to the authorities.
     This was new evidence that he had introduced in giving oral  testimony
    and was something he had not mentioned either in his first statement or
    his interview.   The  Adjudicator  found  that  the  Appellant  had  no
    problems with the  authorities  whatsoever  until  1999.   He  did  not
    believe that the Appellant had been involved in any major way with  the
    demonstration he claims to have taken part in.  He found that there was
    no evidence to suggest that the Appellant's involvement would have been
    anything other than at a low level and found that he would have been of
    very little interest to the authorities, otherwise he would  have  been
    sought  out  by  the  authorities  very  quickly.   According  to   the
    Appellant, the raid on his house took place some seven months after the
    demonstration.  As a result the Adjudicator did not accept that such  a
    raid took place.  The Adjudicator did not accept that a warrant for the
    Appellant's  arrest  had  been  issued.   No  such  document  had  been
    produced.  The Appellant explained that he had only  recently  received
    his identity card through friends who had travelled to Turkey  and  who
    had posted it from there.  He explained that they  had  not  taken  the
    summons with them  because  if  they  had  been  stopped  with  such  a
    sensitive document it would have caused  difficulties  for  them.   The
    Adjudicator  found  that  explanation   implausible   since,   if   the
    Appellant's friends had been stopped with the Appellant's identity card
    on them that would have been a  very  much  more  serious  matter  than
    merely being in possession of a copy of an arrest warrant.

10. The Country Information and Policy Unit Report makes it clear that  the
    penalties for violating or attempting to violate exit regulations, such
    as leaving on illegal or falsified documents, range from one  month  to
    three years' imprisonment and/or a fine, that actual penalty  depending
    on the individual circumstances (paragraph 5.101).  The report goes  on
    to explain that citizens returning from abroad are  sometimes  searched
    and interviewed by the authorities on their return.  On  the  basis  of
    information Amnesty International receives, usually a person  who  gets
    back will be asked why he or she has been abroad and if the  answer  is
    along the lines of, "I just tried to find a job", they will most likely
    be allowed to go home to their families.  Generally speaking,  it  does
    depend on what kind of documentation exists on the  returnee  and  what
    the actual practice of the country is in which the concerned individual
    applied for asylum.

11. Paragraph 5.103 said that on return, in recent years the  practice  had
    become more liberal with regard to possession and confiscation of items
    brought abroad, such as CDs from Dubai and other western products.   It
    mostly depends on what the authorities are looking for.  If they assume
    that a person has returned from a  country  like  the  USA,  then  this
    person certainly will be questioned and undergo stringent  checks,  but
    will not normally  be  detained  for  a  longer  period  of  time.   In
    September 2002 the Deputy Foreign Minister announced that Iranians  who
    obtained  the  citizenship  of  foreign  countries  with  Iran's  prior
    agreement can, once again, become Iranian citizens.

12. The letter from the British Embassy in Tehran  had  dealt  specifically
    with the case of an Applicant who was seeking to join a spouse  in  the
    United Kingdom who was a  failed  asylum  seeker.   Apparently  he  had
    entered the United Kingdom illegally, lodged an asylum application  and
    when this was turned down and after "going through the  various  hoops"
    he made a voluntary departure on his own passport back  to  Iran.   His
    passport had been sent back to his family in  Iran  by  the  agent  who
    smuggled him into the United Kingdom.  He had no problems  on  entering
    Iran.  He was not questioned but his passport was merely stamped.   The
    author of the letter referred to having consulted various colleagues in
    other embassies in Tehran.  Australia had  returned  approximately  100
    failed asylum seekers within a two year period and  have  no  confirmed
    reports of mistreatment of any of them.   Some  were  questioned  about
    their illegal departure and about non payment  of  departure  taxes  or
    evasion of military service.  The former resulted in a spot  fine,  but
    the Australians were unaware of any case where a returned Applicant had
    not been allowed  to  enter  Iran  and  re-enter  the  community.   One
    returnee from Australia had  complained  to  the  Australian  press  of
    mistreatment in Iran (he claimed  he  had  been  detained  by  security
    authorities  on  return).   The  Australian  Embassy  were  unable   to
    establish the true nature of his complaints, however, and had not heard
    anything more about the incident in recent months.  The  Dutch  Embassy
    said that in their 2001 Report they had stated that,  as  far  as  they
    knew, failed asylum seekers did not face  significant  problems  beyond
    those described by the Australians.  They had received one report of  a
    failed asylum seeker being detained in prison and  were  investigating.
    The Dutch were aware that failed asylum seekers  do  not  face  serious
    problems as many returnees come in and out  of  the  Dutch  Embassy  to
    plead their case.  They cited one case of a deportee  who  now  runs  a
    baby clothes shop in Tehran by way of example of a returnee to everyday
    life.  Similarly, the Canadian Embassy were aware of  "multiple"  cases
    where failed asylum seekers have returned and been returned to Iran and
    were unaware of any experiencing difficulties simply  as  a  result  of
    having claimed asylum in Canada.  They pointed  out  that  many  asylum
    Applicants returned to Iran  once  they  have  been  granted  permanent
    residence or Canadian citizenship.

13. We are of the opinion that, given the Adjudicator's findings, there  is
    no real risk, or serious possibility, of this Appellant being  detained
    on his return to Iran.  Undoubtedly he will  be  questioned  about  his
    departure, but the reaction of the authorities is likely to  depend  on
    the responses he gives  to  their  questions.   On  the  basis  of  the
    information before us, we do not believe there to be a real, or serious
    risk that he would face prosecution as a  result  of  having  left  the
    country illegally but, were he to do so, we do  not  believe  that  any
    sentence he may be required to serve would cause his  protected  rights
    under Article 3 to be breached following  the  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Fazilat [2002] UK 00973.  We do  not  believe  that  merely  by  having
    signed  an  undertaking  not  to  have  become  involved  in  political
    activities, he will be at any higher risk.

14. For all these reasons this appeal is dismissed.







                                                            Richard Chalkley
                                                              Vice President

