
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |DJ (Abandonment - Voluntary |
|                           |        |return) Poland [2003] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00090                       |
|On  5 September 2003       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|7th October 2003.                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Chairman)                                           |
|Mrs J Harris                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant  appeals  to  the  Tribunal  with  leave  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, R S Hobbs Esq, in which he  dismissed
      his appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  16  September  2002
      issuing directions for his removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  asylum
      having been refused.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 5 September 2003.  Mr  C  Delisser
      for Anooma & Co appeared on behalf of the appellant,  and  Mr  G  Elks
      appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    Prior to the hearing we had been provided by Mr Elks with a copy of  a
      Form IF101(PA) headed "Disclaimer of right of appeal against  decision
      to refuse asylum/Notice of withdrawal of  appeal  or  application  for
      asylum".  This is signed by the appellant and  contains  what  on  the
      face of it is his agreement to withdraw his application for asylum and
      then as  a  result  arrangement  will  be  made  for  his  removal  or
      voluntarily supervised departure to Warsaw as soon  as  possible.   It
      seems that he left on 25 June 2003.

4.    Mr Delisser produced  a  skeleton  argument  and  authorities.   Among
      other things he argued that the disclaimer is the only evidence of the
      appellant's apparent intention to abandon his appeal  and  that  there
      was no evidence to suggest that he knew what he was signing, nor  that
      the contents of the document had been explained  to  him  in  his  own
      language before he signed it.

5.    Mr Elks produced documentation  from  the  International  Organisation
      for Migration who operate a UK voluntarily  assisted  return  and  re-
      integration programme.  The date of application made by the  appellant
      was 16 April 2003, and again the form is signed by him.   His  reasons
      for wishing to return are given as being the following:

           "The asylum application of my parents are refused  and  I  don't
           have any other choice."

6.    Mr Delisser made the point that his  instructing  solicitors  had  not
      bee instructed by the appellant to abandon the appeal  and  that  they
      had been unable to contact him by letter at his home address or on his
      mobile telephone and that this has been the case since notification of
      permission to appeal was granted.  He contended that the  Home  Office
      should have communicated with the  appellant's  solicitors  concerning
      his purported wish to abandon his appeal and that the failure to do so
      means that there  is  a  strong  risk  that  he  has  not  effectively
      abandoned his appeal and that the burden for showing that he has  done
      so lies on the Home Office.  He argued that in order to give  efficacy
      to the relevant statutory provision (and there was some dispute though
      at the end of the day the substance of it makes no  difference  as  to
      whether we were dealing with abandonment of an appeal under  the  1999
      Act or the 2002 Act) it had to be interpreted as meaning that  he  had
      left the United Kingdom with the intention of  abandoning  his  appeal
      and effectively therefore that he intended to  leave  permanently,  in
      order for the relevant section to apply.   Alternatively the Act  must
      be read in accordance with the principles of natural justice.   If  he
      had been encouraged to leave the United Kingdom by  the  Secretary  of
      State without it being made clear to  him  what  the  consequences  of
      departure were, then the rules of natural justice had  been  breached.
      There was no indication that he had been given legal  advice  when  he
      signed the disclaimer form, nor that a translation had been  involved.



7.    As regards the documentation from the International  Organisation  for
      Migration, Mr Delisser argued that it should be interpreted as meaning
      that that when he stated that he did not have any other  choice,  this
      meant that he perceived that he had no further right of  appeal.   The
      Home Office were required to ensure that the necessary safeguards were
      in place  before  depriving  him  of  the  necessary  safeguards.   In
      circumstances where he had earlier claimed that he would be persecuted
      it was important that the proper procedures were observed when it  was
      now said that he had abandoned his appeal.

8.    It seems clear that the appellant of his  own  volition  went  to  the
      International Organisation for Migration and filled in the form headed
      "UK voluntary assisted return and re-integration programme".   We  can
      see no other reason for  attending  that   organisation  except  on  a
      voluntary basis.  In our view the reasons for  wishing  to  return  as
      stated  are  sufficiently  clear.   Given  that  his  parents'  asylum
      application had been refused he felt that he did not  have  any  other
      choice but to return.  We do not  think  that  that  can  be  properly
      interpreted as indicating that he did not believe he himself  had  any
      further appeal rights.  We see no reason to suppose that it would  not
      have  been  made  clear  to  him  by  his  representatives  after  the
      Adjudicator hearing that an application was being made for  permission
      to appeal and that he only  had  to  keep  in  contact  with  them  to
      discover the outcome of that application.  It seems in  fact  that  he
      attended the International Organisation for Migration on the very  day
      that his solicitors signed the grounds of appeal.  His failure to keep
      in contact with his  solicitors  thereafter  cannot  in  our  view  be
      regarded as in any sense giving rise to proper criticism of  the  Home
      Office.  Given that he voluntarily sought to be assisted to return, we
      also consider that the Home Office cannot be properly  criticised  for
      not contacting his solicitors and telling  them  what  was  happening.
      Whether or not the Home Office enquired of him whether he had told his
      solicitors of this is neither here nor there.  In our view there is no
      obligation on the Home Office in the circumstances of a case  such  as
      this where a person has voluntarily sought to leave the United Kingdom
      and signed a declaration of voluntary return,  that  the  Home  Office
      should then contact his solicitors in effect  to  make  sure  that  he
      knows what he is doing. There is no indication that he  acted  in  any
      way other than voluntarily.  We do not consider that  the  wording  of
      the legislation admits of the interpretation that Mr Delisser seeks to
      put on it.  In this regard we heard argument  in  particular  from  Mr
      Elks as to whether this falls under the 2002 or the 1999 Act,  and  at
      the end of the day both representatives agree that  nothing  hangs  on
      the distinction. The relevant wording of Section 104(4)  of  the  2002
      Act is as follows:

           "An appeal under Section 82(1) shall be treated as abandoned  if
           the appellant -


           a)  is granted leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom,
           or


           b)  leaves the United Kingdom."


9.    The wording of Section 58(8) of the Immigration & Asylum Act  1999  is
      as follows:

           "A pending appeal under this Part is to be treated as  abandoned
           if the appellant leaves the United Kingdom."

10.   For what it is worth, we consider that Mr  Elks  was  right  to  argue
      that this appeal falls under the 1999 Act, but  it  was,  as  we  have
      noted above, common ground that the wording of the legislation is such
      that effectively it makes no difference.   We  do  not  consider  that
      under either provision it can properly be said that more needs  to  be
      read into the wording than is contained there already.  The  situation
      in Muja [2002] 05107 where the  Tribunal  declined  to  interpret  the
      abandonment provision in such a way as to make it applicable in a case
      where the Secretary of State had illegally removed  an  appellant,  is
      clearly distinguishable from the instant case.  The case before us  is
      one where the appellant  voluntarily  sought  the  assistance  of  the
      International Organisation for Migration to enable him  to  return  to
      Poland, in circumstances which in our view cannot  be  interpreted  as
      has been suggested by Mr Delisser as implying that  he  believed  that
      his appeal rights had come to an end, and  he  was  duly  assisted  to
      leave.  We do not consider that there is any duty in the circumstances
      of such a case on the Secretary of State to  contact  the  appellant's
      legal representatives to inform them of what is happening, and  we  do
      not see any flaw in the disclaimer notice that there is no  indication
      that  the  contents  had  been  explained  to  the  appellant  by   an
      interpreter.  No doubt it would be preferable if  that  had  been  the
      case, but we do not consider it can properly be suggested that on  the
      face of it anything other than that the proper  procedures  have  been
      observed,  particularly  where  the  appellant  initially  sought  the
      assistance of a voluntary organisation to assist his departure.



11.   As a consequence we conclude that this appeal has been abandoned.




                                                                   D K Allen
                                                              Vice President
