

                 NU (Credibility - Risk on Return) Turkey [2003] UKIAT 00072



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                               Date heard:  8 September 2003
                                                      Date notified.12.09.03
                                  Before:-.


                           DR H H  STOREY (Chair)
                                 MRS M L ROE

                                                               Between



                                                       Appellant

                                                                  And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Turkey,  has  appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr A  C  B  Markham  David,
dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  decision  by  the  respondent  giving
directions for removal following refusal to grant asylum. Mr D  Saldanha  of
Counsel instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors represented the appellant.  Ms  K
Evans appeared for the respondent.


2. The Tribunal has decided to remit this appeal.

3. Albeit accepting that the appellant's family had been seriously  harassed
over many years, the adjudicator did not accept that the appellant had  been
persecuted  or  that  he  would  upon  return  be  treated  as  a  suspected
separatist.

4. The grounds of appeal contended that given the  adjudicator`s  acceptance
that the appellant's family had suffered and continued to suffer  harassment
from the authorities, he should have allowed the appeal.


5. Given the evidence the adjudicator said he accepted, we would agree  that
is arguable he should have concluded that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
simply on the basis of being  a  member  of  a  family  which  continued  to
receive regular visits from the authorities looking for  guns  and  evidence
of involvement with the PKK. However, we do not consider that we  are  in  a
position  to  decide  this  case  for  ourselves  on  the   basis   of   the
adjudicator`s primary findings of fact. That is because he  gave  inadequate
reasons for accepting the claimant's account of his  past  experiences.  The
appellant in this case did  not  appear  at  the  hearing.  He  had  claimed
through those he instructed that he could not get a train  from  Bristol  to
Cardiff  until  2.30  p.m.  having  missed  one  at  6  a.m.  Although   the
adjudicator did not believe this claim and  so  refused  a  request  for  an
adjournment, he did not find that as a result the  appellant  had  forfeited
an opportunity to give oral evidence and have his account tested  in  cross-
examination. In our view he  should  have  made  a  finding  on  this  issue
because it was relevant to his assessment of the case as a whole and to  the
quality of the appellant's evidence. Instead he stated:

      "As the appellant did not give evidence before me, the principal means
      of assessing his evidence is by the  level  of  consistency  with  the
      objective evidence. The appellant lives in  Diyarbakir  in  south-east
      Turkey, which is a stronghold of the PKK,  where  the  population  are
      mainly Kurdish. There is ample evidence  to  support  the  pattern  of
      harassment of the Kurdish described by the appellant".


6. We have no quarrel with the adjudicator treating the extent to which  his
account squared with the objective evidence as a relevant factor  and  as  a
very relevant  one.  However,  we  do  not  think  that  in  this  case  the
adjudicator was entitled to make a  positive  credibility  finding  on  this
basis alone. If it were right for an adjudicator to  decide  credibility  on
this basis alone, then appeals could succeed even when the account given  by
a claimant was full of serious discrepancies.

7. The shortcomings of the adjudicator's approach were  compounded  in  this
case by the fact that the Reasons for Refusal letter of 3 July 2002,  whilst
not specifying any inconsistencies in the appellant's account,  plainly  did
not accept the credibility of his  claim.  At  paragraph  7  the  respondent
noted that despite the alleged harassment that he  was  subjected  to  since
1992, "you and your family remained in Diyabakir until you decided to  leave
in 2001. This delay in attempting to leave  the  area  casts  doubt  on  the
sincerity of your claim to have feared persecution from the  authorities  in
Turkey between 1992 and  2001."   The  adjudicator  records  little  of  the
submissions that were put to him by the representatives at the hearing,  but
there is certainly nothing to indicate  that  the  respondent  had  conceded
credibility. Accordingly it was incumbent on him to explain why he  did  not
find the respondent's reasons for rejecting credibility persuasive.

8. In such circumstances we are simply not prepared to approach this  appeal
on the basis that we have adequate findings of fact  before  us.  What  this
appeal requires, and still has not had, is a  properly  reasoned  assessment
of the appellant's evidence. We would add the comment that  lack  of  proper
fact-finding by adjudicators  in  Turkish  cases  appears  to  us  to  be  a
significant problem. We entirely understand  that  adjudicators  work  under
pressure and are subject to strict time-constraints. But given the  frequent
need for the courts and the Tribunal to modify their assessment  of  current
risk factors in Turkish cases in the light of the latest  objective  country
materials, it rarely helps for adjudicators to  seek  to  resolve  cases  by
assuming or too easily accepting  certain  facts  as  true  so  as  to  then
examine the risk consequences for a particular  appellant.  Very  often  the
issue of risk will turn crucially on whether the  particular  account  given
by the claimant is true.

9. For the above reasons the appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  it  is
remitted in accordance with Rule 22 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 2003 to be heard by an adjudicator other than  Mr  A  C  B
Markham David.

                                                               DR H H STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
