
Heard  at  Field  House          OG (Article 8 - Proportionality) Algeria
[2003] UKIAT 00078
On        4 August 2003
Written    5 August 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             . . . . . . . . . . .
.19/08/03 . . . . . . . . . . .

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                 Mr P R Lane



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Algeria, appeals, with leave,  against  the
     determination of an  Adjudicator,  Ms  S  Beg,  dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 27 December 2001   to  refuse
     leave to enter and refuse asylum.

  2.  Before  us,  Mr  N  Armstrong,  instructed  by  Messrs  Irving  &  Co,
     represented the Appellant and Ms J Sigley,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
     Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant came to the UK on 14 March 2000  and  claimed  asylum  on
     arrival.  His claim was based upon  fear  of  the  GIA,  who  had  been
     seeking to extort money from the family car business, operated  by  the
     Appellant, his father, and his brother, Farid. This was not reported to
     the police, who however learned that Farid had been in contact with the
     GIA. He was arrested and detained on two occasions and at  the  end  of
     August 1997 he left Algeria for the  UK,  where  he  has  been  granted
     indefinite leave to remain as a refugee. The Appellant claims  that  he
     was arrested by the police  after  his  brother  left,  and  after  his
     release, was in hiding for a while  but  returned  home  and  was  then
     conscripted into the Armed Forces.  He finished his military service in
     January 2000 but believed he would  be  a  target  for  the  terrorists
     because of his military service.  He had also spent long periods out of
     work. His father, mother and another sibling  remain  in  Algeria.  The
     Adjudicator dismissed the Appellant's asylum and associated  Article  3
     claim, and there is no appeal before us concerning this.

  4. However the Adjudicator also considered and rejected  a  claim  by  the
     Appellant under Article 8 in respect of his  family  life.  The  appeal
     before  us  is  against  this  decision.  The  relevant  facts  can  be
     summarised as follows. The Appellant's brother Farid lives in  the  UK,
     as does another brother, Foudil, who has been granted indefinite  leave
     to remain as a consequence of psychiatric problems. They live near each
     other and often meet.   Additionally,  the  Appellant  married  Valerie
     Gabi, a UK citizen, on 5 February 2003,  some  two  months  before  the
     hearing before the Adjudicator, having only met her  some  five  months
     earlier. His wife knew at the time of the marriage that the Appellant's
     asylum appeal was coming  up,  but  they  still  went  ahead  with  the
     marriage because she said she was impulsive. By previous relationships,
     she has a young daughter who lives with  her  and  the  Appellant,  and
     another daughter, now just 15, who lives with her mother.

  5. The Adjudicator concluded that there was a strong likelihood  that  the
     Appellant married on 5 February 2003 to enhance his chances of  staying
     in the UK, though she accepted  he had developed  a  good  relationship
     with his wife and her daughter. The Adjudicator also accepted that  the
     Appellant had a close relationship with his two  brothers  in  the  UK.
     However the  Adjudicator  had  regard  to  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
     including  the  need  of  the  Respondent  to  maintain  an   effective
     immigration  policy.   Though  she  did  not  say  so  in  terms,  both
     representatives have accepted that at least by inference she followed a
     correct step-by-step approach in her assessment of Article 8,  and  the
     only issues before us relate to her assessment of proportionality.

  6. In this regard  the  Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  return  of  the
     Appellant to Algeria together with his wife and her daughter, would not
     be subject to any insurmountable obstacles.   Alternatively,  she  also
     concluded that there was no reason why the Appellant should not  return
     to Algeria alone to obtain entry clearance as a  spouse  in  accordance
     with the Immigration Rules. She had regard to the  submission  made  to
     her by Mr Armstrong that the Appellant may not be able to obtain  entry
     clearance because he might not be able to meet the requirements of  the
     Rules as to accommodation and maintenance.  However she concluded  that
     the requirements could possibly be met by the Appellant's wife  in  due
     course if she obtained employment, but that was a matter for her.

  7. Before us, Mr Armstrong attacked  these  conclusions  in  two  specific
     respects.

  8. The first was that the Adjudicator when assessing  whether  there  were
     any insurmountable obstacles to the family returning  to  Algeria  with
     the Appellant, did not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  both  his
     brothers had indefinite leave to remain in the UK and could not  return
     with him.  This amounted to an insurmountable obstacle to the return of
     the family. Nor did she take into account the relationship between  the
     Appellant's wife and  her  older  daughter  and  her  mother,  and  the
     problems that relocation to Algeria would cause them.

  9. The second related to the prospect of the Appellant returning alone  to
     seek a visa to re-enter as a spouse. Whilst he  acknowledged  that  the
     Adjudicator and the Tribunal were bound by the decision of the Court of
     Appeal in Mahmood, nevertheless he argued that account should have been
     taken of the fact that this was a borderline case  as  to  whether  the
     Appellant could satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  on
     accommodation and maintenance, and  removal  would  make  his  task  of
     satisfying  his  burden  more  difficult,  if   not   impossible.   The
     Appellant's wife was presently freed by the presence of  the  Appellant
     to study to be a school assistant, and she was also  working  part-time
     as a lunch assistant at the school attended by her younger daughter.

 10. In considering these submissions we have followed the guidance  of  the
     Court of Appeal in  Oleed,  that  we  should  not  interfere  with  the
     Adjudicator's  assessment  unless  it  is  either  "plainly  wrong   or
     unsustainable."

 11. These issues concerning Article 8 have been considered by the Court  of
     Appeal in  various  decisions.  In  Amjad  Mahmood  [2001]  INLR  1  it
     undertook a very thorough review of the Strasbourg jurisprudence on the
     issue of proportionality. Lord Philips MR summarised  the  position  as
     follows.
           "I have drawn the following conclusions as to  the  approach  of
           the Commission and the ECHR to the  potential  conflict  between
           the respect for family life and the enforcement  of  immigration
           controls.
           1. A state has a right under international law  to  control  the
              entry of non-nationals into its territory, subject always  to
              its treaty obligations.
           2. Article 8 does not impose on a state any  general  obligation
              to respect the choice of residence of a married couple.
           3. Removal or exclusion of one family member from a state  where
              other members of the family are lawfully  resident  will  not
              necessarily infringe Article 8 rights provided there  are  no
              insurmountable obstacles to the family living together in the
              country of origin of the family members excluded. Even  where
              this involves a degree of hardship for some or all members of
              the family.
           4. Article 8 is likely to be violated  by  the  expulsion  of  a
              member of the family that has  been  long  established  in  a
              state if the circumstances are such that it is not reasonable
              to expect the other members of  the  family  to  follow  that
              member expelled.
           5. Knowledge on the part of  one  spouse  at  the  time  of  the
              marriage  that  rights  of  residence  of  the   other   were
              precarious  militates  against  a  finding  that   an   order
              excluding the latter spouse violates Article 8.
           6. Whether interference with family rights is justified  in  the
              interests of controlling immigration will depend on  (i)  the
              facts of the  particular  case  and  (ii)  the  circumstances
              prevailing in the state whose action is impugned.

 12. Lord Phillips also held in paragraph 65 that;
           65. If and when the  Appellant  applies  for  permission  for  a
           settlement visa in accordance with [the Rules]  his  application
           will have to be considered having regard  to  his  rights  under
           Article 8. In the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  that  the
           possibility that his application may not succeed is  any  reason
           for excusing him from the requirement  to  make  an  application
           outside the country if he wishes permission to settle here  with
           his wife and family.

 13. Additionally Laws LJ stated at paragraphs 23 and 26 that
           23. Firm immigration control requires a consistency of treatment
           between one aspiring immigrant and another. If  the  established
           rule is to the effect - as it is - that a person seeking  rights
           of residence here on grounds of marriage, (not being someone who
           already enjoys a leave, albeit limited, to  remain  in  the  UK)
           must obtain an entry clearance in his country of origin, then  a
           waiver of that requirement in the case of someone who has  found
           his way here without an entry clearance and then seeks to remain
           on marriage grounds, having no other legitimate claim to  enter,
           would, in the absence of exceptional  circumstances  to  justify
           the waiver, disrupt  and  undermine  firm  immigration  control,
           because it would be manifestly unfair to other would-be entrants
           who are content to take their place in the entry clearance queue
           in the country of origin.
           26. No matter that the immigrant in the individual case,  having
           arrived here without the required entry clearance, may  be  able
           to show that he would have been entitled to one,  or  even  that
           the Home Office actually accepts that he meets the [Immigration]
           Rules' substantive requirements; it is  simply  unfair  that  he
           should not have to wait in the queue  like  everyone  else.   At
           least it is unfair unless he can  demonstrate  some  exceptional
           circumstances, which reasonably justifies his jumping the queue.

 14. The Court of Appeal in Isiko [2001] Imm AR 291 also concluded that  the
     Secretary of State was entitled to regard as important the integrity of
     the immigration regime as a whole, and  expressly  approved  the  above
     observations by Laws LJ. The Court of Appeal in Soumahoro  [2003]  EWCA
     Civ 840 recently expressed the same point in even  stronger  terms.  It
     concluded that where the Secretary of State had conducted  a  balancing
     exercise on the facts, the role of the Adjudicator should be to  decide
     whether the conclusion reached by him was in accordance with  the  law,
     even if the Adjudicator would personally have preferred the balance  to
     be struck differently. Even in circumstances where it is necessary  for
     the Adjudicator to reach his or her own conclusions on proportionality,
     (such as where the Secretary of State has not considered the Article  8
     point, or where there are new or different facts  that  have  not  been
     considered by him) the Adjudicator should pay deference to  the  policy
     of the Secretary of State to maintain an effective immigration  policy,
     to  the  extent  that  it  was  doubtful  whether,  in  practice,   the
     application of these two  different  approaches  would  often  lead  to
     different outcomes.

 15.  Thus  the  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT01757,   applying   these
     principles, held that it would be proportionate to  remove  an  illegal
     entrant, separated from his UK wife and  British  child  because  queue
     jumping for entry clearance will not be acceptable, provided a  genuine
     application under the Rules from his home country would  not  take  too
     long.

 16. We have followed the principles set out in these cases in assessing the
     submissions made to us.

 17. Mr Armstrong's  first  submission  is  that  the  Adjudicator  was  too
     restrictive when concluding that there was no insuperable  obstacle  to
     the Appellant's wife and her child returning with him to live  together
     in Algeria. He should have taken into  account  the  extended  families
     both of the Appellant and of his wife.

 18. With regard to the Appellant, this extended family means his  brothers.
     They both  have  indefinite  leave  to  remain  arising  out  of  their
     experiences in Algeria, and came to the UK well before  the  Appellant.
     Ms Sigley did not suggest that there would not be insuperable obstacles
     to both of them returning with the Appellant. However, as  she  pointed
     out, even if their relationship with  the  Appellant  is  strong,  both
     brothers are adults living in  separate  households,  albeit  near  the
     Appellant and their situation was not what Lord Phillips  had  in  mind
     when analysing the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  as  described  above.  We
     agree. We consider that in context he was referring to  the  extent  to
     which a State has an obligation to respect the choice of residence of a
     married couple. He said that in terms. He went on, in our judgment,  to
     assess the other issues, including that of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
     to return in the context of an applicant's immediate family. That is  a
     husband and wife and children, living with him  in  his  household.  We
     accept that an applicant may  have,  in  addition  to  their  immediate
     nuclear family, a larger extended family with whom some family life  is
     enjoyed in varying degrees, but it is implicit that unless they are  an
     interdependent group, essentially living  together  in  one  household,
     they will not be returning anywhere together. It would be artificial to
     interpret the observations by  Lord  Phillips  as  meaning  that  every
     relative, however remote, should be assessed to see whether there is an
     insurmountable obstacle to their returning with an applicant, when they
     do not live with the Appellant in the UK. Having said that,  we  accept
     that it is possible for an adult to have a very close family life  with
     relatives other than his/her spouse and children, and that consequently
     they should be considered as part of his  nuclear  family.   This  will
     depend upon the facts in each case. There  may  be  for  example  be  a
     situation where there is a very close dependency on an applicant  by  a
     relative, who is not a spouse or child. In such event their ability  to
     return with the applicant will be relevant. However,  in  this  present
     appeal,  the  Adjudicator  did  not  find  as  a  fact  that  any  such
     relationship existed between the Appellant and either of his brother's.
      The brother with psychiatric problems  did  see  the  Appellant  on  a
     regular basis, and the Appellant lived with him for  a  while  when  he
     first arrived in the UK, but that is far short of there being a current
     and active dependence or their now being part of a common household. We
     do not accept therefore that the viability of return for either brother
     is a decisive factor in assessing whether there are any  insurmountable
     obstacles to the Appellant returning with his immediate family.

 19. With regard to the Appellant's wife and her wider family, it  is  clear
     that neither she, nor her mother, nor either of her daughters wishes to
     return to Algeria with the Appellant.  They have many good reasons  for
     not wanting to do so. There may be a degree of hardship if they were to
     do so. However none of them,  on  the  evidence,  have  an  insuperable
     obstacle to living with the Appellant in Algeria and we do  not  accept
     Mr Armstrong's submission that  Lord  Phillips  clear  and  unambiguous
     reference to an "insuperable obstacle," should be qualified to  include
     a reasonableness test.

 20. Thus we do not consider that there  is  any  viable  substance,  in  Mr
     Armstrong's first ground.

 21. In his second ground in essence he invites us to take into account  the
     possible outcome of an application for a visa, made by the Appellant on
     return to Algeria, and whether the prospect of success will be  damaged
     by removal. However it is not for us to decide this issue.  The  proper
     task for the Adjudicator, and  indeed  the  Tribunal,  is  to  consider
     whether the requirement on the Appellant to return to Algeria to make a
     visa application will be disproportionate under Article 8.

 22. Thus the Tribunal in  Soloot  01/TH/01366  was  correct  to  allow  the
     appeal, because on the facts the applicant would have  been  unable  to
     make any visa application  if  returned  to  Iran,  as  there  were  no
     facilities available in that country and the  applicant  would  not  be
     permitted to travel to a neighbouring country, where  there  were  visa
     application facilities. That is however a very  different  matter  from
     the Tribunal considering the merits of a visa application, where proper
     facilities exist, as in Algeria. That is the  proper  function  of  the
     Secretary of State and those who act in his name. In  this  appeal,  no
     application under the Rules has yet been  made  by  the  Appellant  for
     leave to enter as a spouse.  Still less has any decision been  made  by
     an Entry Clearance Officer. We would  be  wrong  to  speculate  on  the
     outcome. The Entry Clearance Officer is, as we are,  required  to  take
     into account an applicant's human rights.  If we were to deal with this
     issue ourselves, we would  in  effect  either  be  usurping  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer's role or assuming, without any good reason, that the
     Entry Clearance Officer will make a decision that is not in  accordance
     with the law. If the Entry Clearance Officer should get it wrong,  then
     his decision will be subject to a right appeal in the usual way.

 23. Nor do we  accept  Mr  Armstrong's  point  that  there  is  a  material
     distinction for our purposes between an application on removal  and  an
     entry application.  The entire point of Laws LJ's comments  in  Mahmood
     was that an applicant should not be  entitled  to  undermine  effective
     immigration control by being able to  make  an  in-country  application
     based on a marriage, when the Rules  do  not  permit  it.  Indeed  Lord
     Phillips effectively  disposed  of  this  and  the  previous  point  in
     paragraph 65 of Mahmood, when he said  that  "I  do  not  consider  the
     possibility that his application may not  succeed  is  any  reason  for
     excusing him from  the  requirement  to  make  an  application  outside
     country if he wishes permission  to  settle  here  with  his  wife  and
     family."

 24. The Tribunal addressed a similar  point  in  its  starred  decision  in
     Chawish [2002] UKIAT 01376. In that case the  Applicant,  a  Kurd  from
     Iraq, was a beneficiary of an undertaking not to  remove  him  until  a
     safe means of returning him to the KAA could be found. He  argued  that
     if he remained in the UK without any immigration  status  he  would  be
     destitute and this would be in violation of his Article 3  rights.  The
     Tribunal held that
           "It would be unlawful for the Secretary of State to act in  such
           a way as to breach the claimant's human rights or  indeed  those
           of anyone seeking to enter or to remain in United  Kingdom.   If
           he did act in such a way, a legal challenge could be brought and
           the decision would be overturned.  The  law  does  not  tolerate
           anyone being left destitute as a  number  of  decisions  of  the
           Court of Appeal have made clear."

 25. This in our view is the correct approach. We should  not  prejudge  the
     Entry Clearance Officer's decision  or  assume  that  he  would  breach
     Article 8 when making that decision.  The issue before us, as  for  the
     Adjudicator, is whether it would be  disproportionate  to  require  the
     Appellant to return to Algeria to make a visa application for entry  to
     the UK as a spouse  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
     Adjudicator concluded that it would not, and there is no error in  that
     decision

 26. For all the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.




                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
