
Determination                               SA (Article 8 - Article 3 -
Separation From Children) Iran [2003] UKIAT 00154

Determination Notified                  Heard at: Field House
20 November 2003__________                   On: 10 November 2003
                                        Written on: 13 November 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                   Before

                         Mr L V Waumsley - Chairman
                                Mr T S Culver

Between
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Representation
 Appellant - Ms  Rebecca  Chapman  of  counsel  instructed  by  Bindman  and
Partners
Secretary of State - Mr J  McGirr Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. The appellant a national  of  Iran  appeals  with  permission  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of  an  Adjudicator  (  Mr  F  E  P
      Meadows ), who dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 20 February 2002 to refuse to grant asylum.


   2. The appellant's claim for asylum is based on the following assertions:
        a) The appellant's father in law was head of Savak for the  Teheran
           area which were the Security Forces under the Shah prior to  the
           revolution. After the revolution he was detained for  two  years
           and from time to time thereafter.
        b) The father in law was not allowed to work and had  most  of  his
           property confiscated. He remained under surveillance.
        c) Because they had difficulty renting a place for  themselves  the
           appellant and her husband lived with his parents for 4 years.
        d) When they were discovered with a satellite dish her husband  was
           taken away and abused. He was later apprehended in  relation  to
           possession of a stolen cheque.
        e) He was required to report several  times  in  relation  to  this
           charge. He was asked to  give  information  about  his  father's
           associates.
        f) The appellant thought that she was being watched and  her  house
           was broken into and property destroyed.
        g) Her husband was summoned to appear in court but had  the  matter
           adjourned. During the period of adjournment  the  appellant  was
           arrested on the basis that she was driving a stolen car. She was
           held for several hours without food or drink and told she should
           persuade her husband to be more cooperative.
        h) The appellant's husband did not respond to a summons to come  to
           court and was told that an arrest warrant had  been  issued  for
           him. Her husband went into hiding.
        i) The appellant obtained a visa to come to the United Kingdom  for
           herself and her children to enter as visitors.  She  arrived  in
           the United Kingdom on 16 December 2001 and applied for asylum on
           7 January 2002.
        j) The appellant now says  her  husband  abused  her  and  she  has
           brought divorce proceedings against him in this country.


   3. The adjudicator did not find the appellant credible for  a  number  of
      reasons:
        a) He did not accept that her father in law's role would  make  the
           appellant of interest to the Iranian authorities.
        b) Her father in law had not been detained since 1989.
        c) He did not accept that the authorities would have written to her
           husband advising him of a warrant for  his  arrest.  They  would
           simply have arrested him.
        d) The appellant was able to leave Iran on her own properly  issued
           passport which would not have been  possible  had  she  been  of
           interest to the Iranian authorities.
        e) She had represented to the Embassy that she wished to visit  her
           brother in the United Kingdom and did not have problems in Iran.
           Clearly she was either being untruthful then or now.
        f) Her parents and siblings live in Iran and have had no problems.
        g) In her Statement of Evidence Form (SEF) of January 2002  or  her
           interview the appellant made no mention of matrimonial problems.
           The first time she mentioned them was  in  September  2002.  The
           adjudicator thought they  had  been  mentioned  to  enhance  her
           claim.
        h) In the absence of evidence from her church he would  not  accept
           that she was taking instruction in Christianity.
        i) The adjudicator declined to deal with any problems arising  from
           her marriage breakdown because he was not given any documents to
           support her suggestion that she had brought divorce  proceedings
           in the United Kingdom.


   4. The Tribunal granted permission to appeal to consider the human rights
      grounds that might arise in regard to her  matrimonial  problems.  The
      documents have been served  to  show  that  she  has  brought  divorce
      proceedings against her husband and various orders of the Family Court
      have been made in regard to her relationship with her husband and  his
      access to their children


   5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McGirr  asked  for  an  adjournment
      because he had located the  file  of  the  husband's  application  for
      asylum. That application had been refused by the  Secretary  of  State
      the appeal had been refused  by  the  adjudicator  and  permission  to
      appeal refused by the Tribunal.

   6. Mr McGirr wanted  to  clarify  the  position  because  he  thought  it
      possible from that file to show that there had been collusion  in  the
      bringing of the  divorce proceedings.

   7. Ms Chapman did not oppose the application. Indeed  although  she   has
      served an expert's report which alludes to matrimonial law in Iran she
      felt there could be further clarification.

   8. We felt we might be able to deal with the  case  on  the  question  of
      whether taking the appellant's case at its  highest:  accepting  there
      was no collusion in regard to the divorce proceedings and that she has
      been truthful in this  regard  the  appellant  would  be  entitled  to
      protection under the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR).

   9. Having heard the arguments of both sides on this issue we feel we  can
      deal with it on this basis and there would be nothing gained  from  an
      adjournment.

  10. Ms Chapman referred us to the 2001  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
      Practices of the United States Department of State for Iran.  This  at
      page  19  of  22  indicates  that  women  are  discriminated  against,
      particularly in regard to family and property law under the provisions
      of the Islamic Civil and Penal Codes.

  11. On the same page its reflects that women who  remarry  are  forced  to
      give up the custody of the children of the  earlier  marriage  to  the
      children's father. However there are exceptions to this principle such
      as when the husband is a drug addict or has a criminal record.

  12. She also referred us to  the  October  2003  Country  Information  and
      Policy Unit Report (CIPU) which at paragraph 6.154 states  the  father
      has legal custody of the children unless he can be shown to be  unfit.
      The Civil Code provides that custody of  a  male  child  is  with  the
      mother until the child is 2 and until 5 for a daughter.

  13. Finally on this topic she referred us  to  her  expert's  report  from
      Professor Afshar of the University of York who relates that women have
      automatic custody under Iranian law of boys to  the  age  of  two  and
      girls to 7.

  14. The professor refers to a bill passed in May 2002  which  would  allow
      women custody of all children to the age of 7, when  the  court  would
      decide which parent would have custody. He says this bill has  yet  to
      be approved by the Guardian Council.

  15. The CIPU  at 6.152 refers to the bill being  passed  by  the  Guardian
      Council in December 2002 and that the bill enhances a woman's right to
      divorce in Iran but that it is still very limited by  comparison  with
      that of a man.

  16. Professor Asfhar opines that if  returned  to  Iran  and  her  husband
      divorced her the appellant would  lose  custody  of  her  son  and  is
      legally likely to lose custody of her daughter when she reaches 7.

  17. We felt we should deal with the case of the  basis  that  if  all  the
      family is returned to Iran there is a real risk  that  this  appellant
      would lose custody of both her children. Her son  is  now  6  and  her
      daughter 4.

  18. The law on parental contact in Iran was  not  made  clear  to  us.  Ms
      Chapman referred us to a reference to the  Report  of  United  Nations
      Committee on the Rights of  the  Child  of  May/June  2000  quoted  at
      paragraph 6.166 of the CIPU which referring to Iranian law  says;  the
      rights of the child were seen through a paternalistic lens; the  child
      was not seen as an active subject of human rights.

  19. She argued that we should assume that if a  father  wanted  to  forbid
      contact a woman would not be able to have any contact with her  child.
      She argued that if returned to Iran there would be a real risk of this
      loving mother being denied all access to her children and if this  was
      so it would not only be a denial of her right  to  family  life  under
      Article 8 of  the  ECHR  but  also  would  be  inhuman  and  degrading
      treatment such as to be a violation of her right under  Article  3  of
      the ECHR.

  20. Article 3 of the ECHR forbids torture. It refers to torture or inhuman
      or degrading treatment  or  punishment.  There  is  a  great  deal  of
      jurisprudence both in this country and in Europe which reflects it  is
      a very high standard.

  21. We do not accept that even assuming this woman might be denied  access
      to her children by the Iranian courts,  an  assumption  which  is  not
      supported by the evidence in this case,  it  would  be  an  Article  3
      violation.

  22. Painful as it would be for a loving mother to be denied access to  her
      children one must face the fact  that  it  sometimes  occurs  in  this
      country. Where the court finds that it is in the best interests of the
      child to forbid all contact it  can  and  sometimes  does  forbid  all
      contact.

  23. Were this a violation of Article 3 no court within a country signatory
      to the Convention could lawfully do so for there is no derogation from
      Article 3 for the good of society or of the child.

  24. When it comes to custody it will be obvious that whenever  a  marriage
      breaks down one parent is going to lose custody all  of  the  time  or
      both parents for some of the time.

  25. It is also obvious that different countries with different values will
      deal with family break down in different ways. It may be that European
      countries will tend to give custody of young children  to  the  mother
      while Islamic countries would give it to the father.

  26. It would seem very strange to us if the difference in family law  were
      to give rise to protection under Article 8 of the ECHR against removal
      of illegal immigrants to those who would have more  rights  under  the
      laws of a European country than they would in their home countries.

  27. Ms Chapman argued that were this appellant and her  children  returned
      to Iran there would be insurmountable obstacles to the continuance  of
      the family life they have enjoyed during the two years they have  been
      here.

  28. She correctly argued that there are circumstances where Article 8  can
      provide protection from removal. But the situation where this  happens
      is where some family members will remain in  the  host  country  while
      others are removed. It is the removal which effects the separation.

  29. In this case all the family will be removed to Iran. It  may  be  that
      the appellant's husband will be removed separately  but  she  and  her
      children will not be separated by the removal.

  30. Even if Ms Chapman is correct it will be the operation of Iranian  law
      which separates the  appellant  from  her  children  rather  than  the
      removal from the United Kingdom.

  31. We rely in regard to this approach to the case of Ullah  &  Do  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 1856 where the Court of Appeal considered this  question.  In
      that case the effect of removing the appellants to their homeland  was
      to interfere with their rights to religious  freedom,  but  the  court
      considered the question in regard to all the rights protected  by  the
      ECHR.

  32. Lord Phillips MR gave the judgement of the court. Dealing with Article
      8 family life he stated in paragraph 42.  Article  8  has  been  quite
      often  invoked  in  support  of  a  submission  that  an   immigration
      restriction infringes the convention. We believe, however, that it has
      only successfully been invoked where removal or refusal of  entry  has
      impacted on the enjoyment of family life of those already  established
      within the jurisdiction.

  33. The court went on to decide; that a removal decision to a country that
      does not respect Article 9 rights will not infringe the HRA where  the
      nature of the interference with the right to practise religion that is
      anticipated in the receiving state  falls  short  of  Article  3  ill-
      treatment.

  34. The court further stated; This appeal is concerned with Article 9. Our
      reasoning has, however, wider implications. Where  the  Convention  is
      invoked on the sole ground of the treatment which  an  alien,  refused
      the right to enter or  remain,  is  likely  to  be  subjected  by  the
      receiving state, and that treatment  is  not  sufficiently  severe  to
      engage Article 3, the English court is not required to recognise  that
      any other Article of the Convention is, or may be, engaged.

  35. This approach was approved in the more recent Court of Appeal decision
      in an HIV/AIDS case; N[2003]EWCA Civ 1369.

  36. We conclude that even putting the case of this appellant on this issue
      at its highest and assuming that there would be a  real  risk  of  her
      losing custody of her children on her return to Iran, she still has no
      right to the protection of the ECHR because what she  fears  does  not
      amount to Article 3 mistreatment and any Article 8  interference  with
      family life will occur by operation of the law  of  Iran  and  not  by
      reason of her removal from the United Kingdom.

  37. This appeal must therefore be dismissed.

                                             Thomas S Culver
                                                      Legal Member
