
AU (Identifying Issues - Article 8 - Procedure) Afghanistan [2003] UKIAT
00186

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard at Field House
On: 28 October 2003
Prepared: 28 October 2003

                                   Before


                              Mr Andrew Jordan


                               Mr D.M. Froome




Between:
      Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      Respondent

For the appellant: Mr D Lemer, counsel
For the Secretary of State: Ms C Hanrahan, HOPO



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan  who  appeals  against  the
      decision of an adjudicator, Mr T.R. Cockrill, following a  hearing  on
      17 April 2003 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to refuse both his  asylum  and  his  human  rights
      claims.


   2. The appellant was born on 1 January 1950 and is now  aged  53.   There
      are 9 dependants associated with his appeal.  His wife was born  on  2
      May 1964 and is 39 years old.  The couple have  eight  children.   The
      eldest, Hayad, was present during the hearing before the Tribunal  and
      told us that he was born on 2 May 1982 and is 21 years  old.   He  and
      his brother, Khalid, have both left college and are not  presently  in
      employment.  The other six children are  all  attending  school.   The
      youngest are still at primary school.


The permission to appeal


   3. When His Honour Judge Ainley  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Tribunal, he did so on the limited grounds of Article 3 and Article  8
      of the ECHR only in so far as they related to  the  difficulties  that
      the family might face with eight children on arrival in Kabul.

   4. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Lemer, who appeared  on  behalf
      of the appellant, made an application to extend the grounds of  appeal
      to those set out in paragraphs 1 to  12  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,
      Grounds 1,2 and 3.  Under Rule 20 (2) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2003,  where  the  Tribunal  has  refused
      permission to appeal on any ground, it must not  grant  permission  to
      vary the grounds of  appeal  to  include  that  ground  unless  it  is
      satisfied that, because of special circumstances, it would  be  unjust
      not to allow the variation.

   5. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that  there  were  special
      circumstances requiring  us  to  reverse  the  decision  of  the  Vice
      President granting permission.  One of the  matters  relied  upon  was
      that the appellant does not now have available to  him  the  right  to
      seek statutory review of the Vice President's  decision,  although  it
      was conceded such a right existed at the time.  It does not seem to us
      that this amounts to a special circumstance,  albeit  there  was  some
      uncertainty when the Rules were first introduced as to  the  right  of
      statutory review when limited permission to appeal was granted.

   6. The more substantial ground was that the Vice President did  not  give
      any reasons for refusing leave in relation to Grounds 1,2 and  3.   It
      was submitted that, pursuant to Rule 18  (6)  of  the  2003  Procedure
      Rules, the Tribunal's determination must include its  reasons,  albeit
      those reasons may be in summary form.  It is common  ground  that  the
      Vice President gave no reasons.

   7. In order to deal with this objection, we considered  the  first  three
      grounds of appeal in order to ascertain whether any  of  them  had  an
      arguable prospect of success.  In Ground 1 it  was  said  that,  as  a
      result of a single sentence in paragraph 5 of the appellant's  witness
      statement of 3 April 2003, the adjudicator was wrong in  limiting  his
      consideration of the appellant's claim  to  a  fear  of  the  Taliban,
      thereby ignoring what the appellant said, namely:

           "The warlords are still ruling and have got no respect for human
           rights."


      It was submitted that as  a  result  of  this  single  reference,  the
      adjudicator failed to consider a key part of the appellant's case  and
      thereby materially erred.


   8. We do not consider that there is any substance to this point  at  all.
      The adjudicator referred to what the appellant himself  identified  as
      his fears in Afghanistan.  In paragraph 20 of the  determination,  the
      adjudicator said:
           "The  appellant  was  asked  specifically  what  he  feared   in
           Afghanistan and his reply was the Taliban.  He  added  that  the
           Taliban had taken over his land.  He reasserted how the  Taliban
           wanted to recruit his sons in order to fight on their behalf and
           they were  demanding  money  from  him.   The  appellant  was  a
           shopkeeper in Qandahar.  The appellant feared  the  Taliban  and
           those supporters of the Taliban  in  his  village.   Before  the
           deadline was  up  which  had  been  given  by  the  Taliban  the
           appellant left the  area.   The  appellant's  home  area  was  a
           Taliban stronghold..  The appellant said that the  Taliban  were
           still in control of Qandahar."


   9. It is quite apparent to us that the adjudicator was dealing  with  the
      issues that were argued before him.  He was not required to go through
      each line of the statements to check if the appellant  had  failed  to
      identify the  source  of  his  fears.   If  the  appellant  was  asked
      specifically what  he  feared  in  Afghanistan,  the  adjudicator  was
      entitled to accept his response.


  10. In Ground 2, it is argued that the adjudicator stated in paragraph  28
      of the determination that there are have been outbursts of violence in
      Afghanistan since the end of the war and that there  would  inevitably
      be local pockets where there are  supporters  of  the  former  Taliban
      regime.  The adjudicator went on to conclude that, because the Taliban
      were no longer in power, the appellant's fear of the  Taliban  was  no
      longer well founded.  It is submitted that in failing to  specify  the
      objective evidence he relied upon, the adjudicator  fell  into  error.
      The Tribunal reject this submission.  There can be no doubt that there
      had been numerous outbursts  of  violence  in  Afghanistan  since  the
      conclusion of the war.  It would be impossible for the adjudicator  to
      list each  and  every  source  of  that  obvious  statement  of  fact.
      Furthermore, we did not understand Mr  Lemer  to  be  saying  that  he
      disagreed with the adjudicator's statement of fact that there had been
      outbursts of such violence.  Similarly, simple common sense, supported
      by the overwhelming evidence of the background material, reveals  that
      the former Taliban supporters have not  simply  disappeared  into  the
      ether but exist as local pockets that may present a local risk.  That,
      however, is a far cry from the saying that, with the  removal  of  the
      Taliban regime, the appellant himself, or members of his  family,  are
      currently at risk for the reasons given when he made his claim.


  11. Ground 3 explores what is essentially the same point, namely, that the
      adjudicator was in error in his conclusion that although and there are
      pockets of  supporters  of  the  Taliban  still  in  Afghanistan,  the
      appellant and his family were not at risk.  In our judgment, there  is
      no arguable  prospect  of  this  ground  of  appeal  succeeding.   The
      appellant's case was that the Taliban had taken over his land and that
      the Taliban wanted to recruit his sons in order to fight on its behalf
      and was demanding money from him.  The appellant  feared  the  Taliban
      and those supporters of the Taliban in his village.   It  is  apparent
      that the removal of the Taliban regime has removed the overall  threat
      posed by them.  In particular, if local individuals posed the  threat,
      it could no longer be inferred  that  the  threat  existed  throughout
      Afghanistan.  Consequently, for example, Kabul would not  present  the
      appellant and his family with the same  threat  of  harm  from  former
      Taliban supporters as may exist in his home village.

  12. In the circumstances, we were satisfied that  there  were  no  special
      circumstances rendering it unjust to refuse permission to  extend  the
      grounds that the appellant was permitted to argue before us.


The application for an adjournment


  13. Mr Lemer then applied to adjourn the hearing of the  appeal  following
      the announcement by the Secretary of State of the so-called  "amnesty"
      on 24 October 2003.  We were provided with the press  release  setting
      out a summary of the new  policy,  (or  "exercise"  to  use  the  term
      adopted in the release).  It is said that up to  15,000  families  who
      sought asylum in the United Kingdom more than three years ago will  be
      considered for permission to live and work here.  The one-off exercise
      will apply to those who sought  asylum  before  2  October  2000,  had
      children before that date and who have suffered from historical delays
      in the system.  It is said that the exercise will apply to cases where
      the final appeal process has not been exhausted as well  as  to  those
      whose final decisions have already been made but where removal has not
      been effected.  The appellant and his family  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom on 16 February 1999 and applied for asylum on  arrival.   This
      is nearly some five years ago.  A decision was made to  refuse  asylum
      on 11 March 2002, over three years later.  On its face, therefore, the
      appellant's case is one that is eligible for consideration  under  the
      new policy.  It is said that the Home Office will write to  those  who
      are eligible for leave to remain but  is  not  encouraging  people  to
      enquire directly and that it is expected to take about six  months  to
      assess the bulk of those who may be eligible.


  14. It was submitted that the proper course was to adjourn the hearing  of
      the appeal for the Home Office to  consider  the  application  of  the
      amnesty.  So far, a few days  after  the  announcement,  there  is  no
      settled policy as to whether appeals should be adjourned where  it  is
      arguable that an appellant is eligible to benefit from the concession.
       However, it is apparent from the terms of  the  concession  that  the
      concession will apply whether this appeal is determined in favour  of,
      or against, the appellant.  Were the Tribunal to adjourn the appeal, a
      further hearing or hearings will be required, thereby  increasing  the
      strain on the Tribunal's workload.  If the appeal is  dismissed,  this
      will not prejudice the operation of the concession in the  appellant's
      case.  If the appeal is allowed, the appellant will have  the  benefit
      of a decision in his favour sooner  than  under  the  concession.   Ms
      Hanrahan, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  accepted
      that the appellant's appeal was a  case  that  required  consideration
      under the concession and that she would take steps to ensure that  the
      case papers were forwarded to the relevant unit at the Home Office for
      consideration.


  15. At one stage in his submissions to us, we wondered  whether  Mr  Lemer
      was arguing that the  Tribunal  should  itself  consider  the  policy,
      albeit only in the form as it appears in the press release  and  apply
      it in accordance with the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Abdi
      [1996] Imm AR 148.  We do not consider that this  is  the  appropriate
      course to take.  It is for the Secretary of State to make his decision
      in the exercise of his discretion under the policy.   If  and  when  a
      decision is made which is adverse to the appellant, it will be for the
      appellant to consider the route available to him, if any, to challenge
      that decision.  It is not for the Tribunal at this stage, and  in  the
      absence of providing  the  Secretary  of  State  with  an  appropriate
      opportunity to consider the policy for himself, to  second-guess  what
      the Secretary of State may do.  The point becomes clearer  still  when
      we are not provided with a copy of the policy itself.

  16. We refused the application to adjourn.


The Article 3 and Article 8 claims


  17.  The  adjudicator  considered  the  claims  in  paragraph  31  of  the
      determination.  His consideration was limited to the following:


           "I had taken account  of  the  overall  family  situation.   The
           appellant is a married man with eight children.  Inevitably they
           will have settled in  school  and  be  pursuing  lives  in  this
           country.  There is bound to the disruption therefore  when  they
           go back to Afghanistan.  Nevertheless, they will all  travel  as
           one family unit,  and  any  interference  is,  in  my  judgment,
           proportionate.  I have looked at this case in the round in order
           to assess whether or not  there  will  be  any  breach  of  this
           appellant's human rights by  return  and  concluded  that  there
           would not.  That appeal is also dismissed."


  18. The Tribunal accepts that the adjudicator has failed to adopt the step-
      by-step approach suggested in Nhundu.  In the absence of any  disputed
      issues of fact in relation to this aspect of the claim,  the  Tribunal
      is in as good a position as the adjudicator to decide the matter.  The
      difficulty faced by the appellant is the absence of any  comprehensive
      statement of the factors relied upon by the appellant  in  support  of
      his case.  Mr Lemer referred to the fact that, before the adjudicator,
      counsel who then appeared for the appellant applied for an adjournment
      as no witness statements had been obtained from the dependants of  the
      appellant.  This is it expressly referred to in paragraph  14  of  the
      adjudicator'  s   determination.    The   adjudicator   refused   that
      application and this must have  given  the  appellant's  advisers  the
      clearest alarm bell  that,  if  the  Tribunal  were  to  consider  the
      appellant's Article 8 claim, appropriate evidence  would  have  to  be
      placed before it.   No  application  was  made  to  adduce  additional
      evidence.   The  witness  statements  clearly  contemplated   by   the
      appellant in the hearing before the adjudicator have not been prepared
      for the benefit of the Tribunal.  We permitted Mr Lemer an opportunity
      to take instructions and indicated that we were prepared  to  consider
      any matters he chose to argue before  us.   In  the  bundle  that  was
      prepared for the adjudicator, supporting documentation is limited to a
      medical report prepared in respect of the  appellant's  wife  dated  2
      June 2003 and various school reports prepared in relation to  the  six
      youngest children.


  19. Mr Lemer submitted that the appellant enjoyed  a  normal  family  life
      with his wife and children in the United Kingdom.  However,  since  it
      has never been suggested that the family will be split up, the  family
      unit will return to Kabul intact.  Mr Lemer also submitted that  there
      is a nephew of the appellant who lives in Southall,  relatively  close
      to the appellant's  family  in  Northolt.   The  nephew  has  a  wife,
      children, mother, brother and sisters with whom the appellant's family
      enjoy close relations.  The nephew and  his  family  has  a  right  to
      remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  addition,  the  appellant  has
      maintained contact with close friends in the United Kingdom  whom  the
      family had known in Afghanistan.  Thus, he submitted, the family  life
      enjoyed by the appellant extended  beyond  his  immediate  family  and
      included  close  relatives.   Mr  Lemer  told  us  that  he   had   no
      instructions on whether there were other family members in the  United
      Kingdom  but  the  appellant  has  no  remaining   close   family   in
      Afghanistan.

  20. Whilst it is clear that the appellant enjoys family life with his wife
      and children, it is not  possible  to  determine  on  the  information
      before us whether the  nature  of  the  relationship  enjoyed  by  the
      appellant with his nephew and his wider family amounts to family life.
       Occasional or even regular visiting between relatives  and  telephone
      contact does not necessarily  amount  to  family  life  in  the  sense
      envisaged by Article  8.   Nevertheless,  for  the  purposes  of  this
      appeal, the Tribunal is prepared to accept  that  in  the  appellant's
      case, his family life extends to having close ties with his nephew and
      family.

  21. At page 15 of the bundle of documents prepared for the adjudicator the
      medical report in respect of the appellant's wife refers to her having
      multiple problems, including hypertension and arthralgia of her  sacro
      iliac joints and her forearms.  She has depression and has  been  seen
      by a psychiatrist.  She has complained of pains in her gastric  system
      and probably has gastric oesophageal disease.  She  receives  standard
      medication for hypertension, depression and her gastric problems.  The
      appellant and one of the sons suffer from severe psoriasis.

  22. The information from the children's schools indicates  that  they  are
      doing well in the United Kingdom.

  23. We also invited Hayad, the eldest son, who speaks excellent English to
      provide us, informally, with some information about  himself  and  his
      brother.  Hayad was born on 2 May 1982 and finished  a  computing  and
      English class at Hayes College following a period at Southall College.
       He does not currently have an apprenticeship or work and, indeed,  is
      not currently permitted to work.  He left college without GCSEs.   His
      brother, Khallid, finished at  college  after  completing  a  computer
      course.  He is not in employment.

  24. The information that we have set out above  encapsulates  the  general
      position of this family in the United Kingdom.  Each  of  the  private
      lives of the members will  suffer  a  substantial  interference  by  a
      return to Afghanistan.  They have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
      nearly five years.  They do not wish to return to Afghanistan.  On the
      other hand, it is clear that the policy of the Secretary of  State  to
      return the appellant and his family is in pursuance  of  a  legitimate
      aim of maintaining immigration control.  Like  many  such  cases,  the
      issue is whether that interference is a proportionate response.

  25. Mr Lemer referred us to the background information.  We do not  intend
      to set out in full the passages referred to by him.  At page A7 of the
      bundle, he referred to us to an extract from the  Human  Rights  Watch
      World Report, 2003, dealing with the return of refugees to  a  country
      that  has  been  ravaged  by  decades  of  civil  war  and   conflict,
      destruction from the US bombing campaign, insecure conditions in  some
      parts of the country and the continuation of  devastating  drought  in
      the south.  It is said that  basic  infrastructure  and  services  are
      essentially  non-existent  outside  urban  areas.   The   World   Food
      Programme, which supplies food to returning refugees  in  many  areas,
      warned of food shortages.  We were also referred to page F4 and the UN
      Security Council report of the Secretary-General dated 27 March  2003.
      In  this  report,  Afghanistan's  peace   process   remains   fragile.
      Insecurity and lack of law and  order  continue  to  have  a  negative
      impact on the lives of Afghan citizens.  Substantial progress  has  to
      be made.  Afghanistan will continue to need considerable political and
      financial engagement from the international community for some time to
      come.  At page H1, there is an IRIN news report about rising crime  in
      Kabul.


  26. Mr Lemer conceded, however, that there  was  no  evidence  that  large
      families like that of the appellant's are at greater risk than a small
      family  but,  inevitably,  the  larger  the  family  the  greater  the
      resources required to service it in a country  where  availability  of
      resources is limited.

  27.  We  were  referred  to  the  CIPU  Report  for  Afghanistan  and,  in
      particular, paragraphs 5.90 to 5.98  dealing  with  Medical  Services.
      The health status of Afghan's ranks amongst the poorest in  the  world
      and health infrastructure and human resources were grossly  inadequate
      for a population of about 24 million.  Nevertheless,  there  is  basic
      medical care.  In May 2002, a Danish  Fact  Finding  mission  reported
      there were 20 to 25 hospitals in  Kabul  which  were  functioning  but
      charged fees.  According to paragraph 5.98 of the CIPU Report,  mental
      health resources are limited but some therapeutic drugs are available.
       There are very few trained psychiatrists.

  28. In accordance with the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Razgar
      [2003] EWCA Civ 840, we have considered the appellant's Article 8 case
      in relation to his private life in the United Kingdom.  This  includes
      consideration of the differential between the treatment  available  in
      the United Kingdom for the appellant's family and that in Afghanistan.
        We  have  already  set  out  the  treatment  that  is  available  in
      Afghanistan as mentioned in the CIPU Report.  Having  considered  that
      differential, we do not consider that the appellant has established he
      or his family members will experience serious  harm  to  their  mental
      health caused, or materially contributed to, by  the  differential  in
      treatment.  See paragraph 22 of Razgar.

  29. The CIPU Report also deals with accommodation available in Kabul.   In
      paragraphs 6.162 to 6.164 it is stated that accommodation is available
      in Kabul although housing is increasingly  limited  as  more  families
      arrive.  The huge influx of returning refugees has  inevitably  placed
      strains on the city's housing and infrastructure.   During  2002,  the
      population of Kabul has doubled in size.   As  a  result,  rents  have
      soared and most residents face a difficult daily struggle to survive.

  30. The removal of this family from the United Kingdom will  deprive  them
      of the benefits they presently enjoy.  The contact that the  appellant
      has with his nephew and his family and other friends is no  more  than
      one would expect from having spent five years  or  so  in  the  United
      Kingdom. This is the inevitable consequence of removal.

  31. In addition,  the  return  of  this  family  to  Afghanistan  will  be
      difficult for them.  In accordance with the decision of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Ullah [2003] INLR 74, the Tribunal  has  considered  whether
      the treatment that this family will be subjected to in  the  receiving
      state, (that is, in  Afghanistan),  will  be  sufficiently  severe  to
      engage Article 3.  We do not consider that it will be,  see  paragraph
      64 of Ullah.  Like the many other returning refugees,  the  background
      material makes it plain that there is a level of  security  sufficient
      for their needs.  The background information does not state that there
      is no accommodation available for them.  There is no evidence  that  a
      family as large as the appellant's will be  substantially  worse  off.
      Indeed, with three male breadwinners, all of whom are apparently  able
      to work, there are increased opportunities.  Furthermore, it would not
      necessarily be unreasonable if the two adults  sons  form  a  separate
      household if this renders finding accommodation easier.  Basic medical
      services are available and the medical report prepared  on  behalf  of
      the appellant's wife does not establish a return to Kabul will prevent
      adequate treatment for her problems.

  32. For these reasons, we dismiss the appeal.




Decision: The appellant's appeal is dismissed.







Andrew Jordan
Vice President
28 October 2003
