
Heard at Field House              N (RR-Ceasefire) Macedonia CG [2003]
UKIAT 00077
On     14 July 2003
Written 14 July 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             21/08/2003

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                              Mr M G Taylor CBE




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen of Macedonia. The Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  R  J  Manuell,
     allowing the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  Appellant
     on 12 October 2001 to issue removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr G Elks, a Home Office Presenting Officer, represented the Appellant.
     Ms R Bagral represented the Respondent.

  3. There was a preliminary point raised by  the  Respondent's  solicitors,
     arising from the fact that the grounds of appeal  were  neither  signed
     nor dated by the Appellant as required by the procedure rules.  However
     this was clearly an accidental omission and the Tribunal, in accordance
     with paragraph 59 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
     Rules 2003, permitted Mr Elks to correct the error

  4. As to the substantive appeal, there is no  dispute  over  the  specific
     facts as claimed by the Respondent. He is an ethnic Albanian who  lived
     with his parents and worked on the family farm.  On 21  July  2001,  he
     was arrested for the first and only time in his life, by the Macedonian
     police.  He was told the police station that his arrest was due to  the
     fact that his brother was a member  of  the  National  Liberation  Army
     (NLA). He was detained for three weeks in solitary confinement and  was
     beaten.  He was then released, subject to a weekly reporting  condition
     and to his being forbidden to contact his brother or the NLA. He joined
     up with a cousin who had experienced similar problems and together they
     left Macedonia for the UK.

  5. As we have said, these findings of fact were accepted  as  credible  by
     the Adjudicator and have not been disputed  before  us.  The  issue  is
     whether the Adjudicator was correct  in  the  light  of  the  objective
     evidence to conclude that the Appellant  would  still  be  at  risk  on
     return today in the changed circumstances in Macedonia. The Adjudicator
     heard this appeal the end of November 2002 and it  was  promulgated  in
     December 2002.  Later versions  of  the  objective  evidence  had  been
     produced to us but they are not in any material respect different  from
     what was before the Adjudicator.

  6. Mr  Elks  first  argued  that  the  Adjudicator,  in  making  his  risk
     assessment, was in error in paragraph 26 of the determination in making
     two inferences that were not supported by the evidence.  The  first  is
     that those suspected of NLA connections  such  as  the  Respondent  are
     likely to remain of interest to the Macedonian authorities.  The second
     is that because the Respondent is  unaware  of  his  brother's  current
     whereabouts, this means his brother has  not  taken  advantage  of  the
     amnesty for NLA members and remains  a  suspect  in  the  eyes  of  the
     authorities. Ms Bagral has submitted that both  these  inferences  were
     properly supported by the evidence and could not  be  characterised  as
     either plainly wrong or unsustainable as prescribed  by  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Oleed.

  7. We agree with Mr Elks' submission. The evidence clearly shows that  the
     Respondent was arrested because of his brother's membership of the NLA,
     and not because of any activities of his own. He  was  released  before
     the framework agreement was signed, which suggests that the authorities
     were satisfied he had no involvement with the NLA  himself,  as  indeed
     was true. He left Macedonia on 10 August 2001, three  days  before  the
     framework agreement was signed. Even though he failed  to  comply  with
     the reporting conditions of his release by reason of his coming to  the
     UK,  he  would  readily  be  able  to  demonstrate  to  the  Macedonian
     authorities that he had been in the UK since his release and was not in
     any way involved thereafter with any fragments of  the  NLA.  He  would
     easily be able to clear himself even in the unlikely event  that  there
     was any lingering suspicion. On the second point,  the  evidence  shows
     that the Respondent last saw his brother a month before he was arrested
     and has heard nothing of him since, nor does he know where his  parents
     are.  There is no real connection between this  lack  of  communication
     with the Respondent and the Adjudicator's inference that it  means  the
     brother has not taken advantage of the amnesty and remains a suspect in
     the eyes of  the  authorities.   The  brother  may  have  died  in  the
     fighting. He may have sought asylum in another country. If he  remained
     in Macedonia he may have claimed the benefit of the amnesty.  There  is
     no reason in the evidence why he should not have  disarmed  and  sought
     amnesty when the NLA disbanded. If the Respondent does not  know  where
     his parents are there is no ready line of communication through them to
     his brother. There is no  indication  in  the  determination  that  the
     Adjudicator considered these various  factors  when  reaching  the  two
     inferences upon which the outcome of his determination  is  essentially
     based,  and  which  are  on  the  evidence   highly   speculative   and
     unsustainable.

  8. Ms Bagral referred us to various parts of  the  objective  evidence  to
     show us  that  the  Respondent  would  as  a  suspect  be  at  risk  of
     persecution and a breach of Article 3, and alternatively that he  would
     be at risk of persecution and a breach of Article 3 simply as an ethnic
     Albanian. We do not agree that the relatively  out  of  date  and  very
     limited information to which she referred us and which was  before  the
     Adjudicator, carries  these  consequences.  The  reality  is  that  the
     insurgent violence began in February 2001 at  the  instigation  of  the
     NLA. On 5 July 2001, the government and  the  insurgents  negotiated  a
     ceasefire, and on 13 August 2001 the ruling ethnic Macedonians and  the
     leaders of the ethnic Albanians signed the framework  agreement  laying
     down the ground work for the preservation of a peaceful, unitary, multi-
     ethnic state with improved civil rights  for  minority  groups.  On  26
     September 2001 under the terms of the  demilitarisation  agreement  the
     NLA combatants completed a voluntary handover of their weapons to  NATO
     troops and announced their disbandment. They were given  immunity  from
     prosecution if they  laid  down  their  arms  in  accordance  with  the
     agreement. The framework agreement was ratified finally on in  November
     2001 and  the  Constitution  was  amended  as  required  by  the  peace
     agreement.  Since the ceasefire an international peacekeeping force has
     been present in Macedonia to assist the process.

  9. The Amnesty International Report of August 2002 confirms that there had
     been some human rights violations by police. Around mid-2002 there were
     reports of isolated examples of  ill-treatment  by  police  of   a  few
     ethnic Albanians. In August 2002 some ethnic Albanians,  who  may  have
     been NLA activists in the past, kidnapped five  Macedonians  and  there
     was a siege by the police but this was essentially criminal  action  by
     the kidnappers. By the end of 2002, according to Amnesty  International
     violent incidents had  decreased  and  mixed  Albanian  and  Macedonian
     police units were successfully redeployed under the  guidance  of  OSCE
     monitors.  There  were  unspecified  reports  of  some  armed  Albanian
     splinter groups, who may previously have been connected with  the  NLA,
     clashing with  the  authorities  during  2002.  However  the  objective
     evidence as a whole does not support Ms Bagral's  submission  that  the
     Respondent would be at any real risk of  persecution  or  a  breach  of
     Article 3 by  reason  of  his  connection  with  his  brother  and  his
     brother's past activities, or that he would be at any real  risk  as  a
     consequence of his Albanian ethnicity.

 10. By the time the Adjudicator heard this  appeal  in  December  2002  the
     changed situation was already clear, and his conclusions both as to the
     two inferences described above and as to  the  objective  evidence  are
     unsustainable and must be set aside, as must his decision to allow  the
     appeal. The Respondent has not established that he is at any real  risk
     of persecution or a breach of Article 3 on return.

 11.  For the reasons given above this appeal by the Appellant is allowed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
