
                                                                   OS (EU
Accession - Appeal Rights) Lithuania [2003] UKIAT 00190
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 4th November 2003
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                   8.11.2003
                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                               Mr P R Moulden
                                Mr D J Parkes

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The first Appellant appeals, with leave, against the determination  of
     an Adjudicator, Miss A M Cheales, deciding that he  has  no  right  of
     appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him  asylum
     and to remove him to Lithuania.  The second  Appellant  appeals,  with
     leave, against  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  J  Azam,
     deciding that she has no right of  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision to refuse her asylum and to remove her to  the  Czech
     Republic.

  2. The difficulty in both cases was the same:  and the grounds of  appeal
     are, in essence, the same.  The position is this.  A person who is  to
     be removed to an accession country has, under s115  of  the  2002  Act
     (or, in the case of more recent appeals, under s94 of the  same  Act),
     no right of appeal while he or she remains in the United Kingdom.   In
     each of these cases, the Respondent claimed that the Appellant had  no
     right of appeal because the notice of appeal was served at a time when
     the Appellant was in the United Kingdom.

  3. It is relatively easy to see how that allegation came about.  In  each
     case, the  Appellant  was  represented  by  the  Immigration  Advisory
     Service, personified before us today by Mr Warburton.  In  each  case,
     the Appellant signed and dated a notice of appeal which  was  retained
     by his or her representative.  The Appellant was then removed  and  it
     appears that, after that, the representatives served the notice on the
     Respondent.  The Respondent, picking it up some time later, noted  the
     date on it,  which  he  assumed  to  be  the  date  of  service.   The
     allegation that the right of appeal did not arise comes about  through
     misunderstanding the date on the notice as the date of its service  on
     the Respondent.

  4. Mr Buckley, who represented the Respondent today, freely conceded that
     the allegations in the present cases  were  made  as  a  result  of  a
     mistake by the Secretary of State.  It follows that these two  appeals
     need to be allowed and we allow them.

  5. There is a wider issue.  In a case such as this, where does the burden
     of proof lie?  On all substantive matters the burden of  proof  in  an
     asylum appeal is on the Claimant.   But  where  there  is  alleged  an
     individual fact  which  is  primarily  within  the  knowledge  of  the
     Secretary of State it is for the Secretary of State to establish  that
     fact by evidence.  Where the  Secretary  of  State  alleges  that  the
     notice was served at  a  particular  time  which  has  the  effect  of
     depriving the Claimant of a right of appeal, we think that it  is  for
     the Secretary of State to prove that fact.  That is not  to  say  that
     the Secretary of State has, in general, the task  of  proving  that  a
     notice was not served in time.  These cases are different.  It is that
     the Secretary of State alleges service  on  a  particular  date  which
     deprives the Appellant of a right of appeal.  In those  circumstances,
     as it seems to us, it is for the Secretary of State to prove the date.

  6. For the reasons we have given, these appeals are allowed and we direct
     that each of them be considered afresh by an  Adjudicator  other  than
     the one who had previously determined it.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
