
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |MG (Kosovo - Rape Victims - |
|                           |        |Prejudice) Serbia and       |
|                           |        |Montenegro [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00097                       |
|On  2 October 2003         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21.10.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                              |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Mr R G Baines                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr A M Kopieczek) who heard the appeal of a citizen  of  the  Federal
      Republic  of  Yugoslavia  (Kosovo)  referred  to  hereinafter  as  the
      appellant on 14 January 2003.  He  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum
      appeal but allowed the appeal under Article 3 and  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.

2.    Mrs R Giltrow appeared for the Secretary of  State.   Mr  D  Blum,  of
      Counsel, instructed by S A Carr & Co represented the respondent.

3.    The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 June 1999  and  was
      granted leave to remain for one year under the policy then  prevailing
      - the KOSEX Programme.  She married on 4 January  2002.   She  applied
      for asylum on 31 July 2002.  Her  husband's  appeal  rights  had  been
      exhausted on that date.  She had two children, one  born  three  weeks
      ago.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted the account given to him by the appellant  of
      her experiences in Kosovo.  She had been raped by a Serb soldier.  The
      Adjudicator was told by the appellant that neither her husband nor her
      family knew about this rape.  The Adjudicator accepted this.

5.    The Adjudicator found that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
      would be at risk in general terms in her home village and  that  there
      was a sufficiency of protection for her in Kosovo. There would  be  no
      renewed attack on her of the kind that she had suffered in the past  -
      see paragraphs 35 and 36 of the determination. There was no real  risk
      of future persecution for a Convention reason.   The  Adjudicator  had
      before him a report by Dr Pizzo dated August 2002 which suggested that
      if the appellant were to return  to  Kosovo  her  mental  state  would
      deteriorate "which would lead to her being quite  disabled".   As  the
      Adjudicator comments in paragraph 42, Dr Pizzo did  not  indicate  the
      basis  on  which  he  came  to  that  conclusion.   The  Adjudicator's
      determination continues as follows:

           "43.  The appellant's family do not know about the rape.   There
           is  objective  evidence  which  suggests  that  women   in   the
           appellant's position would be ostracised and  socially  isolated
           if family and neighbours find out about a rape, because  of  the
           sham that this brings on the family.   The  appellant  has  said
           that if her husband found out he would leave her and take  their
           child.  On the basis  of  the  country  background  material,  I
           accept that this is reasonably likely to be true.   It  is  also
           reasonably likely in my view that if the  appellant  returns  to
           her own village the fact of her rape would become known  to  her
           family because her neighbours are likely to have been  aware  of
           it.


           44.  There  is  evidence  of  the  availability  of  psychiatric
           services  and  medication  in  Kosovo  generally.   However  the
           document from the municipality Council of  Ferizaj  states  that
           there is no psychiatric hospital in the Ferizaj region and  that
           the nearest is in Pristina.  The Ministry of Health letter sates
           that there are no practising psychiatrists  in  the  appellant's
           province and that there are two psychiatrists in  Ferizaj  which
           look after 300,000 people  in  the  surrounding  municipalities.
           The letter from the Clinic for Medical Diagnostics suggests that
           there is a lack of psychiatric help  for  war  rape  victims  in
           Kosovo.


           45.  The evidence about the availability of psychiatric care  in
           the CIPU  is  to  some  extent  inconsistent  with  the  Medical
           Diagnostics Clinic report.  However, the other evidence  that  I
           have referred to suggests that in the appellant's area there  is
           a lack of psychiatric services.  The reasons for refusal  letter
           suggest that there are  adequate  psychiatric  services  in  the
           appellant's area and a health centre in  her  village.   In  the
           grounds of appeal the appellant challenges these assertions  and
           invites the respondent to adduce evidence of the  existence  and
           extent of those psychiatric services.  The evidence has not been
           provided by the respondent.


           46.  If the appellant were returned to her home area  in  Kosovo
           she is reasonably likely to become isolated and ostracised  once
           the fact of her rape is known to her family, as I have indicated
           is likely.  She would be unable to obtain adequate treatment for
           her psychiatric conditions, on the basis of the evidence adduced
           on her behalf.


           47.  I have considered those consequences against the background
           of a country which still experiences a high level of  crime  and
           where, according to the  CIPU  (4.2-4.3)  unemployment  runs  at
           about 50 percent and about 50  percent  of  the  population  are
           considered to be living in poverty.  In addition  to  this,  the
           appellant would be reasonably likely to be  separated  from  her
           child who was born in July 2002.  All these factors suggest that
           the view of Dr Pizzo, that the appellant's mental  health  would
           deteriorate, is likely to be an accurate assessment.


           48.  I am not satisfied that the  appellant  would  be  able  to
           relocate in Kosovo.  Her mental state and the fact that she  has
           a young child viewed against the situation in Kosovo  generally,
           have lead me to conclude that this would be unduly harsh.  There
           is no reason to doubt the appellant's evidence that  her  sister
           in Kosovo would be unable to accommodate her and her family.


           49.  In all these circumstances, I am satisfied  that  returning
           the appellant  to  FRY  (Kosovo)  would  amount  to  inhuman  or
           degrading treatment under Article 3.  So far  as  Article  8  is
           concerned in terms of the physical and moral  integrity  of  the
           appellant, although removing the appellant would in principle be
           in accordance with the law and pursues a legitimate  aim,  I  am
           not  satisfied  that  removing  the   appellant   would   be   a
           proportionate response to that aim."

6.    Mrs Giltrow submitted that there was no indication who  the  appellant
      feared.   She  had  said  that  no  one  knew  about  the  rape.   The
      Adjudicator's approach had been speculative.  Dr  Pizzo  had  not  had
      regard to whether the appellant could obtain treatment in Kosovo.  The
      appellant had said she could not  stay  with  her  husband's  sister's
      family as it would be difficult for them to support her.  It would not
      be unduly harsh in the circumstances for her  to  live  in  a  village
      other than her original village.  It was speculative  to  assume  that
      the news of the appellant's rape would emerge. She was  close  to  the
      family at the time of the incident and they  do  not  appear  to  have
      found out about it.  She could return to Pristina where her  husband's
      family came from. She need not return to her own village.  The  burden
      was  on  the  appellant  to  provide  evidence  that  there  were   no
      psychiatric services.

7.    Mr Blum submitted that it was not for the doctor  to  speculate  about
      the  psychiatric  treatment  available  in   Kosovo.    It   was   not
      speculative, it was a finding of fact that news would leak out.  There
      was no burden on the appellant in the circumstances as  the  Secretary
      of State had asserted that there were sufficient psychiatric services.
      The appellant had put in evidence  to  show  that  that  was  not  so.
      Reference was made to a document at page 52 of the appellant's  bundle
      stating  that  there  were  no  practising  psychiatrists  in  various
      municipalities.  It was not clear, Counsel  accepted,  what  questions
      had been asked of the Ministry  of  Health  which  had  elicited  this
      information.  Apparently the document had been sent to the instructing
      solicitors at their request.  Reference was made to authorities in the
      bundle.  There was a general absence of  medical  treatment  and  long
      waiting lists.  Counsel accepted that each case had to be  decided  on
      its individual merits.  Not every woman who had been  raped  would  be
      ostracised and not  every  ostracism  would  involve  a  violation  of
      Article 8 or Article 3 rights.  There were  two  points  to  consider.
      One was the deterioration in the appellant's  mental  health  and  the
      other was the ostracism.  The appellant was not taking  medication  at
      present as she had just given birth to  a  baby.  She  was  on  herbal
      medicine instead.  It was planned that she would resume her  mediation
      in due course.

8.    The Adjudicator had accepted Dr Pizzo's opinion that  the  appellant's
      health would deteriorate.   It  was  necessary  to  look  at  all  the
      evidence in the round as the Adjudicator had done.   Counsel  directed
      our attention to items in the appellant's bundle that  indicated  that
      rape victims were the subject of ostracism.  There  might  not  be  no
      high risk of suicide in  the  appellant's  case  unlike  some  of  the
      authorities on which reliance was placed and it may be that the proper
      emphasis should be on Article 8 in this case rather  than  Article  3.
      There would be a lack of accommodation  available  in  Pristina.   The
      Adjudicator had correctly addressed himself on the law and  the  facts
      and the Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.  Mrs  Giltrow
      submitted that the appellant had kept to herself the events  that  had
      occurred four and a half years ago and there was no  reason  why  that
      fact should now come to the public's attention.  If the neighbours  in
      the locality were aware of the rape,  there  was  no  reason  why  the
      appellant should have her past held against her in Pristina where  her
      husband's family came from. She had been  treated  on  a  confidential
      basis in the United Kingdom since 2000. It would not alert  the  local
      population in Kosovo  should  she  attend  a  health  centre  for  her
      problems.  As so many people have been traumatised by  the  events  in
      Kosovo - not merely rape victims  -  attending  a  health  centre  for
      psychiatric problems would  not  cause  people  to  believe  that  the
      patient had been raped.  The lack of treatment, if there was   a  lack
      of treatment, would not cause a serious life threatening deterioration
      in the appellant's condition - see Bensaid [2001] INLR  325  and  D  v
      United Kingdom [1997] 24EHRR423.

9.    At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination.

10.   On 30 July 2002 Dr Bawa stated that the appellant's mental  state  was
      not unduly depressed and she was not actively suicidal.  There was  no
      evidence of any  psychosis  and  she  did  not  express  any  abnormal
      perception or delusional beliefs.  She  lived  with  her  husband  and
      three week old baby.  She had  been  raped  in  Albania  but  had  not
      mentioned this to anyone.  Dr Pizzo wrote on 30 October 2002  that  he
      did not see the appellant again after his  last  consultation  because
      she had moved out of the catchment area and had failed to  attend  her
      last appointment with Dr Pizzo.  In Dr Pizzo's  report  of  22  August
      2002 the appellant had emphasised that she was keeping her experiences
      to herself for fear of  ostracism.   Dr  Pizzo  refers  to  a  gradual
      improvement in her mental state since October 2000.  Counsel  told  us
      that the appellant had in fact not been on her usual medication as she
      had recently had a child but was planning to return  to  it.  She  had
      been on some herbal medication.

11.   It is apparent that the Adjudicator was not altogether impressed  with
      the quality of the medical evidence.  Both Dr Pizzo and  Dr  Bawa  are
      described as locum staff grade to a Consultant Psychiatrist.

12.   It is important to recall that the appellant will not be returning  to
      Kosovo alone.  She will be returning with her husband and children  to
      Pristina where her husband's sister and her  family  apparently  live.
      She has lived with her husband for some time and  they  have  a  young
      family and she has kept the news of her past experiences from him  and
      her family.  We accept Mrs  Giltrow's  submission  that  it  would  be
      speculative to assume that news of the events would surface  after  so
      many years.  The appellant has  had  confidential  treatment  in  this
      country and we simply do not accept that seeking treatment  in  Kosovo
      would lead to people finding out what had happened.

13.   We are aware of the extent of the problem of rape in Kosovo.   In  the
      bundle there is a report from a gynaecologist practising  in  Pristina
      dated 30 August 2002.  He stated that before and after the war he  had
      had many war rape victim patients seeking help,  support,  advice  and
      therapy at his clinic.  In view of the small number  of  psychologists
      and neuro-psychologists in Kosovo there was a difficulty in  referring
      his patients for consultation - patients had to wait more than a  year
      and there was no guarantee of such a consultation. The  document  from
      the Ministry of Health dated 27 November 2002 states that there are no
      practising psychiatrists in three named  municipalities.   There  were
      two psychiatrists in Ferizaj  who  had  to  look  after  some  300,000
      people.  Counsel was not able to tell us what questions had been asked
      of the Ministry of Health which had  elicited  this  information.   In
      paragraph 9 of the refusal letter the Secretary of State had  asserted
      that there was a health centre in the  appellant's  village  and  this
      does not appear to have been contradicted.  However it is not possible
      to know to what extent the assertions made by the Secretary  of  State
      were put the Ministry of Health - we do not know what  questions  were
      asked.

14.    Counsel  refers  to  a  deterioration  in  the  appellant's   medical
      condition  were  she  to  be  returned  to  Kosovo.   The  appellant's
      condition has improved over the years on such medical evidence  as  we
      have before us.  Having found in paragraph  42  of  his  determination
      that Dr Pizzo had not indicated the basis on which he had come to  the
      conclusion that  return  would  lead  the  appellant  to  being  quite
      disabled, it does appear to be unexplained why the Adjudicator  should
      have come to the conclusion that the doctor's opinion was likely to be
      an accurate assessment. We consider the Adjudicator's approach  to  be
      based on surmise and speculation and not properly founded on evidence.

15.   As we have said, the appellant will be returned with her  husband  and
      family to Pristina.   Her  husband's  family  apparently  live  there.
      There may be difficulties with  accommodation  but  we  are  far  from
      satisfied that the difficulties would  breach  the  appellant's  human
      rights.  Counsel indicated that he was concentrating more on Article 8
      than Article 3 issues.  However, the appellant has apparently survived
      on herbal medication without ill effect during her pregnancy and it is
      not established that such medication as she currently requires is  not
      available to her or that an absence of  such  medication  would  cause
      sufficiently adverse consequences as to amount to an interference with
      her physical and moral integrity:  see Bensaid v United Kingdom [2001]
      INLR 325 at paragraph  46  on  page  337.   We  accept  there  may  be
      difficulties and long waiting lists and that treatment  might  not  be
      what it is in the United Kingdom.  On the other hand, the  doctors  in
      Kosovo will be more familiar  than  most  with  the  types  of  trauma
      suffered by this appellant.  Although she will  be  deprived  of  some
      support in the United Kingdom, she will have the support of her family
      and be in her home country.

16.    We  were  referred  by  Counsel  to  various  Tribunal   authorities.
      However, each case turns on its own facts.  Furthermore  the  evidence
      presented is always slightly different.  The  objective  material  put
      before each Tribunal also differs as does the medical evidence.

17.   We accept that there is prejudice against rape victims  but  we  agree
      with what was said in D and Others  (HX/37250/02)  that  it  certainly
      cannot be the case that all women who come from Kosovo who  have  been
      raped require protection under the Convention on Human Rights  -  each
      case has to be considered on its merits:   see  paragraph  10  of  the
      determination.

18.   In this case, the appellant has kept the news of her attack  from  her
      husband and family for many years and we  are  not  satisfied  on  the
      evidence before us that what happened in the past would come  back  to
      haunt her.  If she is concerned about what neighbours might have found
      out in her home village, it is reasonably open to  her  to  reside  in
      Pristina where her  husband's  family  live.   We  disagree  with  the
      Adjudicator's finding that it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant
      to relocate.  After all, on marriage one party or the other will often
      relocate in any event.  The  Adjudicator  does  not  explain  why  the
      appellant should not live with her husband in Pristina,  for  example.
      Counsel referred to  the  Kosovo  Rehabilitation  Centre  for  Torture
      Victims.  In its headquarters there are two psychiatrists,  a  GP  and
      other specialists.  There are also satellite centres  in  other  areas
      which have a psychiatrist, GPs and nurses.  Counsel submits that these
      satellite centres are  not  in  the  appellant's  area.   As  we  have
      observed, if the appellant is inhibited about living in her home area,
      there are other areas where there is some assistance  for  people  who
      have been raped.  We accept that there may be waiting lists and  other
      difficulties but we do not find, for the reasons we have  given,  that
      the consequences of removal would have sufficiently adverse affects on
      her physical and moral integrity.

19.   We accept that there may be accommodation and other  difficulties  for
      the family in Kosovo but we do  not  find  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to conclude that removal of the  appellant  would  involve  a
      breach of her rights under Article 8,  still  less  a  breach  of  her
      Article 3 rights.

20.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed and  the  decision  of
      the Adjudicator is reversed.




                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President
