
CC
|Heard at Field House       |        |GS (Article 8 - Private life|
|                           |        |- Edore and Razgar) Ecuador |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00137          |
|On 5 September 2003        |        |                            |
|Prepared on:               |        |                            |
|5 September 2003           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|11 November 2003                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr A A Lloyd JP                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza, of counsel instructed by Ole Hanson  &
                       Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ecuador appeals against the  determination
      of an Adjudicator (Ms S Pitt) who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
      decision made on 9 January 2002 refusing him leave to enter  on  human
      rights grounds.


   2. The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 14  January  1997
      accompanied by his wife and daughter, Joselyn born on 17 August  1993.
      Another  daughter  Justine,  was  born  on  29  November   2000.   The
      Appellant's sister in law, Vallejo Salcedo Eliana Belen, born November
      1984, arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 November 1999. She has  been
      granted exceptional leave to remain until 2005. She has lived with the
      Appellant and his family since arriving in the United Kingdom.

   3. The Appellant claimed asylum on arrival. His application  was  refused
      by the Secretary of State on 16 April 1998  and  leave  to  enter  was
      formally refused on 29 May 1999. The appeal against this decision  was
      dismissed by a special Adjudicator on 20 January 1999. As neither  the
      Appellant nor his representatives attended the hearing, the appeal was
      treated as abandoned. The Appellant and his family did not  leave  the
      United Kingdom but on 25 April 2001, an application was made for leave
      to remain under the Human Rights Act. This application was refused for
      the reasons the Secretary of State has set out in his decision  letter
      on 9 January 2002.

   4. The Appellant asserted that he would be at risk of treatment  contrary
      to Article 3 from a criminal gang in Ecuador. The Adjudicator did  not
      find the Appellant to be a credible witness in this respect.  She  did
      not accept his account of being threatened or attacked by  a  criminal
      gang, nor that his parents or other family  members  continued  to  be
      mistreated after he had left. Further, even taking his  claim  at  the
      highest, she was not satisfied that there would be an insufficiency of
      protection.

   5. The Adjudicator also had evidence before  her  relating  to  Joselyn's
      educational difficulties and to the fact that removal  would  lead  to
      the Appellant and his family being separated  from  his  sister-in-law
      who had been granted exceptional leave  until  2005.  The  Adjudicator
      came to the view that there were no obstacles to the family enjoying a
      private life in Ecuador. She did not accept that Joselyn's educational
      difficulties would lead to treatment contrary to Article 3.  She  went
      on to consider the position under Article 8.  She  was  not  satisfied
      that the Appellant and his family had established a family  life  with
      his sister-in-law and in any event there was nothing to show that  she
      could not return to Ecuador with them. Any interference  with  private
      life established in the United Kingdom would not be  disproportionate.
      In these circumstances the appeal was dismissed.

   6. The Grounds of Appeal argue that the Adjudicator failed to consider or
      to properly consider the evidence relating to Joselyn's special  needs
      and failed to appreciate  the  extent  to  which  Eliana  was  like  a
      daughter  to  the  family  and   the   disproportionate   interference
      separation would cause.

   7. At the hearing before the Adjudicator Ms Braganza  took  the  Tribunal
      through the evidence relating to  Joselyn's  condition.  The  Tribunal
      have reports and letters from Gill  Stephenson,  Speech  and  Language
      Therapist from the Community Health South London  NHS  Trust;  Barbara
      Ward, a Special Educational  Needs  Coordinator;  Robert  Pattullo,  a
      Senior Educational Psychologist; Marsha Greene, a child Mental  Health
      Specialist; Magdalene Moorey , a Speech and Language Therapist; Marsha
      Lattey, a Team Administrator at Health in Action Zone and finally from
      Irene Sclare, a Consultant Clinical  Psychologist/Project  Coordinator
      with Health in Action Zone.

   8. The reports start with the report from Gill  Stephenson  on  17  March
      2001. Her assessment suggests that Joselyn has severe difficulty  with
      all language skills. She will require individual support to enable her
      to access the curriculum and will require intervention from  a  Speech
      and Language Therapist. A letter dated 17 July 2001 from Barbara  Ward
      confirms that Joselyn has  made  very  slow  progress  since  starting
      school in April 1998. She rarely spoke at school and  was  functioning
      like a much younger child. It was her view that Joselyn  was  a  child
      who had been very deeply affected by the experiences she  shared  with
      her parents and the events she  had  witnessed.  In  the  report  from
      Robert Patullo it is confirmed that Joselyn's language,  literacy  and
      numeracy skills all lie below the bottom  of  the  normal  range.  She
      needs  individual  instruction  and   thorough   checking   that   she
      understands what is required. She would benefit from help in  managing
      her emotional reactions to past events. It was his view  that  Joselyn
      could best be helped by feeling assured that her family  were  settled
      and that there would be no return to the anxieties of the past. It was
      his view that Joselyn and her family would benefit from some  form  of
      psychotherapeutic   counselling   because   of   previous    traumatic
      circumstances. Joselyn would benefit from additional help in school.


   9. A letter from Barbara Ward, dated 20 January 2003 refers to  the  fact
      that Joselyn has made slow but steady progress and was responding well
      to the additional support which she had received. If she were uprooted
      from her present environment where she  feels  secure  all  this  work
      would be lost and the outlook for her would  be  bleak  indeed.  In  a
      further psychological report from Robert Patullo, dated 3 April  2003,
      he refers to the severe degree of delayed language and literacy skills
      which he had measured when he assessed Joselyn in  2001.  As  she  was
      older, her difficulties  were  correspondingly  more  severe,  and  it
      seemed likely that they were due to the emotional trauma that  Joselyn
      had experienced when  there  was  significant  family  disruption  and
      formerly as the family were persecuted for political reasons  and  had
      to move frequently. It was extremely important that Joselyn  continued
      her stable environment  until  such  time  as  she  transfers  to  her
      Secondary School.

  10. The letter of Marsha Greene dated 9 April 2003 indicates that only  an
      initial assessment has been made of the family  circumstances.  It  is
      recorded that Joselyn came to England  from  Ecuador  along  with  her
      family in 1997 seeking  asylum,  and  as  part  of  this  Joselyn  has
      witnessed a lot of violence and aggression particularly  inflicted  on
      her father by gangs of men. It was her opinion  that  Joselyn  was  in
      need of substantial and appropriate educational support within  school
      if she was to meet her full potential. In the  report  from  Magdalene
      Morray it is confirmed that Joselyn has a severe  expressive  language
      difficulty. It can not properly be  described  as  a  severe  language
      disorder. Joselyn would not be able to access the National  Curriculum
      without  significant  differentiation   and   individualised   support
      identified in this report.

  11. The  final  report  from  Irene  Sclare  confirms  Joselyn's  learning
      difficulties and the  fact  that  she  is  making  little  educational
      progress. Joselyn seemed very aware that her parents feared being sent
      back to Ecuador and that Ecuador was perceived by them  as  an  unsafe
      place for the family. Given Joselyn's gentle and anxious nature it was
      highly likely that she would be distressed about  having  to  leave  a
      supported and supportive school which  was  sensitive  to  her  needs.
      Joselyn is vulnerable to change, lost and  uncertain  because  of  her
      young age and  her  delayed  learning,  her  fear  of  outsiders,  her
      perception of the world as dangerous and her lack of  confidence.  She
      needed stability, consistency, and security in order  to  develop  and
      learn and maximise her potential.

  12. Ms Braganza submitted that on the basis of this evidence it was  clear
      that a removal to Ecuador  would  involve  an  interference  with  the
      private life of both the Appellant and the members of his  family  and
      in particular Joselyn. Any interference would be disproportionate to a
      legitimate aim within Article 8 (2).

  13. Ms  Sigley  submitted  that  all  the  reports  were  prefaced  on  an
      acceptance of events in Ecuador. This was particularly  apparent  from
      the letters written by Barbara Ward. However, the Adjudicator had  not
      accepted the account given by the Appellant. It was clear that Joselyn
      did have special needs but the issue was  whether  there  would  be  a
      breach of the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  human  rights
      convention. Even assuming that there was a breach of  the  Appellant's
      right to private life, removal would be proportionate to a  legitimate
      aim. There was educational provision in Ecuador: see paragraph 4.43 of
      the CIPU report. The Secretary of State could not accept that any  one
      with special educational needs could bring themselves within Article 8
      and thereby engage the obligations of the United Kingdom Government.

  14. There is no challenge in the grounds of appeal  to  the  Adjudicator's
      findings on the claim based on a fear of violence from criminal  gangs
      in Ecuador. The Adjudicator rejected this evidence.  This was an issue
      of fact for her to determine. Her findings were open to  her  and  are
      properly sustainable on the evidence.

  15. It is conceded before the Tribunal that the Appellant  can  not  bring
      himself within Article 3. The high threshold required for a breach  of
      this article is not even arguably reached.

  16. However, Ms Braganza argues that there would be a breach of Article  8
      if the family were to be returned. Her  submission  is  based  on  two
      grounds; the first relates to  Joselyn's  educational  needs  and  the
      second to the prospect of separation from Eliana.

  17. When considering Article 8, it is important to keep in mind  that  its
      objective is essentially to protect the individual  against  arbitrary
      interference by public  authorities  with  the  rights  identified  in
      Article 8 including private and family life.  However,  this  must  be
      balanced against the legitimate objectives identified in Article 8(2).
      There is a balance to  be  struck  between  the  enjoyment  of  rights
      protected by Article 8(1)  against  the  legitimate  aims  of  society
      within Article 8(2). Any interference must  be  proportionate  to  the
      legitimate  aim,  and  no  greater  than  necessary  to  achieve   the
      legitimate objective. The  Tribunal  understand  and  sympathise  with
      Joselyn's parents: their aim is to do what is the  best  interests  of
      their children and in particular Joselyn. That is not the question the
      Tribunal has to determine. We are concerned with whether the  proposed
      removal engages the obligations of the United Kingdom government under
      the Human Rights Convention.

  18. The first issue for the Tribunal to  assess  is  whether  the  removal
      would interfere with the private life of the Appellant and his family.
      Private life has a broad meaning and it includes the right to  develop
      one's own personality and the right to physical and  moral  integrity.
      The right to develop full potential through  good  education  arguably
      does come within the right to private  life.  It  is  clear  from  the
      evidence  that  Joselyn  does  have  special  educational  needs.  The
      Tribunal accept that she has a severe language disorder and  that  she
      needs considerable help and support to overcome or at least ameliorate
      that disorder. On this basis the Tribunal  are  satisfied  that  there
      would be an interference with her right to  private  life  if  she  is
      removed to Ecuador and a consequential interference with the right  to
      private life of her parents. There is no dispute that the interference
      would be lawful: there is power in law for the Secretary of  State  to
      direct the removal of the Appellant and his family.  It  would  be  in
      accordance with a legitimate aim, the prevention of disorder or crime.
      The  need  to  have  an  effective  immigration  policy  is  part   of
      maintaining order within society in the United Kingdom.

  19. Two issues arise. The first is whether the Appellants are able to show
      an interference with private life within the United Kingdom as opposed
      to breach of the Appellant's right to physical and moral integrity  in
      Ecuador. In Ullah and Do [2002] EWCA Civ 1856 the Court of Appeal  had
      held that in so far as an applicant seeks to rely on the  consequences
      of removal arising from the  situation  in  Ecuador,  a  claim  cannot
      succeed unless it is shown that the situation is of such severity that
      there would be a breach of Article 3. This is because the Human Rights
      Convention imposes territorial not  extra-territorial  obligations  on
      contracting countries.  The  extra-territorial  effect  of  Article  3
      arises only because of the fact that Article 3 enshrines  an  absolute
      prohibition against torture, inhuman or degrading treatment.

  20. Ms Braganza argues that it is the fact  of  removal  from  the  United
      Kingdom and the deprival of access to the facilities available in  the
      United Kingdom that amounts to the interference. On balance  and  with
      some hesitation the Tribunal accept that in the light of the length of
      time that Joselyn has been in this country receiving educational  help
      and support, to remove her would amount to an  interference  with  her
      private life.

  21. The second issue  the  Tribunal  have  to  consider  is  whether  this
      interference would  be  disproportionate  to  a  legitimate  aim.  The
      Tribunal are bound by the Court of Appeal judgements in Blessing Edore
      [2003] EWCA Civ 716 and Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840. In Blessing  Edore
      the  Court  held  that  the  proper  approach  to  the  assessment  of
      proportionality was to consider whether the decision of the  Secretary
      of State was outside the range of reasonable responses  on  the  facts
      before him. In Razgar this approach was qualified to the  extent  that
      where  the  essential  facts  found  by  the   Adjudicator   were   so
      fundamentally different from those  determined  by  the  Secretary  of
      State that they substantially undermined  the  factual  basis  of  the
      balancing exercise performed by him it would be for the Adjudicator to
      carry out the balancing exercise himself.

  22. The Tribunal are satisfied that the Secretary of  State  did  consider
      the educational needs of Joselyn. These are dealt with at paragraph  7
      of the decision letter  dated  9  January  2002.  Before  making  that
      decision  the  Secretary  of  State  had   before   him   the   strong
      representations made on behalf  on  the  Appellants  by  Barbara  Ward
      enclosing a copy of the report from Gill Stephenson.  Further evidence
      was put in front of the Adjudicator and updated  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal but it is impossible to say that the facts before either  the
      Adjudicator or the Tribunal are so fundamentally different from  those
      determined by the Secretary of State that the proper course  would  be
      for the Tribunal to exercise  its  own  discretion  on  the  issue  of
      proportionality. The issue for us is whether the Secretary of  State's
      decision was within the range of reasonable responses.

  23. In our judgment it was. The Secretary of State had taken the view that
      the Appellant was not entitled  to  asylum  nor  to  protection  under
      Article 3. Both decisions were upheld by Adjudicators. It follows that
      the Appellant and his family have had no lawful right  to  be  in  the
      United Kingdom since 1997. This must be set against the  compassionate
      circumstances relating to Joselyn. This is not an  easy  balance,  but
      the Tribunal are unable to say that the Secretary of State's  decision
      was outside the range of decisions properly open to him.

  24. It is also argued that there would be  a  breach  of  the  Appellant's
      rights to family life because Eliana has been living with  the  family
      since she arrived in the United Kingdom.  She  was  born  in  November
      1984, the Tribunal are satisfied that the Adjudicator was entitled  to
      conclude that there is nothing to show that Eliana could not return to
      Ecuador. There is no indication of the basis on which she was  granted
      exceptional leave. If she chose to remain in the United  Kingdom,  and
      even assuming a breach of the right to family life, the  Tribunal  are
      satisfied that a decision to remove the Appellant  would  fall  within
      the range of reasonable responses open to the Secretary of State.

  25. The Tribunal are therefore satisfied that this appeal cannot  succeed.
      In AE v FE [2003] EWCA Civ 1032 the Master of the Rolls, although in a
      different context, commented that the consideration of appeals  should
      distinguish clearly between (1) the right to refugee status under  the
      Refugee Convention (2) the right to remain by reasons of rights  under
      the Human Rights  Convention  and  (3)  considerations  which  may  be
      relevant to a grant of leave to remain for humanitarian  reasons.  The
      Tribunal are not satisfied that  there  is  a  breach  of  the  Untied
      Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention  for  the
      reasons which we have attempted to set out. Matters are  raised  which
      may be relevant to a grant of leave for humanitarian reasons but  that
      is a matter for the Secretary of State and not for this Tribunal.

  26. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
