
JH
|Heard at Field House       |        |SB (Sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |Protection-Mafia) Albania CG|
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00028          |
|On  12 February 2003       |        |                            |
|Dictated 13 February 2003                                         |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.11TH July 2003                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Chairman)                                        |
|Mr C H Bennett                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances
For the appellant:           Mr B Hawkin of Counsel
                       Instructed by White Ryland, Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by Seit Buhaj, a citizen  of  Albania,  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr  T  R  Jones)  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision made on 4 April  2001  giving
      directions for his removal following the  refusal  of  his  claim  for
      asylum.

2.     The  appellant  arrived  at  Heathrow  Airport  on  15   March   2001
      accompanied by his wife and younger son.   He  claimed  asylum  on  27
      March 2001.  He based his claim on a fear of persecution as  a  member
      of the Legality Party.  He also asserted that he was in  fear  of  his
      life because of the Mafia.  His claim was refused for the reasons  set
      out in the respondent's letter dated 4 April 2001.

3.    The hearing of this appeal has  had  a  protracted  history.   It  was
      first set down for full hearing on 10 July 2001 but was then adjourned
      for the authentication of documents and there was a  possibility  that
      it might be linked with another appeal.  By October  2001,  no  action
      had been taken by the respondent to authenticate the  documents.   The
      Adjudicator declined to allow the appeal under Rule 33 and it was  set
      down for hearing on 13 December 2001.  There were  then  a  number  of
      adjournments because of problems with  the  interpretation:   a  North
      Albanian interpreter was required.  Eventually the hearing started  on
      14 March 2002 and was adjourned part heard until 4 April 2002, when it
      was finally completed.  Unfortunately the determination was not issued
      until 4 September 2002.

4.    The Adjudicator has summarised the  appellant's  asylum  interview  at
      paragraphs  3-6  of  his  determination  and  his  oral  evidence   at
      paragraphs 13-40.  The appellant asserted that the police had not only
      subjected him to harassment  on  account  of  his  membership  of  the
      Legality Party but also had been unwilling and unable to  provide  him
      with protection from his problems with the Mafia from 1996 because  of
      the strong links between the Albanian authorities and the Mafia.    He
      said that he was especially vulnerable to persecution because he was a
      successful businessman.  There had been  four  attempts  on  his  life
      since 1996.  He relied in particular on four incidents.   He  referred
      to a threatening letter which he had received in November  1996.   His
      factory had been dynamited in August 1997.  He suspected that a  Mafia
      group had been responsible.  There had been  an  incident  in  October
      1997 when he was wounded in the leg by a firearm.  The police had  not
      helped him  because  at  that  time  they  were  not  able  to  defend
      themselves let alone anyone else.  There had been a further attempt on
      his life on 5 February 2001 when he was returning  from  work  in  the
      afternoon.  His car had been crashed into and he  was  forced  to  get
      out.  He was threatened.  He believed that the aim  of  this  incident
      was to apply pressure to  him  and  isolate  him  from  his  political
      activities.

5.    The Adjudicator had before him a psychiatric  report  prepared  by  Dr
      Herst dated 8 January 2002.  In that document at  page  3  (A3A)  when
      relating this incident, the report says:

           "There is a 2 inch U-shaped scar clearly visible on the  lateral
           aspect of his left leg,  which  is  consistent  with  a  gunshot
           wound."

      The Adjudicator expressed concern about this passage.   He  said  that
      this seemed to be a record of what the appellant had told Dr Herst and
      was stated as part of the history.  It did not say that Dr  Herst  saw
      the scar, still less that he gave any expert  opinion  upon  it.   The
      Adjudicator was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  suffered  a
      gunshot wound in the circumstances he described.

6.    The Adjudicator did not find the appellant to be a  credible  witness.
      He has given his reasons in paragraphs 54-57 of his determination.  He
      was not satisfied that the Mafia had persecuted the appellant  because
      of his political opinion or  for  any  other  Convention  reason.   He
      accepted that the claimant feared that the Mafia wanted a share in his
      prosperity.  He said that taking a global view of all the evidence  he
      accepted it as reasonably likely that what the appellant had described
      was  attempted  extortion,  criminal  damage  and  criminal   activity
      activated by greed and social envy, not persecution for  a  Convention
      reason:  see paragraph 53.  The Adjudicator went on to  refer  to  the
      evidence that the appellant's company had been granted a  licence  for
      expansion in March 2000.  He asked why, if the authorities in  Albania
      were bent on persecuting him for any reason they should  grant  him  a
      licence to expand his factory.  The appellant's response was that  the
      licence had come too late and that the factory was in his wife's  name
      but elsewhere in the evidence he said that this was for  tax  reasons.
      The Adjudicator was not satisfied that it was reasonably  likely  that
      the authorities in Albania had persecuted him in the two  years  prior
      to his departure.

7.    In paragraph 55 of his determination the Adjudicator  dealt  with  the
      individual episodes referred to above.  He was not satisfied  that  an
      assault had taken place on 4  October  1997  but  said  that  had  his
      decision in relation to this incident been otherwise he would not have
      found that it was evidence of persecution by the  authorities  but  an
      independent criminal assault perpetrated for gain:   paragraph  55(a).
      He accepted that the factory had been dynamited in August 1997 but  he
      was not satisfied that this was directed at the  appellant  personally
      but had been at a  time  when  there  was  considerable  civil  unrest
      following the collapse of a number of pyramid schemes in Albania.  The
      Adjudicator also heard evidence about  an  incident  relating  to  the
      appellant's elder son.  For the reasons  which  he  gave  he  was  not
      satisfied that this incident had occurred.  The Adjudicator went on to
      deal  with  the  incident  on  5  February  2001.   He  rejected   the
      appellant's evidence about this, basing his reasoning on a document  a
      '"vertetim"  purporting  to  come  from  the  Police  Commissariat  in
      Shkodar.  In the light of these  findings  of  facts  the  Adjudicator
      dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

8.    In his submissions Mr Hawkin argued firstly  that  the  delay  between
      the hearing and the issue of  the  determination  indicated  that  the
      findings were unsafe.  Credibility was central to the determination of
      this appeal and there  had  been  exceptional  delays.   The  Tribunal
      invited Mr Hawkin to comment on  paragraph  12  of  the  determination
      where the Adjudicator records that he had  come  to  his  findings  of
      credibility within a day or two of the final hearing but had had to re-
      cast the determination for practical  reasons.   Mr  Hawkin  submitted
      that it was not clear what it meant by re-casting  the  determination:
      there was no explanation for the delay.

9.    Mr Hawkin submitted that the Adjudicator's findings were in any  event
      unsafe. The Adjudicator had been wrong to rely on  adverse  inferences
      drawn from the document dated 26 February 2001 produced in support  of
      the incident on 5 February 2001.  The Adjudicator had noted  that  the
      document also dealt with the incident on 12 June 2001, after the  date
      of the document itself.  He argued that the  Adjudicator  should  have
      accepted that this was a clerical error.  In dealing with the  alleged
      incident to the appellant's elder son, the Adjudicator had  failed  to
      give proper  weight  to  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  or  to  the
      explanation as to why the vertetim had a clerical error on it.

10.   He argued  that  the  Adjudicator  had  been  wrong  to  discount  the
      evidence about the scar in Dr Herst's report.  It was clear  from  the
      wording of the report that Dr Herst had seen the scar and  was  giving
      an opinion about how it was caused.  This evidence was important as it
      supported the appellant's account of the shooting incident in  October
      1997.  This approach was not reasonably open to the  Adjudicator.   Mr
      Hawkin further submitted that the Adjudicator had been wrong  to  find
      that there was no real risk on return.  He should have dealt far  more
      clearly with the claim under Article 3.  The Adjudicator  had  clearly
      not disbelieved all the evidence but had failed to make it clear  what
      he had believed.

11.   Mr Saunders submitted that the appellant had not  been  prejudiced  by
      the delay.  The determination had been carefully written.   There  was
      nothing  to  suggest  that  the  Adjudicator  had  misunderstood   the
      evidence.  It was for the Adjudicator to decide what weight to  attach
      to the dates in  the  vertetim  produced  in  evidence.   The  medical
      evidence about  the  gunshot  wound  was  unsatisfactory.   There  was
      nothing to suggest that Dr Herst  any  particular  expertise  in  this
      field.

12.   The Adjudicator had not believed the  appellant's  evidence.   Looking
      at the objective evidence, there was no reason to believe that members
      of the Legality Party would be at any risk  of  persecution.   In  the
      light of the lapse of time there  would  no  longer  be  a  risk  from
      criminals.

13.   The Tribunal will deal firstly with the  issue  of  delay.   In  Mario
      [1998] Imm AR 281, the Tribunal said that it  would  usually  remit  a
      case to another Adjudicator where the period between the  hearing  and
      the dictation of the determination was more  than  three  months.   In
      Narotam Shandar [2000] Imm AR 181, Richards J was dealing with a  case
      where there had been a nine month delay between the  date  of  hearing
      and the signing and promulgating of the determination.  It was a  case
      where there had been no oral evidence.  There were  no  factors  which
      caused concern about the implications of the delay. There was  nothing
      to show that the delay gave rise to any  prejudice  which  would  have
      justified the grant of leave to appeal.

14.   In Cobham v Frett [2001]  1WLR1775,  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the
      Privy  Council  considered  the  effect  of  the  delay  between   the
      conclusion of a trial and the  delivery  of  judgment.   The  Judicial
      Committee held that if excessive  delay  was  to  be  relied  upon  in
      attacking a judgment, a fair case must be shown for believing that the
      judgment  contained  errors  that  were  probably  or  even   possibly
      attributable to that  delay.   Excessive  delay  may  require  a  very
      careful perusal of the judge's findings of fact and of his reasons for
      his conclusions in order to ensure  that  the  delay  has  not  caused
      injustice to a losing party.  It would be important  to  consider  the
      quality of the judge's notes not only of the evidence but also of  the
      advocate's submissions.  It was not  permissible  to  conclude  merely
      from the fact of delay that a judge had difficulty in remembering  the
      demeanour of witnesses.  An appellate court must be satisfied that the
      judgment was not safe and that to allow it to stand would be unfair to
      the losing party.

15.   The issue of delay was also considered by the Court of Appeal  in  Rex
      Goose v Wilson Sandford & Co 13  February  1998.   In  paragraph  112,
      Peter Gibson LJ wrote as follows:

           "A judge's tardiness in completing his  judicial  task  after  a
           trial is over denies justice to the  winning  party  during  the
           period of the delay.  It also undermines the loser's  confidence
           in  the  correctness  of  the  decision  which   is   eventually
           delivered.  Litigation causes quite enough stress as it  is  for
           people to have to endure while a trial is going on.   Compelling
           them to await judgment for an indefinitely extended period after
           the trial is over will only serve to prolong their anxiety,  and
           may  well  increase  it.   Conduct  like  this  weakens   public
           confidence in the whole judicial  process.   Left  unchecked  it
           would be ultimately subversive of the rule of  law.   Delays  on
           this scale cannot and will not be tolerated.  A  situation  like
           this must never occur again."

16.   In that case the Court of Appeal  was  dealing  with  a  delay  of  20
      months. In the past the Tribunal have made it  clear  that  in  asylum
      appeals a delay of three months between the hearing and preparation of
      the determination is unacceptable.  The nature of  the  issues  raised
      particularly in an asylum appeal are  such  that  undue  delay  causes
      unnecessary worry and prejudice to a deserving claimant and equally it
      is not in the public  interest  where  the  claimant  is  undeserving.
      Asylum, immigration and human rights appeals should be determined with
      as little delay as possible ideally on the day or at least within days
      of the hearing.  It should only  be  in  exceptional  cases  that  any
      further delay is justifiable.  In this case the Tribunal do  not  know
      the reason for the delay between the final hearing and  the  issue  of
      the determination.  All that we can glean from the appeal file is that
      it was submitted for promulgation on 13 August 2002 and was issued  on
      4 September 2002.  However, the  Adjudicator  has  made  it  clear  in
      paragraph 12 of his determination that he  came  to  his  findings  on
      credibility and fact within a day or two of the final hearing.  It  is
      clear that he kept audio tapes of the proceedings in addition  to  his
      own  notes  of  evidence.   The  delay  in  the  production   of   the
      determination   arose   because   of   problems   that   occurred   in
      transcription.  He had  to  recast  the  determination  for  practical
      reasons and then checked matters of  evidence  from  the  audio  tapes
      producing a handwritten transcript for reference purposes.

17.    The  Tribunal  accept  and  indeed  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
      Adjudicator's confirmation that he reached his findings on credibility
      shortly after the conclusion of the hearing.  In  these  circumstances
      it is hard to see what prejudice there has been to the appellant  save
      for the delay in awaiting the result.  In Rolled Steel Ltd  v  British
      Steel Corporation [1986] CH246, the Court of Appeal were dealing  with
      a case where a judge had delayed  giving  judgment  for  nearly  eight
      months following a 19-day trial.  Lawton LJ commented that long delays
      in delivering a  judgment  can  cause  disquiet  and  suspicion  among
      litigants who lose and those who win may feel they have been  deprived
      of justice for far too long.  Delays of this length should  not  occur
      unless there are compelling reasons why they should and if  there  are
      such reasons it would be prudent for a judge to refer to them briefly.

18.   The  Adjudicator  has  followed  this  advice  and  the  Tribunal  are
      satisfied that no prejudice has arisen from the mere fact of the delay
      and there is no justification on this  ground  alone  for  interfering
      with the Adjudicator's findings of fact.

19.   The Tribunal will now turn to deal with Mr Hawkin's  other  criticisms
      of the Adjudicator's findings.  He argues  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      wrong not to attach weight to the  document  which  was  submitted  in
      support of the incident of 5 February 2001.  The Adjudicator commented
      that the document also certified an incident involving the appellant's
      son on 12 June 2001 when all the other evidence referred to a date  in
      June 2000.  He said that he watched  the  appellant  as  he  gave  his
      evidence and  was  satisfied  that  the  significance  of  the  police
      "mistake" was not lost on him.  The appellant had no explanation other
      than to suggest that the date should have been 12 June 2000.   Looking
      at the evidence in the round he did  not  consider  that  this  was  a
      document on which he could place reliance.  Mr Hawkin argued that  the
      Adjudicator was placing far too  high  a  standard  of  proof  on  the
      appellant when considering this document.  There is  no  substance  in
      this assertion as the Adjudicator has properly directed himself on the
      burden and standard of proof in paragraph 46 of his determination  and
      there is nothing to indicate that he has  not  properly  applied  that
      standard.  Indeed he refers specifically to  it  in  paragraph  55(d).
      During submissions the Tribunal asked Mr Hawkin  whether,  bearing  in
      mind the lapse of time, there had been any further enquiries with  the
      Police Commissariat in Shkodar to confirm whether or not there  was  a
      clerical error on the document.  There was no further evidence in this
      respect.

20.   In the view of the Tribunal the Adjudicator's findings  were  properly
      open to him.  It was for him to decide what weight  to  give  to  this
      document in the light  of  all  the  evidence  and  in  our  view  his
      conclusions were properly open to him.

21.   It is also submitted that the Adjudicator was wrong not to accept  the
      evidence of the incident relating to the appellant's elder son.  It is
      argued that he did not give sufficient weight to the appellant's  oral
      evidence.  However, this again was a matter  for  the  Adjudicator  to
      assess in the light of all the evidence.  It was  for  him  to  decide
      what weight to attach  to  the  evidence  and  to  the  contradictions
      between the oral evidence and the account given to Dr Herst.

22.   It is argued that the Adjudicator was wrong to  find  that  there  had
      been no gunshot wound in October 1997.  The Tribunal are  prepared  to
      assume that when Dr Herst referred to this scar he had seen it and was
      expressing a view that it was consistent with  a  gunshot  wound.   We
      bear in mind that the report was a psychiatric report  rather  than  a
      medical report where normally there would be a separate description of
      what was seen on examination.  However, the Adjudicator has  indicated
      in paragraph 55(a) that he would have regarded such an incident as  an
      independent criminal  assault  perpetrated  for  gain  and  not  being
      evidence of persecution.  In the light of the situation in Albania  at
      that time, such a finding would be properly open to him.

23.   The appellant's claim was based on a fear of persecution as  a  member
      of the Legality Party. The Tribunal note from the CIPU Albania Country
      Assessment October 2002 that the Legality Movement Party form part  of
      the Union for Victory Coalition  which  obtained  the  second  largest
      number of seats in the 2001 election.  In January 2002 the  Union  for
      Victory ended a boycott that had lasted since the formation of the new
      government in September 2001 and entered the Albanian  Assembly.   The
      Tribunal are not satisfied that membership of the Legality Party would
      now put the appellant at any risk on return.

24.   It was argued that in the light  of  the  human  rights  situation  in
      Albania and the fact that there was widespread organised  crime  there
      would continue to be  a  risk  to  the  appellant  because  he  was  a
      successful businessman.  However, the  appellant  become  bankrupt  in
      late 2000/early 2001.  On his own evidence, the  appellant  does  have
      property in Albania but his assets  are  depreciating  quickly.   When
      talking about his factory, he said that there was no one to manage  it
      and no market for the product.  He could not sell  the  factory:   see
      paragraphs 33-5 of the determination.  If the appellant  were  now  to
      return to Albania, in our view there is no real risk that he would  be
      targeted as a wealthy businessman  and  become  a  victim  of  further
      attempts to extort money from him.  In any event, there is  no  reason
      why he should not look to the police for protection. The Tribunal  are
      aware of the problems faced by  the  police  in  Albania  and  by  the
      authorities in reforming the police and dealing with  corruption.   In
      the light of paragraphs 6.120-122  the  Tribunal  are  satisfied  that
      efforts are being made to deal with these issues.   In  our  view  the
      appellant would be able to look to the authorities for protection.

25.    In  the  view  of  the  Tribunal,  the  Adjudicator's  findings   and
      conclusions were properly open to him on the evidence.  In  the  light
      of his findings there was no need for him to deal in any greater depth
      with Articles 3 or 8.  Mr Hawkin accepted before the Tribunal that  he
      did not seek to rely on Article 8 as distinct from Article  3  in  the
      light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Ullah & Do [2002] EWCA
      Civ 1856.  For  the  reasons  the  Tribunal  have  given  we  are  not
      satisfied that on the facts found by the Adjudicator there is any real
      risk of a breach of Article 3.

26.   In summary, despite the unfortunate delay in this determination  being
      promulgated, the Tribunal  are  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  has
      evaluated this appeal in a very  careful  and  comprehensive  way  and
      reached findings which were properly open  to  him  on  the  evidence.
      There is no proper basis on which the Tribunal should reverse  or  set
      aside those findings.

27.   It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

