
KH

|Heard at Field House       |        |TK (Ceasefire-Negotiations_)  |
|                           |        |Sri Lanka CG [2003] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00026                         |
|Date:   1 July 2003        |        |                              |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date Determination notified:                                       |
|                                                                   |
|11.07.03                                                           |
|                                                                   |
|                           |        |                              |
|                           |Before: |                              |
|                                                                   |
|Mr G Warr (Chairman)                                               |
|Mr M L James                                                       |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                         |
|                                                                   |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                     |
|                           |        |                              |
|                           |and     |                              |
|                           |        |                              |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                    |



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mrs J L Weinberg) who allowed the appeal of a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,
      hereinafter for convenience referred to as  the  appellant,  from  the
      decision of the Secretary of State on 12 November 2001 to refuse  her
      application for asylum.

2.    Mr G Phillips appeared for the Secretary of State while Mr A Burrett
      of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co represented the appellant.

3.    The appellant had a school  friend  who  had  joined  the  LTTE.   She
      stayed with the appellant and her mother in Colombo.  The  appellant's
      father had died in 1979.  The police arrested the  appellant's  friend
      in November 1994.  The police  took  the  appellant  too.   They  were
      detained for three days and released on a condition to sign on.

4.    On 24 March 1995 the  appellant's  friend  did  not  comply  with  the
      condition and did not reappear until February 1996  when  she  visited
      the appellant's home unexpectedly.   It  had  been  a  tense  time  in
      Colombo since an explosion at the Central Bank on 31 January 1996.

5.    The police raided  the  appellant's  home  on  20  February  1996  and
      detained the appellant, her mother and her  friend.   The  appellant's
      mother was released on the same night.  However, the appellant was ill-
      treated for ten days until 1 March 1996 when she  was  released  on  a
      reporting condition.

6.    The appellant said that she learned from her mother that a  bribe  had
      been paid in order to secure her release although the appellant stated
      that she was sure that the police officer who had been bribed and  had
      facilitated her escape would see that it was  recorded  that  she  had
      escaped.

7.    An agent arranged for the appellant to travel to Australia  where  her
      sister was getting married.  The appellant  and  her  mother  obtained
      Australian visas  and  arrived  in  Australia  on  7  May  1996.   The
      appellant made an unsuccessful application for asylum in Australia.  A
      marriage was arranged for the appellant to a UK citizen of Sri  Lankan
      origin who visited Australia for the marriage on 9 February 2000.  The
      appellant was granted a years visa to join her husband and arrived  in
      this country on 14 October 2000.  She applied for asylum on 9  October
      2001.

8.    The appellant's marriage has broken down.  She says that  her  husband
      behaved  badly  towards  her.   Divorce  proceedings  are   apparently
      pending.

9.    The appellant is living  with  her  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      There are also cousins of the family in this  country.   However,  her
      mother and her other brother and sister are living in Australia.   Her
      brother and sister are Australian citizens and  her  mother  has  also
      been given Australian citizenship apparently.

10.   The Adjudicator found that there was  "a  ring  of  truth"  about  the
      appellant being suspected by  the  authorities  in  Colombo  of  being
      involved with the LTTE because of her friend.  The family had been ill
      advised to harbour this friend and it had got them into trouble.

11.    The  Adjudicator  referred  to  Jeyachandran  [2002]   UKIAT   01869.
      Although it was now six years since the appellant had left  Sri  Lanka
      the Adjudicator considered that she had been  identified  as  an  LTTE
      supporter:

           "It is true that the appellant had been released on bail but the
           fact is that she had not complied with the bail conditions  when
           she went to Australia for the wedding of her sister.   Were  she
           to be returned she would find herself entirely alone in  Colombo
           with no family.  Not only is  it  exceedingly  difficult  for  a
           young woman to live in Sri Lanka with no family, and  no  family
           support, but in this case I find that she would almost certainly
           be detained for further questioning on arrival  at  the  airport
           and there is still a danger in those circumstances  that  during
           the period of detention for further  questioning  she  would  be
           persecuted."


12.   The Adjudicator also found there was likely to be a breach of  Article
      8 as the appellant had no family and no one to return to in Sri Lanka.
       Her sister was married in Australia and her mother and  brother  were
      there also all as Australian citizens.  The appellant had come to  the
      United Kingdom as a married woman but that  marriage  had  not  worked
      out.  The appellant had a brother in this country as well  as  various
      cousins who were living close by and with whom  the  appellant  had  a
      good relationship.  The appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for
      the previous two years and the Adjudicator records that  it  would  be
      disproportionate for the appellant to be removed.

13.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds  that  the  Adjudicator
      had erred in allowing the appeal in the light of the current objective
      situation in Sri Lanka and the appellant would no longer have any well-
      founded fear of persecution.  The Adjudicator had failed adequately to
      explain how Article 8 would be breached.

14.   The objective material before the Tribunal  included  the  April  2003
      Country Assessment  with  accompanying  authorities  and  Mr Phillips
      indicated he would not be placing  reliance  on  the  recent  Internet
      reports that had been lodged on behalf of the  appellant.   While  the
      ceasefire was continuing, the LTTE had suspended  involvement  in  the
      peace process.

15.   Mr Phillips relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  referred  us  to
      paragraph 4.84 of the Home Office Country Assessment.  The  LTTE  were
      still committed to  the  ceasefire  and  had  not  breached  it.   The
      appellant's circumstances were not exceptional.  Reliance  was  placed
      on Jeyachandran and Brinston [2002] UKIAT  01547.   Under  Article  8,
      reliance was placed on Mahmood [2001]  Imm  AR  229.   There  were  no
      insurmountable obstacles preventing  the  appellant's  return  to  Sri
      Lanka.

16.   Mr Burrett submitted that the Adjudicator had taken into  account  the
      objective situation and the relevant  authorities  together  with  the
      approach of the UNHCR.  The appellant's case was exceptional  and  she
      would be wanted on return.  There was not a deficiency of analysis  in
      the determination.  The situation had grown more precarious since  the
      Adjudicator's hearing and the LTTE had withdrawn from the  negotiating
      table.  The Adjudicator had found that the appellant had been released
      on payment of a bribe and had been bailed.  Counsel accepted  that  it
      would be odd if the appellant was recorded as an escapee  as  well  as
      being on bail.

17.   Under Article 8, the Adjudicator had  concern  about  the  appellant's
      case and had taken into account the medical report  showing  that  the
      appellant was depressed.  Her family were not in Sri Lanka.   She  had
      gone  through  a  divorce  and  was  distressed.   She  had  a   close
      relationship with her  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was
      emotional  attachment to her sibling in this  country.   It  would  be
      unduly harsh to remove the appellant.  No members of her  family  were
      in Sri Lanka.  Her brother was a settled UK citizen and  was  unlikely
      to return to Sri Lanka with the appellant.

18.   We reserved our determination.  The sixth  round  of  peace  talks  in
      March 2003 were overshadowed by the sinking of an LTTE vessel  earlier
      in the month - see paragraph 4.82 of the Country Assessment.  The LTTE
      had threatened to boycott the talks but had eventually gone ahead with
      them.  On 21 April 2003 the LTTE suspended participation in the  peace
      talks in protest  at  the  handling  of  what  were  termed  "critical
      issues".  There was concern about the unequal peace dividend and there
      was bitterness about the exclusion of the LTTE  from  the  April  2003
      reconstruction talks  in  Washington  due  to  the  ban  on  the  LTTE
      travelling to the USA.  However, in  paragraph  4.84  of  the  Country
      Assessment it is also recorded that on 23 April 2003 the LTTE had said
      that they had no intention of breaking the ceasefire  but  wanted  the
      government to implement decisions agreed at earlier meetings.

19.   While the progress made in the ceasefire negotiations and  talks  have
      not been maintained in recent months  it  does  not  appear  that  the
      process has broken down.

20.   The appellant has been out of Sri Lanka for a  very  long  time.   She
      was released on payment of a bribe although she  claims  it  would  be
      recorded as an escape.  However, if it was recorded as an  escape,  it
      is odd that she was released on reporting conditions.

21.   The appellant had herself no political involvement at  all.   She  and
      her family made the mistake  of  harbouring  an  LTTE  member  despite
      warnings from the authorities in the mid-1990s.  There had been a very
      tense atmosphere following the incident at the central bank.

22.   The Adjudicator in our view erred in finding that the appellant  would
      be of interest to the authorities on return to Sri Lanka having regard
      to the passage of time, the circumstances of her release from custody,
      and the fact that she was not herself involved in the LTTE at all.

23.   This is not a case in which the absence  of  the  appellant  from  Sri
      Lanka would be at all remarkable.  She left  Sri  Lanka  to  attend  a
      wedding in Australia where her family still resides.  In Australia she
      married a British citizen and followed  him  to  the  United  Kingdom.
      That marriage has apparently no life in it.  The  authorities  in  Sri
      Lanka would be unlikely  to  draw  any  adverse  inferences  from  the
      appellant's return home.

24.   We are unable to accept that the appellant's circumstances are in  any
      way exceptional nor that she would be in the least  degree  wanted  by
      the authorities.  The Tribunal in  Jeyachandran  stated  that  it  was
      still too early to be satisfied that the situation in  Sri  Lanka  had
      changed to such an extent that there would now be no risk  to  anyone.
      However, it was always necessary to consider the circumstances of each
      individual case.  The appellant in Jeyachandran was found to be wanted
      and was someone who was wanted in a relatively  serious  fashion.   In
      our view, the Adjudicator erred in concluding that the appellant would
      be of any interest on her return.  She simply is  not  an  exceptional
      case and she is not wanted.

25.   The Adjudicator made no reference to Article 3 in  her  determination.
      In our view, the Adjudicator did not weigh  up  the  competing  issues
      properly in this case when considering Article 8.

26.   In Mahmood the Court of Appeal set out conclusions as to the  approach
      of the Commission and the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  on  the
      balance to be drawn between  the  respect  for  family  life  and  the
      enforcement of immigration controls.  We note that a state has a right
      under international law to control the entry of non-nationals into its
      territory subject always to its treaty  obligations.   That  case  was
      concerned with spouses.  We are here concerned with siblings and  more
      distant relatives.  Two of the appellant's  siblings  and  her  mother
      reside in Australia.  They have Australian citizenship.

27.   The appellant has not  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  very  long
      although we will assume in her favour that she has established  family
      life with her brother following the  collapse  of  her  marriage.   We
      appreciate  that  the  collapse  of  her  marriage  would  have   been
      distressing and led to her feeling  depressed.   We  acknowledge  that
      there was medical evidence before the Adjudicator  although  that  has
      not been placed before us.

28.   The appellant is adult.  We have no doubt that  the  appellant  has  a
      good relationship with her brother and other  family  members  in  the
      United Kingdom.  In Kugathas [2003] INLR 170  at  177,  paragraph  25,
      Arden LJ observed:

           "Because there is no presumption of family life, in my  judgment
           a family life is not established between an adult child and  his
           surviving parent or other siblings unless something more  exists
           than normal emotional ties: see S v  United  Kingdom  [1984]  40
           DR196 and Abdul Aziz, Cabales and Balkandali  v  United  Kingdom
           [1985] 7EHRR 471.  Such ties might exist if the  appellant  were
           dependent on his family or vice versa".


      An extract from the case of S v United Kingdom is quoted at  paragraph
      14 of the judgment of Sedley LJ:


           "Generally, the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependants,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent,  minor  children.   Whether  it  extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case.  Relationships between adults, a mother and  her  33  year
           old son in the present case would not  necessarily  acquire  the
           protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without  evidence  of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than  the  normal
           emotional ties."


29.   This was accepted as a proper approach by Sedley LJ.

30.   The Adjudicator found that the appellant had a good relationship  with
      her family who lived close by.  We note that the Adjudicator  reviewed
      the medical evidence in paragraph 20 of her determination although she
      does not refer to that in the concluding paragraph where she sets  out
      her  reason  for  finding  that  return  of  the  appellant  would  be
      disproportionate.  We note that the appellant suffered an  episode  of
      depression in May 2001 and she had required anti-depressants.  She had
      again experienced stress related symptoms and low  mood  and  remained
      vulnerable to developing depression in view of her  previous  history.
      She felt lonely and isolated and was anxious about  returning  to  Sri
      Lanka.

31.   The Adjudicator made no findings under Article 3  in  this  case.   We
      find that for the reasons set out earlier in  this  determination  the
      Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  would  be
      persecuted on her return.  Assuming in the appellant's favour that she
      enjoys family life with her brother and other relatives in the  United
      Kingdom, we find that removal would be in pursuance  of  a  legitimate
      aim  (immigration  control)  and  that  her  removal  would   not   be
      disproportionate.  We do not find that the factors relied  on  by  the
      Adjudicator were sufficient for the appellant to make  good  her  case
      under Article 8.

32.   For the reasons we have given the appeal of the Secretary of State  is
      allowed and the decision of the Adjudicator is reversed.





                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President
