

                                     NA (Oleed - Proper Ambit)  Iraq  [2003]
UKIAT 00148

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



                                            Date heard:   14 September  2003
                                            Date notified   14 November 2003

                                   Before:-


                         DR  H  H  STOREY (CHAIRMAN)
                                MR C THURSBY


                                                       Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                              Appellant



                                     and



                                                                  Respondent







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This case is being reported in order to clarify the proper ambit  of  the
"Oleed point" insofar as it identifies  an  exception  to  the  Ravichandran
principle that the relevant date for assessment of risk in an asylum  appeal
is the date of hearing.

2. The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed  with  leave  of  the
Tribunal against a determination of Adjudicator, Mr R A  Prickett,  allowing
the appeal of the respondent, a national of Iraq, against  the  decision  to
give directions for removal having refused asylum.  Mr  C  Buckley  appeared
for the appellant. Mr  E  Waheed  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Fisher  Jones
Greenwood appeared for the respondent. To avoid confusion the respondent  is
hereafter referred to as "the claimant".

3. The Tribunal has decided to dismiss this appeal.

4. The basis of the claimant`s claim was that he  had  left  Iraq  illegally
with his mother some 13 years ago when he was 7. The  Iraqi  government  had
executed his father because of his association with the Kurds.

5. The adjudicator accepted that the claimant was only 7 when he left  Iraq.
In the light of the expert evidence from Dr  Fatah,  he  accepted  that  his
account of his father`s membership  of  KDP  and  subsequent  execution  was
credible and that it was also likely that upon  return  the  claimant  would
face difficulties for not having done his military service  and  because  he
had left Iraqi illegally.

6. The grounds of appeal maintained  that  the  adjudicator  had  failed  to
identify from whom the claimant would have a well-founded fear and  had  not
justified his finding that there  was  a  Refugee  Convention  reason.  They
further argued that in view of the finding by the Tribunal  in  Issa  [2002]
UKIAT 04759 that Dr Fatah lacked impartiality, he should not  have  attached
as much weight as he did to this man's report.

7. Both parties submitted that the Tribunal had to  decide  this  appeal  in
the light of the Court of Appeal judgment in Oleed [2003] INLR  179  at  189
per Rt  Hon  Schiemann  LJ.  The  Oleed  principle,  perhaps  more  usefully
described as the "Oleed exception" to the Ravichandran approach  of  current
risk, was stated in this judgment as follows:

      "I accept that the Tribunal examines the situation in the country from
      which the refugee is fleeing as at the date of determination. However,
      in the present case in my judgment there was nothing  wrong  with  the
      adjudicator's determination, there was therefore no reason  to  appeal
      it and it would be wrong for the Home Secretary, on  the  back  of  an
      appeal which has been dismissed, to seek to re-examine the  threat  to
      the refugee with reference to a  date  later  than  the  adjudicator's
      determination. To permit this would  merely  encourage  appeals  by  a
      party who has no grounds for appeal but hopes that the situation would
      change sufficiently to enable him to advance  different  arguments  on
      different facts on appeal. Such procedures would not  be  in  anyone's
      interest".

8. The potential relevance of this principle to this  case  arose  from  the
fact that this too was a Secretary of State appeal and one  in  which  there
had been a major change in country circumstances between  the  adjudicator's
decision and the hearing before the Tribunal. At the  date  of  the  hearing
before the adjudicator (17 February 2003), the  Saddam  Hussein  regime  was
still in power in Iraq. Mr Buckley submitted that this was  not  a  case  in
which the Tribunal was confined by the  Oleed  principle  to  assessing  the
claim as at the date of hearing before the adjudicator.  Oleed,  he  argued,
only applied to cases in which the adjudicator had made an error of law.  Mr
Waheed maintained that the Oleed exception did apply in this case since  the
adjudicator,  he  submitted,  had  not  erred.  The  adjudicator  had   been
entitled, he contended further, to rely on the country expert. The  Tribunal
in  Issa  did  not  have  the  country  expert's  credentials  before  them.
Furthermore, it was open to the adjudicator to conclude,  on  the  basis  of
the findings of the Tribunal in Sabah, that any national  of  Iraq  who  had
exited illegally would face a disproportionate punishment  consisting  in  a
10 year sentence served in conditions of detention  that  would  be  inhuman
and degrading.

9. Had it been open to us  to  decide  this  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
situation in Iraq as at the date of hearing before us, we would have had  no
hesitation in allowing the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State.  The  Baath
Party regime is no more.

10. However, we have to consider whether the  Oleed  exception  applies.  As
the Tribunal made clear in  S  (Sri  Lanka)  [2003]  UKIAT,  that  principle
causes difficulties for a straightforward application of  the  current  risk
test enunciated in Ravichandran  [1996] Imm AR 97. Nevertheless,  its  ambit
is limited. The  exception  Oleed  creates  to  the  current  risk  test  is
carefully limited by the requirement that, for this exception to apply,  the
decision of the adjudicator must first be shown  to  be  "plainly  wrong  or
unsustainable" (see paragraphs 29, 35 and 57 of the judgment).

11 In this case we are not satisfied that  the  adjudicator's  decision  was
either plainly wrong or unsustainable.  Accordingly this is a case in  which
the Oleed exception applies so  that  the  relevant  date  is  the  date  of
hearing before the adjudicator.

12. In seeking to persuade us otherwise, Mr Buckley  asked  us  to  identify
two   errors in the adjudicator's determination. One  was  his  decision  to
rely on the evidence of Dr Fatah. The other  was  his  assessment  that  the
Baath Party regime would apply penal sanctions for illegal  exit  against  a
person who was only 7 years old when he left Iraq.

13. As regards the adjudicator's reliance on the expert report of Dr  Fatah,
the first important point to note  is  that  when  it  was  submitted  on  3
December 2002 and the Home Office representative asked for time to  consider
that report, an adjournment had been granted in order that he could  do  so.
Yet when the appeal came before the adjudicator on 17 February  2003,  there
was no Home Office representative  nor  had  any  Home  Office  letter  been
submitted making any challenge to the report of Dr Fatah. In  our  view  the
Secretary of State, having  failed  to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity
specifically afforded to him to consider the report,  was  not  entitled  to
challenge it after the adjudicator had written  his  determination.  In  the
second place, the evidence which the adjudicator  had  before  him  was  not
confined to the report. He noted that in addition to the  interview  record,
the reasons for refusal letter and a witness statement  from  the  claimant,
there were also a number of reports  on  Iraq.  We  have  noted  that  these
reports included the US State  Department  report  dated  March  2002  which
included an  entry  dealing  with  freedom  of  movement  stating  that:  "A
November 1999  law  provides  for  additional  penalties  for  citizens  who
attempt to leave the country illegally. Under the law, a prison term  of  up
to 10 years and "confiscation of movable and immovable property"  is  to  be
imposed on anyone who attempts to leave illegally. ..". Thirdly, the  report
drew in a number of respects on established sources including ones from  the
British government and the US State  Department  and,  having  compared  its
contents with the US State Department report  and  others  included  in  the
bundle, we can find no significant inaccuracy in relation to  what  is  said
in it concerning the penalties imposed under  the  Baath  Party  regime  for
those who have failed to perform national service and  how  the  authorities
of that regime viewed persons who were family  members of  someone  who  had
been  executed  by  the  regime  for   pro-Kurdish   activities.   In   such
circumstances it does not seem to us that any bias Dr  Fatah  might  possess
in favour Kurdish asylum seekers was relevant.

14. Mr Waheed urged us to reject the IAT view of Dr Fatah taken in the  case
of Issa. He argued that there was no proper examination of  his  credentials
in that case, whereas in another case - Abdullah [2002]  UKIAT  8174  -  the
Home Office was recorded as having checked Dr Fatah`s credentials and  being
satisfied  by  them.  One  unedifying  feature  of  the   arguments   raised
concerning Dr Fatah by both parties is that neither has had the courtesy  to
furnish the Tribunal with a  copy  of  Issa.  Since  it  was  cited  in  the
grounds, the Home Office should have adduced it. Mr Waheed sought  to  argue
that it was not his responsibility to adduce  the  case.  That  is  strictly
correct, but his own skeleton argument referred to it in several places  and
he had not checked beforehand to see whether the Home Office had  adduced  a
copy. We wish to remind parties appearing before the Tribunal that  if  they
wish us to decide issues they raise and to decide  them  properly,  it  does
not assist if they seek merely to sit on their hands. The  primary  duty  of
representatives must be to assist the court.

15. Since for reasons already given we do not think that in respect of  this
particular report any possible partiality  on  the  part  of  Dr  Fatah  has
affected its contents in any event, we are quite  frankly  not  prepared  to
expend any further  time  in  the  context  of  this  appeal  assessing  his
credentials as an expert more generally.

16. Mr Buckley contended that the adjudicator erred in law in  his  reliance
on the Tribunal decision in Saber [2002] UKIAT 3240 for concluding that  the
claimant would be at risk of persecution. He pointed out that in  Saber  the
Tribunal had allowed the appeal not on the basis of any examination  of  the
evidence, but simply because the Home  Office  representative  conceded  the
appeal.

17. Mr Buckley is quite correct to point out that the adjudicator did  place
principal reliance on Saber in respect of his assessment  that  any  citizen
who left Iraq under the Baath Party regime could be sentenced to  up  to  10
years in prison  and  serve  his  sentence  in  conditions  which  would  be
"extremely poor and life threatening". He is also right  to  note  that  the
Tribunal in Saber allowed the  appeal  in  the  light  of  the  Home  Office
representative conceding it. However, we have had no evidence placed  before
us to demonstrate that the  assessment  recorded  in  Saber  concerning  the
consequences for those  who  leave  the  country  illegally  was  erroneous.
Moreover, as  already  noted,  the  adjudicator  had  before  him  objective
country evidence confirming that assessment.

18. By reference to ground 3, Mr Buckley sought to argue that  the  claimant
would have been of no adverse interest on his return  (as  at  the  date  of
hearing before the adjudicator) since he had left 14 years ago, when he  was
only seven.  However, despite being the party who has brought  this  appeal,
he did not support that argument  with  any  objective  evidence  indicating
that the travel laws were only applied against persons who  were  adults  at
the time they left Iraq. And in any event, the consequence of  violation  of
the travel laws was only one of  three  main  reasons  relied  upon  by  the
adjudicator for concluding the claimant would  be  of  adverse  interest  on
return. The first reason, based on the claimant`s own evidence  as  well  as
the objectively sourced evidence of Dr Fatah,  was  that  the  regime  would
identify him as the son of an executed pro-Kurdish enemy of the  regime  and
in consequence would seek to ill-treat him also. The second reason  was  the
fact that he was someone who had not done military service  when  he  should
have.

19. The existence of more than one reason  why  the  regime  would  have  an
adverse interest in the claimant also serves as an answer  to  the  question
concerning whether the real risk of serious  harm  upon  return  would  have
been for a Refugee Convention reason. Entirely in accord with the  objective
country evidence, Dr Fatah`s report  provided  support  for  the  claimant`s
fear that if returned as at the date  of  hearing  the  Baath  party  regime
would have imputed the (pro-Kurdish) political opinion of his father to  him
and would have sought to persecute him by reason of that political opinion.

20. It must be borne in mind that the claimant in this case had  been  found
to be the son  of  a  pro-  Kurdish  activist.  His  home  area  was  Basra.
Furthermore, if he had been returned at  the  date  of  hearing  before  the
adjudicator, as a young man of 20 claiming  to  have  left  there  14  years
earlier, it was more than reasonably likely in our view that he  would  have
become  the  subject  of  close  interrogation.  In  the  course   of   that
interrogation, it was reasonably likely that he would not have been able  to
conceal his family history or the circumstances  under  which  he  had  left
Iraq. Whilst in considering  the  claimant`s  case  in  the  light  of  such
factors the adjudicator may have  been  side-  tracked  to  some  extent  by
formalistic submissions based on a previous Tribunal  case,  he  essentially
based his decision to allow the appeal on palpable evidence indicating  that
the claimant would face a real risk of serious harm upon return.

21. Accordingly, we consider that the adjudicator was entitled to allow  the
appeal. The Oleed exception applies: this was to an appeal  brought  by  the
Secretary of State in relation to a  determination  which  was  not  plainly
wrong or unsustainable. This  result  may  seem  somewhat  artificial,  but,
following Oleed, we see no other course open to us.

22. For the above reasons the Secretary of State`s appeal is dismissed.



                  DR H H  STOREY
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
