
                       BI (Risk on Return - Article 8) Serbia and
Montenegro [2003] UKIAT 00038




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                             Date of Decision:  7 April 2003
                                              Date of Promulgation: 05.08.03

                                   Before
                            Mr K Drabu (Chairman)
                                Mr R Bremmer

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 (Appellant)
                                     and


Representatives:
Miss A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer for the appellant.
Mr J Patel of Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik, solicitors for the
      respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
      decision of an Adjudicator, Mrs H S Coleman,  who  sitting  at  Taylor
      House allowed the appeal of  Bujar  Ismaili,  hereinafter  called  the
      respondent. The Adjudicator concluded that his removal from the United
      Kingdom would infringe his rights under Article 8. The respondent is a
      citizen of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from Kosovo. He was born
      on 21 April 1975 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 May 1999  and
      claimed asylum at port. His  claim  to  asylum  was  refused  and  the
      decision was upheld on appeal on 15 September 2000. On  23  July  2001
      the respondent claimed that his removal would be contrary to his right
      to family life. His claim was upheld  by  the  Adjudicator  and  as  a
      consequence we have before us the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State
      before us, contending that the Adjudicator's decision is in  error  of
      law.

   2. The  Adjudicator  said  that  the  Article  8  claim  related  to  his
      relationship with his common law wife. He said he could only  consider
      the  facts  as  they  were  at  the  date  of   the   decision.   This
      interpretation of Section 77 was found to be in error in  S&K  and  we
      shall of course decide this appeal on the  correct  interpretation  of
      Section 77. The parties claim that  they  married  under  a  religious
      ceremony in May 2001. The parties have lived together ever since.  The
      Adjudicator found in paragraph 25 that there is a family life  between
      the respondent and his wife who is also a Kosovan. She quite correctly
      found that the respondent has no right to remain in the United Kingdom
      and that "any interference with Article 8 rights would be  lawful  and
      legitimate." She then went on to  consider  whether  the  interference
      would be proportionate. In this context she noted that  neither  party
      had the right to remain in the United Kingdom and that they married at
      a time when both were aware that their rights to remain in the  United
      Kingdom were uncertain. Furthermore and more importantly there  is  no
      evidence of any insurmountable obstacle making it impossible  for  the
      parties to live in Kosovo. I have no evidence whatsoever of the wife's
      situation. I am simply told that she suffers  from  depression.  There
      was no medical evidence...." After having made a  clear  finding  that
      the couple could live together in Kosovo, the Adjudicator went  on  to
      say in paragraph 29 of her determination, "I only make one proviso  to
      this.  At  the  present  time  the  appellant's  wife  does  have   an
      outstanding asylum claim and human rights claim.  Until  those  claims
      are decided return of a  wife  to  Kosovo  could  possibly  result  in
      resettlement or breach of her human rights. In those circumstances  it
      would not be reasonable or proportionate to ask the wife to return  to
      Kosovo before her claims are decided. If  the  husband  had  to  leave
      whilst  the  wife's  claims  were  undecided  the  parties  would   be
      separated. That separation could be for a long time. I understand that
      the appellant's wife has not yet been interviewed in  connection  with
      her claims. Therefore any separation could be upwards of a  year.  The
      respondent has not given any undertaking not to return  the  appellant
      to Kosovo without his wife. Under those specific circumstances and  in
      the absence of any such undertaking, I find  that  separation  of  the
      couple would be disproportionate while the wife awaits a  decision  on
      her status in the UK. To that limited extent I find that the appellant
      should not be returned to Kosovo until his wife's applications in this
      country have been determined and that any immediate return  to  Kosovo
      without the wife would be in breach of Article 8. To  that  extent,  I
      allow the human rights appeal."

   3. We asked Mr Patel to address us first. He said that we  should  uphold
      the Adjudicator's decision. He said that  the  respondent's  wife  had
      come to the UK in 2000 and was still  waiting  to  be  interviewed  in
      connection with her claims. He said that she should not be forced into
      a situation that required her to give up her legitimate claims in law.
      He said that she had every right to pursue her  claims  and  for  that
      reason the respondent, he said, should be allowed to  remain.  We  did
      not think it necessary to hear submissions from Miss Holmes.

4.    With the greatest  respect  to  the  Adjudicator,  her  reasoning  for
      allowing the appeal has turned Article 8 right on its head. Article  8
      does not give a person the right to install himself in another country
      simply on the basis that he has chosen to live in  that  country.  The
      Adjudicator's reasoning for allowing the appeal gives  the  respondent
      rights  that  he  does  not  have  either  in  the  domestic  or   the
      international law. His wife is not settled in the United Kingdom.  She
      has no status and yet the Adjudicator finds that simply as a result of
      her presence the respondent should be allowed to remain so that he can
      be with her. There is no impediment to his return  to  Kosovo  as  the
      Adjudicator clearly and correctly found. There is no impediment to the
      return of his wife either. The Adjudicator was not shown any  evidence
      that she requires international protection.  The  Adjudicator  allowed
      wholly extraneous factors to influence her decision. The fact that the
      wife has not been interviewed and it may be  a  while  before  she  is
      interviewed is neither here nor there. If and when she is  interviewed
      and if her claim  to  international  protection  is  established,  the
      respondent can apply to join her as her dependant.  Her  human  rights
      claim under Article 8 will be determined in the usual way as will  her
      claims, if any, under other Articles of the  ECHR.  The  Adjudicator's
      determination in this case is perverse and we set  it  aside.  In  our
      judgement the respondent does not have a claim under Article 8 in that
      even if he has a family life in the United Kingdom, it is not one that
      requires to be protected and respected  by  its  continuation  in  the
      United Kingdom. He has no right either on his own or through his  wife
      to remain in the United Kingdom. If his removal is interference in his
      family life, it is  neither  disproportionate  nor  unreasonable.  The
      appeal is allowed.


K Drabu

Vice President

