
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |MA (Home Office Policy -    |
|                           |        |Abdi - s.65 Appeal) Jamaica |
|                           |        |[2003] UKIAT 00083          |
|On 4 August 2003           |        |                            |
|Dictated: 4 August 2003    |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23.09.03                                                          |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)                                         |
|Mr P R Lane                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Appearances:

For the appellant:           Miss  J  Sigley,  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer
For the respondent:    Miss C  Simpson,  of  Equity  Legal  &  Advisory
      Services

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant,  whose  is  the  Immigration  Officer,  Gatwick  North,
      appeals with leave against the determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Ms
      Linda Freestone, sitting at Taylor House, in  which  she  allowed  the
      respondent's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  to
      refuse her leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The facts of this  case
      can be summarised as follows.

2.    The respondent and her son Jason (then aged 1) arrived in  the  United
      Kingdom on 15 December 1993.    She sought entry as a  visitor  for  4
      weeks.   This was refused, since it was considered that she was not  a
      genuine visitor.    She  was  granted  temporary  admission  until  18
      December 1993.   However, on that day neither she nor her son reported
      for their return flight to Jamaica.

3.     In  January  1994,  Immigration  Officers  attempted  to  trace   the
      respondent, without  success.   A  further  attempt  was  made  on  13
      February 1994.

4.    Nothing more was heard from the respondent until 27 March  2001,  when
      a letter was received from solicitors who sought indefinite  leave  to
      enter on the respondent's  behalf  on  the  basis  that  she  had  two
      children born in the United Kingdom with her  Nigerian-born,  illegal-
      entrant husband, and that she also wished to continue  treatment  "for
      an over active thyroid gland" (explanatory statement, paragraph 7).

5.    The same explanatory statement  goes  on  to  describe  the  husband's
      situation in the United Kingdom.  It also gives details of  the  three
      children  of  the  respondent.     The  statement  then  continues  as
      follows:

      "The 7 year  concession  applies  to  "enforcement"  cases  concerning
      young children but is taken into account in "port"  cases  which  [the
      respondent] and [her  son]  fall  into.    It  was  decided  that  the
      passengers did not benefit from  this  concession.    Other  enquiries
      revealed that treatment for  the  passenger's  medical  conditions  is
      available in Jamaica.  In light of all the circumstances above,  there
      appear to be no reasons sufficiently compelling to waive the mandatory
      entry-  clearance  requirement.     The  passengers  were,  therefore,
      refused leave to enter in accordance with the rules  ...  and  removal
      directions were set for 7 September 2001.    The  passengers  did  not
      arrive for their return flight."

6.    The explanatory statement  ended  by  analysing  the  submissions  put
      forward on behalf of the respondent, regarding Article 8 of the  ECHR.
       The statement indicates that the Immigration  Service  was  satisfied
      that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  was  in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules and did not breach Article 8.

7.    That explanatory statement is dated 18 December 2001.  A letter of  26
      November 2001 had also, however,  been  written  to  the  respondent's
      representative.   This letter states that:

       "The  settlement  application  submitted  by  your  client's  earlier
      representative was determined on 17-08-01 by  way  of  a  decision  to
      refuse entry.   This took into account the presence here of the two UK
      born children and the child accompanying your client to  this  country
      in 1993."

      The letter goes on to say that a review had  been  undertaken  by  the
      Immigration Officer "with Article 8 in  mind".    The  officer  states
      that he had "also reviewed the substantive decision in  the  light  of
      any current concessions which might apply.   I  have  taken  the  view
      that the refusal decision will stand since your client is not  availed
      by any concession in respect of presence in this country, or  that  of
      her children".

8.    The "7 year concession" to which reference has earlier  been  made  is
      contained in policy DP5/96.    As currently  formulated,  this  policy
      begins the following statement:-

      "Whilst it is important that each individual case must  be  considered
      on its merits, there are specific factors which are likely  to  be  of
      particular  relevance  when  considering  whether  enforcement  action
      should proceed or be initiated against parents who have children  with
      lengthy residence in the United Kingdom.  The general  presumption  is
      that we will not usually enforce the departure of a family where there
      is a child(ren),

         .  who  was  or  were  either  born  here  and  have  lived   here
           continuously to the age of seven, or
         . where, having come to the United Kingdom at an  early  age  they
           have accumulated 7 years or more continuous residence. "

   9. There then follows a statement that "this policy is a  concession  and
      as such there is no obligation to agree to  any  application  on  this
      basis.  The onus is on the applicant to show they benefit from this or
      any other concession".
10.   Under  the  heading   "Refusal   of   Applications",   we   find   the
    following:-

       "There  may  be  circumstances  in  which  it  is   considered   that
      enforcement action is still appropriate despite the lengthy  residence
      of  the  child,  for  example  in  cases  where  the  parents  have  a
      particularly poor immigration history and have deliberately  seriously
      delayed consideration of their case.   In  all  cases,  the  following
      factors are relevant in reaching a  judgment  on  whether  enforcement
      action should proceed:

         . the length of the parents' residence without leave;
         . whether removal has been delayed through protracted  (and  often
           repetitive) representations or by the parents going to ground;
         . the age of the children;
         . whether the children were conceived at a time  when  either  the
           parents have leave to remain;
         . whether the return to the parents' country of origin will  cause
           extreme hardship for the children or put their health  seriously
           at risk;
         . whether  either  of  the  parents  has  a  history  of  criminal
           behaviour or deception;

      Consideration should also be given to  whether  the  child  itself  is
      subject to enforcement action and the outcome of  any  appeal  against
      that decision."

11.   The first Adjudicator who heard the respondent's  appeal  against  the
      decision to refuse her leave to enter dismissed it on the ground  that
      she had not shown that Article 8 of the ECHR would be violated by  the
      decision.

12.   On 21  January  2003  the  immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  allowed  the
      respondent's  appeal  against  the  Adjudicator's  determination   and
      remitted the matter "to a different Adjudicator for reconsideration in
      the light of all the evidence, the requirements of the concession  and
      Article 8" ( Tribunal determination, paragraph 27).

13.    Thus,  the  appeal  came  for  hearing  before  Ms  Freestone.    She
      concluded that Article 8 would not be violated.   There was  a  family
      life in the United Kingdom which would suffer interference.   However,
      the  Adjudicator  found  that  the  respondent  "was  aware"  of   her
      "precarious immigration status when she  married  her  husband.  Jason
      appears to be a bright boy and although he would find it difficult  to
      adapt I do not find that there are any insurmountable obstacles to him
      adapting to life in Jamaica. Because of the ages of  the  two  younger
      children they would adapt more easily.  There has been no evidence put
      before the court to show the husband could not follow  the  family  to
      Jamaica.   Applying  the  reasoning  in  Mahmood  I  find  removal  is
      proportionate and therefore I dismiss the appeal on that basis."

14. Having found this, however, the Adjudicator then went on  to  find  that
    the Immigration Officer had "failed to take account of  his  own  policy
    and failed to give effect to it.  The well established case of Abdi says
    that I can allow  an  appeal  on  the  ground  of  the  failure  of  the
    respondent properly to apply  a  policy  in  the  public  domain."   The
    Adjudicator then went on to  refer  to  two  recent  Tribunal  decisions
    which, she thought, "seem to cast doubt on that principle"  but,  noting
    again that "the Abdi principle is  long  established"  she  allowed  the
    appeal "on that limited basis".









       The "Abdi" principle

15.   In Abdi (Dajui Saleban) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [1996] Imm AR 148, the Court of Appeal held that, if it can  be  shown
      that the Secretary of State has  failed  to  act  in  accordance  with
      established principles of administrative or common law,  for  example,
      if he did not take account of or give  effect  to  his  own  published
      policy, that was "not in accordance with the law".    At the  time  of
      Abdi, section 19 of the Immigration Act 1971 required  an  Adjudicator
      to allow an appeal if  he  considered  that  the  decision  or  action
      against which the appeal was brought "was not in accordance  with  the
      law or with any Immigration Rules applicable  to  the  case"  (section
      19(1)(a)(i)).

16.   In  the  present  case,  Miss  Simpson  conceded  that,  even  if  the
      Adjudicator had been right to allow the appeal in  reliance  on  Abdi,
      the correct course  would  have  been  for  the  Adjudicator  to  have
      directed this Immigration Officer to take account of policy DP5/96 and
      apply it to the respondent's case.

      Does the "Abdi" principle apply in the present case?

17.   The Adjudicator, hearing the appeal on remittal from the Tribunal,  no
      doubt had regard to paragraph 26 of the Tribunal's  determination,  in
      which they said that "we are of the view that the requirements of  the
      concession ought to have been given consideration by the  Adjudicator,
      over and above the requirements under Article  8".    However,  as  is
      explained in paragraph 26 of her determination, she  was  referred  to
      two recent Tribunal cases, which she acknowledged threw into  question
      whether, in the present case, she could properly allow the  appeal  on
      the basis that the decision to refuse  leave  to  enter  was  not  "in
      accordance with the law".

18.   Paragraph 21(1)(a) of Schedule 4 to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      1999 in essence repeats the wording  of  section  19(1)(a)(i)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, referred to above.   However, as the Tribunal in
      Anderson [2002] UKIAT 05801 found:

      "Paragraph 21(2) of Schedule 4 to the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999
      states that an Adjudicator's jurisdiction on appeal under Part  IV  is
      subject to "any restrictions on the grounds of appeal".    The  appeal
      in this case was subject to a restriction set out in  s.69  and  s.65.
      That  is  to  say,  the  Adjudicator's  jurisdiction  was  limited  to
      considering  whether  the  decision  was  contrary  to   the   Refugee
      Convention of the Human Rights Convention.  The  restrictions  on  the
      right of appeal under these sections meant that there was no paragraph
      21(1) "in accordance with the law" jurisdiction  to  consider  whether
      the Secretary of State had properly applied a concessionary policy".

19.   The Tribunal that remitted the case to Ms Freestone  does  not  appear
      to  have  had  the  above  point  argued  before  it.    Indeed,   the
      significance of the actual immigration decision being appealed appears
      to  have  been  appreciated  only  in  the  course  of   the   current
      proceedings.

20.   The essential point is that the respondent has never been given  leave
      to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.   Hers was  a  "port"  case,
      where leave to enter was refused.   She was given a  short  period  of
      temporary admission, which is not the same as leave.

21.    The  point  becomes  significant  when  one  considers   under   what
      provisions of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 the  current  appeal
      has been brought.   It  cannot  be  argued  that  the  appeal  is,  or
      includes, an appeal under  section  59(1)  of  the  1999  Act  against
      refusal of leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom.     This  is  because
      section 60(3) prevents a person from appealing against such a  refusal
      while she is in the United Kingdom unless, at the time of the refusal,
      she held a current entry clearance or was a person named in a  current
      work permit.    Neither exception applies here.

22.   Accordingly, the appeal  is  purely  a  "human  rights"  appeal  under
      section 65(1) of the 1999 Act.

23.   In deciding whether the "Abdi" principle  applies  in  any  particular
      case, the precise nature of the statutory provision  under  which  the
      appeal is being brought must always be carefully considered.   In some
      cases, such as section 59 itself, there is no relevant restriction  on
      the grounds of  appeal,  such  as  to  preclude  an  Adjudicator  from
      allowing it, if he or she finds that the decision in question was  not
      in accordance with the law.

24.   Leaving aside the specific  restrictions  in  section  60,  an  appeal
      under section 59(1) is entirely "at large".   That much is plain  from
      the wording of the provision.

25.   The position, however, under section 65 is radically different.    The
      wording of that section  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  only
      grounds upon which a person can succeed under it is that the authority
      taking the decision in question racially  discriminated  against  that
      person or acted in breach of his or her human  rights.   Unlike,  say,
      section 59(1), there is simply no scope in a section 65 appeal for  an
      appellant to argue that, independently of the question of whether  her
      human rights have been breached, the section requires her appeal to be
      allowed by reason only of the fact that the Secretary of State has not
      had regard to a published policy.

26.   The way  in  which  appeal  rights  have  been  provided  for  in  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  is  somewhat  different
      from the way in which such rights are dealt  with  in  the  1999  Act.
      Questions of statutory construction of the 2002 Act  will,  no  doubt,
      arise in due course.  For the present, however, the Tribunal is in  no
      doubt that an appeal such as the present  one,  brought  purely  under
      section 65  (or  under  section  69,  or  both)  does  not  enable  an
      Adjudicator to  allow  an  appeal  solely  on  the  grounds  that  the
      Secretary of State or an Immigration Officer has failed to have regard
      to, or misapplied, a published policy.

27.   This does not mean, however, that it is irrelevant to  decide  whether
      such a failure has occurred.   On the contrary, in the present case, a
      failure to have regard to DP5/96 is clearly capable of  affecting  the
      question of whether, in the circumstances of the case,  the  Secretary
      of State or  Immigration  Officer  has  arrived  at  a  decision  that
      violates Article 8 of the ECHR, for  example,  whether  the  decision-
      maker has conducted the relevant "balancing" exercise correctly, in  a
      case where  failure to grant leave to enter would interfere  with  the
      right to respect for family life in the  United  Kingdom.    In  other
      words, the relevance of the policy will, in a section  65  appeal,  be
      confined to the  Adjudicator's  assessment  of  whether,  in  all  the
      circumstances, the decision breached the claimant's human rights.

28.   It follows from what we have said that  we  respectfully  differ  from
      what the Tribunal that remitted this case to the Adjudicator  said  at
      paragraph 26 of  their  determination  (see  above).     There  is  no
      question  of  the  policy  being  considered  "over  and   above   the
      requirements under Article 8".

29.   In the present case,  the  Adjudicator  specifically  found  that  the
      removal of the respondent to Jamaica, following  the  failure  of  her
      application for leave to enter, would not be in breach of  Article  8.
       Her conclusions in this regard are contained at paragraph 25  of  her
      determination, to which we have previously  made  reference.    Having
      found that there would not be "any insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
      family  establishing  itself  in  Jamaica,   the   Adjudicator,   when
      considering  the  DP5/96  on  its  own,  came  to  the  irreconcilable
      conclusion that the "return of  his  mother  to  Jamaica  would  cause
      extreme hardship to the  appellant's  son"  (determination,  paragraph
      19).  This difficulty arose for the Adjudicator precisely because  she
      felt compelled to assess DP5/96 independently of the question of human
      rights.





      Did the Immigration Officer fail to  have  regard  to/give  effect  to
      DP5/96?


30.   Unlike the  Adjudicator,  the  Tribunal  finds  that  the  Immigration
      Officer in the present case  manifestly  had  regard  to  DP5/96  when
      considering the respondent's application for leave to enter.   This is
      plain from the explanatory statement of 18 December  2001.     At  the
      hearing before the Tribunal, there was some debate as to  whether  the
      Adjudicator had, in fact, seen  this  statement.   However,  that  she
      clearly had is apparent from paragraph 3 of her  determination,  where
      she says that the respondent's immigration history, and the  case  for
      the Immigration Officer, "are set  out  in  the  refusal  letter,  the
      decision and the statement of the "[Immigration Officer]".

31.   The relevant passages in the explanatory statement and the  letter  of
      26 November 2001 have been set out earlier in this determination.   In
      the Tribunal's view, they show  quite  clearly  that  the  Immigration
      Officer has had regard to the policy, in the context of the individual
      facts of the present case.  Insofar as the Tribunal that remitted  the
      case to  Ms  Freestone  may  be  said  to  have  found  otherwise,  we
      respectfully differ.  In particular, it is not correct, in  our  view,
      to say that the Secretary of State or an Immigration Officer  has  not
      had regard to a policy, notwithstanding that he has clearly  indicated
      that he has done  so,  merely  because  the  statement  or  letter  in
      question does not set out, more or less verbatim,  the  terms  of  the
      policy, indicating in each and every respect how it does or  does  not
      does not apply to the person concerned.

32.   In the present case, it  is  abundantly  plain  that  the  Immigration
      Officer regarded the respondent's immigration history (and that of her
      husband) as "particularly poor".   Whilst Miss Simpson sought to argue
      that removal had not been delayed  through  protracted  or  repetitive
      representations on the part of the respondent (a fact  with  which  we
      would agree), the delay was in reality occasioned  by  the  respondent
      "going to ground" between her arrival in the United  Kingdom  in  1993
      and her application lodged in March 2001.

  33. In essence, at least since the coming into force of the  Human  Rights
      Act 1998, DP5/96, can be viewed as a means of guiding decision  makers
      on the question of  how  to  avoid  reaching  decisions  that  are  in
      violation of Article 8.   Using the policy, the Immigration Officer in
      the present case reached the view that family life could be carried on
      by the parties outside the United Kingdom.   The  Adjudicator  was  of
      the same opinion.

Conclusion

34.   It follows that the appeal of the Secretary of State must be allowed.


                                                   P R Lane
                                                   Vice President




