
Heard at Field House              SS (Bhutanese citizenship - Objective
evidence)
On                       13                   October                   2003
       Bhutan [2003] UKIAT 00134
Written 13 October 2003


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                                   11.11.03

                                   Before

                          Mr S L Batiste (Chairman)
                                 Mrs M L Roe




                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT





                                                                  Respondent




                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Bhutan, appeals, with  leave,  against  the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A J Olsen,  dismissing  his  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent  on  19  August  2002  to  issue
     removal directions and refuse asylum

  2. Mr G Davison represented the  Appellant.  Ms  T  Hart,  a  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.

  3. The Appellant claims that both he and his parents were born in  Bhutan,
     but his paternal  grandfather  came  from  Nepal,  and  the  family  is
     therefore of Nepalese ethnicity. In 1994, his father was killed by  the
     army because he belonged to the Bhutan People's Party. His mother  told
     him that the government had expelled a number of  ethnic  Nepalese  who
     were called traitors and told  they  have  no  right  to  live  in  the
     country. Later that year, when he was nine years old, he and his mother
     moved to India where they  stayed  illegally  in  hiding.   His  mother
     obtained work in the hotel where they remained until she  died  in  May
     2000.  After she died the Appellant was forced to take over her job  in
     the hotel kitchen but he found the duties very hard and the hours  very
     long.  As a result his health suffered and when he told the manager  he
     was told that he would arrange for the Appellant to  leave  India.   He
     was put in contact with an agent who arranged for him to travel to  the
     UK via Russia.  He entered illegally and claimed asylum the next day.

  4. The Respondent  in  rejecting  the  claim  challenged  the  Appellant's
     assertion that he was 17 and a minor at the time of his  arrival  here,
     and also that he was Bhutanese at all.

  5. The Adjudicator held that the Appellant was born in 1985 as claimed and
     is a Bhutanese national, of Nepalese ethnicity. It was unclear how many
     generations back  this  extended,  though  it  certainly  included  his
     parents who were born in Bhutan.  The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the
     Appellant left Bhutan when he was nine years old and went to India with
     his mother. He accepted that the Appellant's father no longer  featured
     in his family after 1994, but concluded that the account of  his  death
     came from a rather unclear account from his mother that confirmed  only
     that his father was taken away  and  she  never  saw  him  again.   The
     Adjudicator also accepted the claimant's account of his stay in  India.
     However he did not believe his account of how he came to the UK.   This
     limited adverse credibility finding was based upon the lack of evidence
     of who paid for the Appellant's journey here,  and  the  implausibility
     that he would meet a Nepali speaking person whilst he was  walking  the
     streets in Edgware.

  6. On this basis the Adjudicator concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not
     stateless, as was submitted on his behalf.  He was not satisfied on the
     evidence that  the  Appellant  would  be  debarred  automatically  from
     returning to Bhutan. 35% of the  Bhutan  population  were  of  Nepalese
     ethnicity. He noted and accepted a report  from  Amnesty  International
     which stated that
           Nepali speaking people from Bhutan who have been forced to leave
           the country, and those who have left voluntarily, have  a  right
           to return to return unless it is established  in  an  individual
           case that a person  has  another  country  of  nationality.  The
           exceptions for those to whom Bhutan is their country,  might  be
           ethnic Nepali people who have recently migrated to  Bhutan  from
           India or Nepal.

  7. The removal directions in this appeal were to Bhutan. If proper  travel
     documents could not be obtained, then the removal directions  would  be
     unenforceable. The Adjudicator held it was not for him to speculate  on
     the outcome of the enquiries that would be made to obtain these  travel
     documents.  As  the  only  fear  expressed  by  the  Appellant  to  the
     Adjudicator was whether he would be accepted in Bhutan, the Adjudicator
     concluded there was insufficient evidence to establish  that  he  would
     not.

  8. There are three separate grounds of appeal. In making our assessment of
     them, we have born in mind the guidance of the Court of Appeal in Oleed
     to the effect that we should not interfere with a determination  by  an
     Adjudicator unless it is plainly wrong or unsustainable.

  9. The first ground of appeal is that the  Adjudicator  was  in  error  in
     failing to  accept  the  Respondent's  representative's  concession  on
     credibility at the hearing.. There is  a  witness  statement  from  the
     Appellant's representative at the hearing, Ms V  Loughton.  She  quotes
     from  her  notes,  which  state  "Accepts  Nepalese  -  no  dispute  on
     credibility - Home Office will not dispute credibility."   However,  as
     the Tribunal has frequently  said,  there  is  a  material  distinction
     between a formal concession as to credibility and the decision  by  the
     Respondent's representative at the hearing not challenge or dispute it.
     A formal concession would be binding on the Adjudicator  but  otherwise
     he would be free to reach his own conclusions on  the  evidence  before
     him.  The quotation from Ms Loughton's  notes  does  not  in  our  view
     establish a formal concession.  Accordingly the Adjudicator was free to
     reach  his  own  conclusions.   Having  said  that,   as   Mr   Davison
     acknowledged, the limited adverse credibility findings have not had any
     material impact on the outcome of the determination.

 10. The second ground is that the Adjudicator failed properly to  determine
     the issue of statelessness. As we have indicated above, the Adjudicator
     found that the Appellant was a citizen of Bhutan and was not stateless.
     It is true, as stated in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  part  of  his
     reasoning was that  the  Appellant  had  himself  stated  that  he  was
     Bhutanese and the Appellant is not an expert on the law of nationality.
     However the Adjudicator also had viable objective evidence  before  him
     on  this  point.  He  was  entitled  to  give  weight  to  the  Amnesty
     International, quoted above. Also the CIPU  report  before  him  stated
     that
           "There is no indication in any sources found that returnees from
           countries other than Nepal and India are automatically  regarded
           as F2 (returned migrants who have  invalidated  their  Bhutanese
           nationality by having  left  Bhutan  and  then  re-entered)  and
           unilaterally stateless or are debarred automatically from  being
           returned to the country."

 11. The grounds of appeal argue that the  objective  evidence  as  a  whole
     suggests that the Bhutanese government is unlikely to recognise him  as
     a citizen. But "unlikely" does not equate with  statelessness.   It  is
     true that in 1977 and 1985 the Bhutan  government  enacted  legislation
     that affected many Nepali Bhutanese. The Marriage Act of 1977 redefined
     a citizen as one having a Bhutanese father.  Previously  either  parent
     was  sufficient.  The  Citizenship  Act  of  1985  required  proof   of
     citizenship that depended on long residence in Bhutan. It deprived many
     Lhotsampas (Bhutanese Hindus of  Nepalese  origin,  who  lived  in  the
     southern plains of Bhutan) of citizenship, on the basis that they  were
     illegal immigrants. However, as the Adjudicator held, it is by no means
     established that the Appellant would fall foul of these Acts.   He  and
     both his parents were born in Bhutan, and the issue in doubt is whether
     it was his grandparents or his great-grandparents who came  to  Bhutan.
     There is indeed a live issue about whether the  substantial  number  of
     Nepalese refugees from Bhutan living currently in Nepal and India  will
     be  re-admitted.  There  are  protracted   negotiations   between   the
     governments of Nepal  and  Bhutan  about  this  that  have  effectively
     stalled without a solution. However the Appellant  would  be  returning
     from the United Kingdom, not Nepal or India, even though he  came  here
     from India.

 12.    The    Adjudicator    clearly     addressed     the     issue     of
     nationality/statelessness and was entitled to conclude on the  evidence
     that there was no automatic removal of citizenship in  the  Appellant's
     case.  The  Appellant  remained  a  Bhutanese  national  and  was   not
     stateless, effectively unless and until the contrary was established by
     events.  He  accepted  that  the  removal  directions  could  only   be
     enforceable if appropriate travel documents from the UK to Bhutan could
     be obtained, and it was  impossible  on  the  evidence  before  him  to
     prejudge whether they could at this stage. We accept the sustainability
     of the Adjudicator's conclusion that it is premature at this  stage  to
     conclude that the Appellant will not be accepted as a national  by  the
     Bhutanese government. This conclusion was properly open to him  on  the
     evidence.

 13. The final ground of appeal in part reflects the previous ground and  is
     that the Adjudicator failed to take into account the objective evidence
     on the subject of  citizenship.  In  this  regard  we  reach  the  same
     conclusions as described in  relation  to  the  previous  ground.   The
     Adjudicator did take  the  objective  evidence  into  account  and  his
     conclusion properly reflects it. However a separate  point  is  raised,
     challenging the Adjudicator's finding  that  on  return  the  Appellant
     might experience discrimination as an ethnic Nepalese but that it would
     not amount of persecution. It is  suggested  by  Mr  Davison  that  the
     Adjudicator did not have reference to the current  CIPU  report,  which
     suggested that there were  human  rights  abuses  including  detention,
     false imprisonment, confiscation of property, beating and  torture.  It
     is correct that the CIPU report  does  identify  general  human  rights
     abuses by the authorities in Bhutan. It also discloses that the land of
     the Nepalese who fled in the  early  1990s,  is  being  taken  over  by
     Bhotes, and that there are pressures on the Nepalese to assimilate into
     the national culture. There is also a report from a refugee in  October
     2002, reported in a Nepali newspaper, that ethnic Nepalis in the  north
     of Bhutan being targeted for false  imprisonment  and  confiscation  of
     property including their identity cards.   However  the  Nepal  Foreign
     Minister stated that 90%  of  Bhutanese  refugees  had  valid  identity
     documents. Also Amnesty International in a 2000 report  indicated  that
     after 1992, when there was a substantial exodus of Nepalis, the  nature
     of the action taken by the authorities changed with significantly fewer
     reports of gross human rights abuses.

 14. The Adjudicator plainly did have regard to all the objective  evidence.
     He said so in paragraphs 6.2  and  6.6,  and  he  referred  to  various
     relevant points from it at various  stages.  He  did  not  specifically
     mention the points described above in  his  determination  but  he  did
     reach a clear overall conclusion that the Appellant's  treatment  would
     not be different from that  of  the  Nepali  population  in  Bhutan  in
     general, which comprised some 35%  of  the  population.  Although  this
     treatment was discriminatory, it would not amount to  a  real  risk  of
     persecution. Having  assessed  the  evidence  to  which  we  have  been
     referred, we conclude that the Adjudicator was entitled to  reach  this
     finding on the evidence before him.

 15. For the reasons stated above we find that the grounds of appeal fail to
     establish  that  the  determination  is   either   plainly   wrong   or
     unsustainable. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
