
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 20 May 2004             |        |AA (Vulnerable Female -     |
|                           |        |Article 3) Ethiopia CG      |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00184          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|8 July 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Dr H H Storey                                                     |
|Mrs R Faux, JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the  appellant:            Mr  L  Parker,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms F Meyler (Refugee Legal Centre)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mr P S Aujla) who allowed on human rights grounds  the  appeal  of  a
      citizen of Ethiopia (hereinafter referred to as  the  appellant)  from
      the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application  for
      asylum.

2.    The appellant was born in Ethiopia in May 1982.   Her parents had  got
      divorced when the appellant was very young.   Her mother went to Saudi
      Arabia.    The appellant remained with her father who later remarried.
        In 1996 the appellant was  at  home  with  her  father,  stepmother,
      sisters and brother when two  soldiers  came  into  the  house.    Her
      father was beaten and taken away.    The soldiers later  returned  and
      beat up the appellant's stepmother.  The  appellant's  stepmother  was
      pregnant.  She died later in hospital.  The appellant and her sister's
      brother went to stay with her aunt.    Arrangements were made for  the
      appellant to travel to Saudi Arabia where the appellant  was  able  to
      join her mother in 1996.

3.    The appellant's mother worked as a domestic servant and  she  arranged
      for the appellant to work for a family in Saudi Arabia.   This  family
      treated the appellant very badly.  The appellant then  worked  for  an
      American family who later  returned  to  the  United  States.     They
      unsuccessfully tried to obtain a permit for the  appellant  to  travel
      with them.   The appellant then worked for  another  family  who  also
      started to mistreat the appellant.   After about 2 months this  family
      decided to come to the United Kingdom during  the  summer  holiday  in
      1998 and brought the  appellant  with  them.    After  two  weeks  the
      appellant ran away.   She was then aged 16.   She was taken into  care
      by Westminster Social Services.  On 27 January 1999 an application was
      made on the appellant's behalf for exceptional leave to remain in  the
      United Kingdom on the basis that she did not know the  whereabouts  of
      her family and would have no one to support her should she be returned
      to Ethiopia.    It was said that there  was  widespread  violence  and
      discrimination against women.   On 26 June 2000 a further  letter  was
      written  to  the  Secretary  of  State  concerning   the   appellant's
      vulnerability.    On 7 April 2003 the Secretary of State  refused  the
      application for exceptional or discretionary leave  and  also  refused
      the implicit application for asylum.

4.    The asylum appeal was withdrawn before the Adjudicator.

5.    There was before the Adjudicator a psychiatric report prepared  by  Dr
      M  Al-Yassiri  dated   27   September   2003.      The   Adjudicator's
      determination concludes as follows:

      "35.  I bear in mind the  findings  in  the  psychiatric  report  that
           although the appellant is  not  suffering  from  post  traumatic
           stress disorder, there are various aspects of her mental  health
           which make her vulnerable.  She suffers from excessive  anxiety,
           difficulty to control the worry, relentless [sic], difficulty in
           concentrating and disturb sleep.  The doctor has put it down  to
           abuse by the appellant's stepmother during childhood as well  as
           abuse by the family for whom she worked as a  domestic  servant.
           The doctor has stated  that  there  is  a  high  probability  of
           developing a  major  depressive  episode  as  well  as  for  the
           deterioration of her  present  psychological  symptoms.    Given
           that background, coupled with the fact that the  respondent  has
           not challenged the  appellant's  age,  and  the  fact  that  the
           initial statement she gave to the solicitors was not  an  asylum
           application but a request for exceptional leave to remain, I  am
           not surprised that some important aspects of her story were left
           out of her first statement and that she found  herself  confused
           in the asylum interview about what she had stated in  the  first
           statement at the age of 16.  She was interviewed in  2003,  when
           she was nearly 21.

      36.   I have taken the appellant's second statement  into  account  in
           which  she  explains  the  credibility  points  raised  by   the
           respondent.  On the totality of the evidence before me,  I  find
           that the credibility points raised by the respondent  have  been
           answered adequately and that  any  outstanding  aspects  of  the
           issues raised are purely peripheral and do not go to the core of
           the appellant's claim.  I am prepared to accept the  appellant's
           account about her  family's  circumstances.   I  find  that  the
           appellant did go to Saudi Arabia as claimed from where  she  was
           brought to the United Kingdom by her employers.  I  am  prepared
           to accept her account that she has no family left  in  Ethiopia,
           certainly not any members of the family with whom  she  has  any
           contact.  I am also prepared to  accept  her  account  that  she
           worked as a domestic servant and that she  was  brought  to  the
           United Kingdom as such as well  as  her  account  that  she  was
           abused by the families that she worked for.


      37.   The issue before me to decide is whether or not the  appellant's
           protected rights mentioned in Article 3 are engaged.  I bear  in
           mind the very high threshold if Article 3 is to be  engaged.   I
           also bear in mind that the appellant is a lone young  woman  who
           will be returning to Ethiopia where she has no family or friends
           and she has been out of the country since 1996 when she  was  of
           the tender age of 14.  Given the  fact  that  she  has  suffered
           abuse at the hands of the two families for whom she worked as  a
           domestic servant, and taking into account her mental  health  as
           explained in the psychiatric report, I find that  the  appellant
           would not remember much about life in Ethiopia  and  would,  for
           all intents and purposes,  be  going  to  an  almost  unfamiliar
           territory.


      38.   The background material shows that women are still  at  risk  of
           ill-treatment  in  Ethiopia.   I  quote  selectively  from  CIPU
           (paragraphs 6.109-6.114) where it is stated that the traditional
           practice of abduction as a form of marriage is  illegal  but  is
           still believed to be  practised  widely  in  many  rural  areas.
           Women are often abused physically during  abduction  and  forced
           sexual relationships accompany many marriages.  It is  estimated
           that there are more than  1000  rapes  a  year  in  Addis  Ababa
           however there were only 68 rape convictions  nationwide  in  the
           year ending September 2000.  It is estimated that an average  of
           about 84 rape cases per day in Addis Ababa are never reported or
           brought to court due to social and cultural problems.


      39.   When  considering the appellant's case in light of the objective
           material, I bear in mind that she has  no  family  in  Ethiopia.
           She hardly knows anything about the country, having left at  the
           tender age of 14.  Her mental health is vulnerable.  She will be
           returning to Ethiopia as a lone young woman.  She will  have  no
           network of support and would not know who to turn to if she  had
           problems.  Taking all the evidence into account cumulatively,  I
           have no hesitation in reaching the conclusion that the appellant
           would clearly be at risk of treatment contrary to Article  3  if
           she is returned to Ethiopia.  As  a  lone  young  woman  without
           support network, she will be at  risk  of  abduction,  rape  and
           other forms of abuse.  I find that there is a real risk  of  the
           appellant's Article 3 protected rights being breached if she  is
           returned to Ethiopia."


6.    The Adjudicator therefore allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds,
      the asylum appeal having been withdrawn.

7.    Mr Parker submitted that the appellant's generalised anxiety  did  not
      get anywhere near the required Article 3  threshold.    There  was  no
      current medical evidence about her condition.    The appellant did not
      suffer from post traumatic stress disorder.

8.    So far as the appellant's age was concerned,  she  was  not  a  minor.
      She was in her early 20s.    Although she had left  Ethiopia  in  1996
      she had spent 14 years in her own country.   She had met a  supportive
      friend through her local mosque as appeared from a letter  written  by
      the Women's Therapy Centre  on  11  September  2000  set  out  in  the
      appellant's bundle and she would be able to find  similar  support  in
      mosques in Ethiopia.    She had lived in Saudi Arabia and had  adapted
      to life in the United Kingdom and would  have  no  difficulty  in  re-
      adapting  to  life  in  Ethiopia.     Reliance  was  placed  on   mere
      generalised risk on return.   The risk of rape had to be seen  in  the
      context of the population of Ethiopia - 66 million.     The  appellant
      was not specifically at risk of rape - she was  not  someone  who  was
      likely to be detained for any reason  nor  was  she  a  member  of  an
      opposition group.    Reference was made to  the  US  State  Department
      Report.   It appeared there were no problems  returning  to  Ethiopia.
      There were no reports that members of the military who redeployed from
      border areas to other regions sexually harassed and raped  some  young
      women -  unlike  the  previous  year.    Many  refugees  had  returned
      voluntarily to Ethiopia and it was curious that they should do  so  if
      conditions were so dire.  There were indications of  increasing  moves
      to hold to account the local police  for  violence  and  human  rights
      abuses - see "Ethiopia: A Situation  Analysis  and  Trend  Assessment"
      (January 2004) -  a UNCHR commissioned report.   At paragraph  5.2  of
      this report it was said there were still important  protection  issues
      in relation to individual cases.   Reference was  made  to  categories
      where individuals were most often at risk.    These included "some  of
      those involved in armed opposition to the government, and,  in  Oromia
      State, some perceived as actively or  tacitly  supporting  them;  some
      involved  in  political  opposition  particularly   during   electoral
      periods; certain political  journalists  and  campaigning  members  of
      professional associations.    In addition there is particular  concern
      for those displaced by conflict  and  food  insecurity,  and  for  the
      communities which host them.    IDPs remain one of the most vulnerable
      sectors  in  Ethiopia  and  consistently  impact   to   increase   the
      vulnerability of the communities amongst whom they live."

9.    Miss Meyler submitted that in contrast to the case  of  Hariri  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 807 (23  May  2003)  the  appellant  had  been  found  to  be
      credible.   She had no family in Ethiopia.   She had suffered as noted
      by the Adjudicator.   Her father had been beaten.   Her stepmother had
      died  after  being  beaten.    The  appellant  would  suffer  a  major
      depressive episode if removed.    There was  a  history  of  abuse  in
      Ethiopia and Saudi Arabia.    There were 84 rapes every day  in  Addis
      Ababa.

10.   Mr Parker submitted that the case did not  reach  the  high  threshold
      required.   Reference was made to SK [2002] 05613 and  N  [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 1369 (16 October 2003).

11.   The depressive illness would not make the appellant  more  vulnerable.
       She would not be more at risk because of depression.    There was  no
      evidence of any current fear of return.   Her asylum  claim  had  been
      withdrawn.    She  would  not  fall  outside  the  class  of   persons
      considered in Hariri.     There was not a consistent pattern of  gross
      and systematic violations of human rights.

12.   At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
       We have carefully considered the points made on both  sides  and  the
      material that has  been  placed  before  us.  The  objective  evidence
      includes  the  October  2003  and  April  2003  Home  Office   Country
      Assessments. The appellant's bundle includes the Amnesty International
      report covering events in Ethiopia in 2003;  the  2003  United  States
      Human Rights Report published in  May  2004;   a  Human  Rights  Watch
      report: "Ethiopia Overview of Human Rights Developments (January 2004)
      and a UNHCR commissioned report (January 2004) entitled  "Ethiopia:  A
      Situation Analysis and Trend Assessment".  The medical  report  (which
      has not been updated since the Adjudicator hearing) is to  the  effect
      that the  appellant  is  not  suffering  from  post  traumatic  stress
      disorder or major depressive illness.   She  had  no  active  suicidal
      ideations nor had she made previous attempts at  suicide.     She  was
      taking anti-depressants described by  her  GP.     The  appellant  was
      however  suffering  from  generalised  anxiety  disorder.    She   was
      presently in  a  vulnerable  state  and  if  forcibly  repatriated  to
      Ethiopia where she had no contact with her family "and has reasons  to
      be fearful, there is high probability of developing a major depressive
      episode  as  well  [as]  the  further  deterioration  of  her  present
      psychological symptoms.  She feels relatively safe  in  this  country.
      The perception of safety aided by the help and support [given] by  the
      network of her former foster family and her determination  to  study."
      The doctor recommended increasing her anti-depressant  medication  and
      considered that the appellant would benefit from psychological support
      in the form of counselling.   It is not clear if any steps  have  been
      taken to implement the consultant's recommendations.

13.   The Adjudicator allowed the appeal because the appellant  was  a  lone
      young woman who would be returning to Ethiopia where she had no family
      or friends.   She had been out of the country since 1996 when she  was
      aged 14.   The territory would be unfamiliar.  In paragraph 38 of  the
      determination reference is made to the generalised risk of rape.    In
      paragraph 39 the  Adjudicator  simply  repeats  the  point  about  the
      appellant being alone and having left Ethiopia at the age of  14.   He
      adds that her mental health  is  vulnerable  and  she  would  have  no
      network of support.   As a lone young woman without support she  would
      be at the risk of abduction, rape and other forms of abuse.

15.   Mr Parker submits that  there  has  been  a  huge  wave  of  returning
      Ethiopians to Ethiopia and it would be surprising if  conditions  were
      so dire that 800,000 voluntary returns had taken place - see paragraph
      6.137 of the April 2004 country assessment.

16.   Clearly rape and other  forms  of  domestic  violence  are  a  serious
      problem in Ethiopia.   We note in paragraph 6.139 of the  Home  Office
      Country Information Report that although the 1994  Constitution  which
      provides for the equality of women, domestic violence  including  wife
      beating and marital rape was a pervasive social problem.   While women
      had recourse to the police and the Courts, societal norms and  limited
      infrastructure   prevented   women   from   seeking   legal   redress,
      particularly   in   rural   areas.    Social   practices    obstructed
      investigations and prosecutions in rape cases, and many women were not
      aware of their rights under the law. However, rape sentences have been
      handed down in line with the 10 to 15 years proscribed by  law  -  see
      paragraph 6.139 of the assessment.   Abuses  committed  by  redeployed
      soldiers were not reported unlike the previous  year.    Awareness  of
      the issue of the rape is reflected in  the  fact  that  the  Ethiopian
      Women's Lawyers Association had conducted  research  on  a  number  of
      rapes committed and the number of rape convictions handed down. It  is
      noted that the police and courts had begun to enforce laws  protecting
      women and children more seriously than in the  past  -  see  paragraph
      6.140 of the April 2004 report (reflected in paragraph  6.123  of  the
      report available to  the  Adjudicator).  Abduction  continues  in  the
      Oromia region  and  the  southern  region,  despite  the  government's
      attempts to curb the practice.

17.   It does appear from the material to which we have been  referred  that
      the state is making attempts to deal with the  problems  of  abuse  of
      women.    So far as state actors are concerned, the UNCHR commissioned
      report to which we have made reference reports  that  there  are  some
      indications of increasing moves to hold to account  the  local  police
      and others for violence and human rights abuses, although it is  right
      to say that the optimism is by no means unqualified.     The  military
      appears to have been professionalised over the previous decade and did
      not step beyond  a  constitutionally  defined  role  in  2001.     The
      appointments of a  Human  Rights  Commission  and  Ombudsman  had  the
      potential to become an initiative of great significance.

18.   We do believe that it is important to take into account paragraph  5.2
      of this report headed "Policy Implications". We  appreciate  that  the
      instances given are not exclusive.  However, we  are  of  the  opinion
      that if the report had been  of  the  view  that  women  such  as  the
      appellant were at risk on return they would have been included in  the
      categories set out in paragraph 5.2 (see paragraph  8  above).     The
      appellant does not appear to fall into any of the categories  referred
      to - those involved in  armed  opposition  to  the  government  or  in
      political opposition, certain political  journalists  and  campaigning
      members of professional associations. It is to be borne in  mind  that
      the appellant's appeal against the refusal of  her  asylum  claim  was
      withdrawn before the Adjudicator. It is also of note that it is stated
      that the refugee population in Ethiopia is smaller currently  than  at
      any time since 1991.   The national political directory in Ethiopia is
      comparatively stable and relatively positive although  the  peripheral
      areas are insecure - reference is made in particular to Gambella.

19.   We take Counsel's point that in Hariri  the  appellant  had  not  been
      found to be credible, unlike this case.   We take into account that in
      this case the Adjudicator accepted the appellant's history.   However,
      it was still necessary  for  the  Adjudicator  to  be  satisfied  that
      returning her to Ethiopia would expose her to a real  risk.   She  had
      not shown that she would face any risk personal to her in Ethiopia  as
      a result, for example,  of  her  or  family's  political  involvement.
      Success in her claim depended  on  showing  that  she  fell  within  a
      category or categories of persons   As was stated in Hariri "the  fact
      that ill-treatment or misconduct might be routine  or  frequent  would
      not be enough".  She is a lone  young  female  who  has  not  been  in
      Ethiopia for some time.   However, she had lived in her country for 14
      years.   She is a single female but she is now  over  20  and  has  no
      physical problems.   She  has  no  suicidal  ideation.    She  is  not
      suffering from post traumatic stress disorder  nor  is  she  currently
      suffering clinical depression.

20.   The Adjudicator does not demonstrate why the  appellant  would  be  at
      risk of a breach of Article 3 if she were returned to Ethiopia.    The
      abuses suffered by the  appellant  in  Saudi  Arabia  are  of  limited
      relevance. She does not  face  return  to  that  country.  The  abuses
      suffered there are therefore only relevant insofar as they demonstrate
      her vulnerable mental state as a result  of  her  adverse  experiences
      there. It is not established on the evidence before us that  the  risk
      in Ethiopia of abduction, rape and other  forms  of  abuse  which  the
      Adjudicator refers to are other than generalised  risks.   It  is  not
      demonstrated that in Ethiopia there is a consistent pattern of  gross,
      flagrant or mass violations of individuals' rights.  Moreover,  it  is
      not demonstrated that the appellant would be more at risk in  Ethiopia
      because of her vulnerability.

21.   We have already referred to the fact  that  rape  sentences  had  been
      handed down in line with the sentences proscribed by  law.    We  have
      also referred to the  research  conducted  by  the  Ethiopian  Women's
      Lawyers  Association.     That  and  the  fact  that  rape  cases  are
      regularly reported indicate that the matter  is  a  matter  of  public
      concern.    Indeed the evidence is to the effect that the  police  and
      courts have begun to enforce laws protecting women and  children  more
      seriously than in the past  -  see  paragraph  6.140  of  the  country
      assessment.   Greater efforts were made to arrest men  who  had  raped
      children and when  convictions  were  secured  prison  sentences  were
      imposed on some rapists.  In Addis Ababa two  police  women  had  been
      assigned to each district.    Women's groups had claimed  that  police
      often did  not  investigate  reports  of  adult  rape  however,  while
      prosecutors had taken over a year to bring charges and then  only  for
      infractions of the lowest possible penalty.

22.   We can only interfere  with  the  Adjudicator's  decision  if  it  was
      plainly wrong.   However, taking into account the matters relied on by
      the Adjudicator cumulatively, we simply see no basis for finding  that
      the appellant would be exposed to a consistent pattern of flagrant  or
      mass violations of her human rights.    The appellant's mental health,
      her youth, the fact that she is a single woman, the fact that she  has
      been out of Ethiopia for a number of years and remembers little of it,
      none of these factors in our view establish that she would be  exposed
      to a real risk of a violation of her human rights.    The  Adjudicator
      states that the appellant would not have a support network.   However,
      given that she has managed to establish support networks in the United
      Kingdom through her mosque we see no reason to  assume  she  would  be
      unable to obtain help, if necessary from mosques in Addis Ababa.   She
      would be returning to her own country  where  she  had  lived  for  14
      years.   We do not in any way wish to sound  unsympathetic  about  the
      problems that the appellant will  undoubtedly  face  in  her  country.
      She will face difficulties.  However, we do  not  find  that  she  has
      established that she will face a real risk of torture  or  inhuman  or
      degrading  treatment  or  punishment  on  return  to  Ethiopia.    The
      Adjudicator was wrong so to hold.   Although we were  not  invited  to
      consider any other Articles, we do not find that any interference with
      the appellant's family or  private  life  would  be  disproportionate,
      bearing in mind the observations of the Tribunal  in  the  case  of  M
      [2004] 00024 (Croatia).

23.   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and  the  decision  of  the
      Adjudicator is reversed.



                                                   G Warr
                                                   Vice President














                    Approved for electronic distribution

