
Ar
NM (MDC- NGO Worker - Risk on Return) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00173


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing  : 13 May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                18 June 2004

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                                Mr R Hamilton
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representatives :
Mr L Jackson of counsel instructed by South West Law for the appellant;   Mr
G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer, for the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of   Zimbabwe.   She   appeals   the
      determination of an Adjudicator (Mr Richard J. Whiting) dismissing her
      appeal against  a decision giving  directions  for  removal  following
      refusal to grant asylum.

2.    The basis of the appellant's claim was that she was a  member  of  the
      MDC married to an MDC activist. She had attained a Master's degree  in
      sociology from the University of Zimbabwe and had worked  in  Bulawayo
      as well as in the extreme east of Zimbabwe. She had been  employed  by
      an  AIDS trust organisation called Family AIDS Caring Trust (FACT)  in
      Mutare in the Eastern Highlands. Before the   2002  elections  ZANU-PF
      introduced restrictions on the distribution of food through other than
      government agencies. The appellant, however, continued  to  distribute
      food and  blankets  despite  these  restrictions.   In  May  2002  war
      veterans threatened her with violence.  In  June  2002  the  appellant
      ceased distributing aid herself but made it known it could instead  be
      collected from her office. In September 2002  five  men  came  to  her
      house in  Mutare.  They attacked and struck her several times.    They
      threatened her with a severe beating if she did not stop  distributing
      food  and returned to her home  are  in  Bulawayo.  The  incident  was
      reported to the  police  without  result.  On  23  November  2002  the
      appellant went with her husband to visit  her  mother-in-law  in  Fort
      Rixon. Five men came to the homestead and assaulted the appellant  and
      her husband. She assumed they were from the   CIO  by  virtue  of  the
      vehicle they drove. It was this incident that decided the appellant to
      leave the country.

3.    The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was employed by   FACT  as
      claimed. He did not make a precise finding that the appellant  was  an
      MDC member and that her husband was an MDC  activist.  However  it  is
      sufficiently clear that these were aspects of  her  account  which  he
      accepted.  At paragraphs 15-17  he  addressed  doubts  raised  by  the
      respondent concerning her lack of detailed knowledge of   MDC  affairs
      and policies, her lack of detailed knowledge  of  ARV  drugs  used  to
      treat HIV/AIDS sufferers, her travel on occasions outside the  country
      and the precise location of  the  assault  the  appellant  claimed  to
      suffer in September 2002.   He clearly saw these doubts as having been
      resolved.

4.    The Adjudicator also accepted that in November 2002 the appellant  was
      assaulted whilst at the home of her mother-in-law in  Fort  Rixon  and
      sustained injuries which resulted in hospital treatment.  However,  he
      considered that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that those who
      attacked her intended to deter her from her activities. The  appellant
      had failed to give an explanation as to how her assailants might  have
      come to know of her presence in Fort Rixon at that time, and where she
      had been before only a few hours before the  attack. Noting  that  the
      appellant was not consistent about  how  long  her  husband  had  been
      hospitalised as a result of the  attack in  November  (saying  it  was
      five days in one statement and three days in  other  statement),   the
      Adjudicator continued:

             '22. After the incident the appellant is recorded in a  letter
                 from her employer [G.I.] as  having  left  that  employment
                 "unceremoniously" at the end of November 2002. Her  address
                 at that time on  the  hospital  records  was  that  of  her
                 parents in the suburb of Montrose, Bulawayo. It is  at  her
                 parent's home that her two children were left at  the  time
                 of her journey to the UK.   I am unable to accept  for  the
                 reasons recorded that the assault upon the appellant   were
                 those attributed by her , being her  work  in  distributing
                 aid in the eastern highlands of  Zimbabwe.  If her  husband
                 was assaulted at the same time as the appellant then given,
                 firstly, his active  role  in  support  of  the   MDC,  and
                 secondly, the location of the attack being at his  mother's
                 house, the attack would  appear to be more likely than not,
                 related to his active  MDC  membership.  Alternatively  the
                 attack could equally be part of the  level  of  lawlessness
                 endemic in the country. As the appellant said in  evidence,
                 "If every  Zimbabwean who got beaten up left  the  country,
                 there would be no-one in the country".'

5.    He then went on to find that he could not accept  her  claim  to  have
      been persecuted  because  of  her  political  opinion  since  her  own
      contention was that she had been persecuted on the basis of  her  work
      with the  NGO (FACT) and her role within that organisation. He stated:
      'I do not find that difference a matter for adverse  credibility,  but
      explicable by way of exaggeration made  on  her  behalf  in  order  to
      strengthen her claim for asylum.'

6.    Having dismissed the asylum grounds of appeal the Adjudicator went  on
      at paragraph 33 to dismiss the Article 3 grounds of appeal as follows:

             'The  appellant  has  ceased  to  work  for    FACT   in   the
             circumstances recorded above. She has stated the  real  reason
             that  she  was   intimidated   and   assaulted,   within   the
             circumstances stated above, was because she  was  distributing
             food and blankets to recipients in a manner which was contrary
             to  Zimbabwean law, however repugnant such restriction may  be
             to objective observers. The official and unofficial government
             agents have achieved their aim. Should she return to  Zimbabwe
             and continue to employ her undoubted  talents  in  support  of
             individuals suffering from HIV/AIDS in such a way  as  not  to
             offend against such legal restrictions she  would  not  be  at
             real risk of severe ill-treatment which would  breach  Article
             3.'

7.    The grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  Adjudicator  had  erred
      procedural and substantially. Procedurally he erred in failing to  put
      his doubts as to the appellant's credibility in respect of  aspect  of
      the  Fort  Rixon incident to the appellant. Substantively,  he  should
      have made a finding of past persecution, given his acceptance  of  the
      two attacks on the appellant  in  September  and  November  2002.   In
      rejecting the appellants claim to have  been  targeted  for  political
      reasons, the Adjudicator misunderstood  Counsel's  submissions   which
      were not that the only reason  why  she  was  targeted  was  her   NGO
      activities  but that this was  the  main  reason.  In  any  event,  in
      rejecting that her  NGO activity was perceived by ZANU-PF as political
      opinion, the Adjudicator failed   to  attach   weight  to  the  expert
      evidence  of  Professor  Ranger  which  specifically   addressed   the
      political reasons behind the clamp-down on  NGOs involved in food  and
      aid distribution. Issue was also taken with the Adjudicator's apparent
      imposition at paragraph 33 of a requirement  that the appellant in her
      future work on behalf of HIV/AIDS sufferers refrain from actions which
      would  "offend  against  legal  restrictions  [on  food  distribution]
      however repugnant such restriction may be to objective observers".

8.    In amplifying the grounds Mr  Jackson  highlighted  the  Adjudicator's
      improper reliance at paragraph 22 on the civil standard of  proof.  He
      urged the Tribunal to allow the appeal outright.

9.    Mr Elks on behalf of  the  respondent  did  not  seek  to  defend  the
      Adjudicator's principal findings of fact. He urged us rather to  remit
      the appeal in order for  proper findings of fact to be made.

10.   We agree with Mr Jackson and Mr Elks that there  are  inadequacies  in
      this determination. Subject to one caveat which we deal with below  we
      do not see anything in Mr Jackson's point about  procedural  failings.
      It is true there was no Presenting Officer present at the hearing, but
      the respondent in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  had  challenged
      credibility and hence the appellant and his  representatives  were  on
      notice that the appellant had to establish the  truth  of  her  claim.
      However, there were substantive failings.  He failed to make  specific
      findings on the expert report of Professor Ranger.  He also failed  to
      make specific findings in respect of the appellant's  husband  and  in
      particular whether he was also attacked and hospitalised  in  November
      2002. However, as we have already indicated, it is sufficiently  clear
      that the Adjudicator found the appellant  generally credible and  that
      he accepted that she had been attacked by official  and/or  unofficial
      government agents on two occasions in September  and  November   2002.
      Furthermore, we consider  the  Adjudicator  gave  sound  reasons  (not
      challenged by way of a respondent's notice) for accepting much of  the
      appellant's account. He  was  quite  entitled  to  consider  that  the
      appellant had satisfactorily explained her limited  knowledge  of  MDC
      policies and/or ARV drugs and  had satisfactorily clarified  a  detail
      about the location of the  September  2002  assault.   We  would  also
      observe  that  the  appellant  had  placed  before   the   Adjudicator
      impressive documentary evidence in the form of a letter dated  16  May
      2003 from the Director of FACT confirming the  appellant's  employment
      as a Regional Training Co-ordinator and later as a Senior Training Co-
      ordinator who "left unceremoniously due to what she perceived to be  a
      threat to her life and family" and wage slips from the same  employer.
      Thus we  do  not  see  any  proper  basis  for  interfering  with  the
      Adjudicator's positive   finding.

11.   That leaves (and raises next) the issue  of  whether  the  Adjudicator
      was entitled to reject aspects of the appellant's  evidence.  In  this
      regard we also see no basis for interfering in his expressed doubts as
      to whether the appellant's husband was assaulted and  hospitalised  in
      November 2002.

12.   However, we have serious concerns about  the  Adjudicator's  treatment
      of the appellant's evidence relating  to  the  motivation  behind  the
      assault on her on the same occasion in November 2002. On the one  hand
      he accepted that she had been assaulted ad hospitalised by  five  men.
      On the other hand he did not appear to accept  that  the   attack  was
      carried out by  official and/or unofficial government agents.  We  say
      "appear"  because  his  findings  on  this  point   are   not   wholly
      unambiguous. At  paragraph  33  he  implies  an  acceptance  that  her
      attackers, whom he said had "achieved their aim", were  "official  and
      unofficial government agents". However, at paragraph 22 cited  earlier
      he states that  "[a]lternatively the attack could equally be  part  of
      the level of lawlessness endemic in the country".

13.   We do not consider that the Adjudicator, particularly having  accepted
      the fact of the assault by five men on the  appellant   in  2002,  was
      entitled to draw the inference that this further incident was simply a
      random or lawless attack.

14.   It may be, as  Mr  Jackson  contended,  that  the  Adjudicator  became
      confused at this point of his determination as a result of  a  failure
      to apply the proper standard  of  proof  of  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood. Certainly his reference at paragraph  22 to  one  scenario
      being "more likely than not" betrays confusion. However, it  seems  to
      us that whatever the degree of confusion over the standard  of  proof,
      the Adjudicator simply forgot at this point to take proper account  of
      the surrounding circumstances which he had, broadly,  accepted.  These
      circumstances were at follows. Within a few hour  of  her  arrival  in
      Fort Rixon after a journey of some 390 miles, she  was  attacked.  The
      car used by her attackers belonged to a CIO official in   Fort  Rixon.
      The  principal  reasons  the  Adjudicator  gave  for   rejecting   the
      conclusion that her attackers were official or  unofficial  government
      agents were twofold: that the assailants had not  (as had happened  in
      September)  identified  themselves  to  the  appellant  and  that  the
      appellant had failed to offer any explanation as to how her  attackers
      might come to know of her presence in  Fort  Rixon.  As to the failure
      of the assailants to identify themselves, we consider   that  in  this
      respect the Adjudicator was overly forensic. If they had seen  fit  to
      turn up in a  car identifiable as a  CIO car  from  Fort  Rixon,  that
      would appear to be enough by way of  self-  "identification".  In  any
      event, the objective evidence relating to attacks carried out by ZANU-
      PF and war veterans does not indicate that these bodies of individuals
      always  or  even  mostly  identify  themselves.   Given   that   under
      Zimbabwean law violent attacks on a person are criminal  offences,  it
      is perhaps easy to see why,  even  in  a  climate  of  impunity,  such
      organisations or individuals would not always state who they  were  or
      why they were doing what they were  do doing.

15.    Turning  to  the  Adjudicator's  other  reasons  for  rejecting   the
      appellant's claim that she had been targeted by official or unofficial
      state agents on this occasion, we agree that this  is  something  that
      the appellant  did not  give  an  explanation  for.  However,  it  was
      sufficiently  clear  from  her  account,  which   we   emphasise   the
      Adjudicator found generally credible,  that  her  NGO  activities  had
      attracted the adverse attention of the  Green bombers on at least  one
      occasion.  In such circumstances we consider the Adjudicator  was  not
      entitled to rely, as a reason for rejecting the  appellant's  account,
      on the appellant's failure to explain a doubt which was never  put  to
      her. This is what we meant when we referred earlier to the one  caveat
      we had regarding his procedure at  the  hearing.  If  the  Adjudicator
      thought fit not to raise this matter with the appellant, he should  in
      our view have  himself considered  other possibilities, including  the
      possibility that the attackers had followed the appellant or had  been
      alerted by unofficial or unofficial  government agents elsewhere  that
      the appellant (and her husband) was visiting Fort Rixon.

16.   We are conscious that the Tribunal does not lightly interfere with  an
      Adjudicator's  findings of fact.  What we  are presented  with in this
      case, however, is  an  Adjudicator  who  makes  general  and  specific
      positive   credibility findings but holds back,  on  the  strength  of
      tenuous doubts not properly put to the appellant, from accepting  that
      the  November 2002 attack was in fact as  a  result  of  targeting  by
      official or unofficial stage agents who  had  already  threatened  her
      with violence if she continued  (as she did) with distribution of food
      and aid without  going  through  government  channels.    Furthermore,
      having found the Adjudicator's findings in respect  of  this  incident
      unsustainable, we consider we are in a position to decide the   matter
      for ourselves, based on a closer appreciation  of  the  circumstantial
      evidence.

17.   In considering the matter for ourselves, we also have  regard  to  the
      evidence of Professor Ranger. Although  noting  that  the  Professor's
      report was before him, the Adjudicator made no  further  reference  to
      it.  Not only was that an error, but in our view the  report  was  one
      which  merited  serious  consideration.  The  Professor  looked   very
      carefully and in detail at the appellant's case, working broadly  with
      the same factual premises as  did  the  Adjudicator.  We  consider  it
      salient to refer to the following passage in particular. Having  noted
      objective evidence indicating that  during  the  relevant  period  the
      Mugabe government and associated bodies took steps  to  prevent   NGOs
      from distributing  food  and  aid  without  going  through  government
      channels, the Professor wrote:

             'For the past  18 months NGOs have been a major target of  the
             Zimbabwean state.  Legislation has been introduced to  control
             their registration and operation; non-Zimbabwean officials  in
             foreign agencies have been denied work  permits;   Zimbabweans
             working for them have been warned and threatened.'

             'I have been told by my friends in  NGOs  -  three  young  and
             middle aged women - how they have been threatened  and  warned
             and of how on occasion they have had to withdraw their workers
             from situations of violence, rape and hunger. As  it  happens,
             my paper for today's date - the Independent - carries  a  very
             relevant  story.  Headed  "Mugabe  orders  aid   agencies   to
             surrender food" it describes how "the United Nations and other
             relief agencies" have been told "to surrender their  emergency
             food aid to ruling part officials".  The World Food  Programme
             and  its "partner NGOs" have been  assisting  on  distributing
             food on a non-partisan basis. This is now to stop.'

18.   In our view close attention to this  expert  report  afforded  further
      evidence in support of the appellant's view  that  she  had  become  a
      target for official and/or unofficial agents  and  that  the  November
      2002 attack was a further instance of this attack.

19.   Accordingly  we  consider  that  the  appellant   had  demonstrated  a
      reasonable likelihood that she left  Zimbabwe as  a  result  of  being
      targeted by official or unofficial government agents.
20.   Turning to the issue of current risk, we  note  that  the  Adjudicator
      had already established as a  fact  that  the  appellant   would  upon
      return seek to continue  her   NGO  activity.   Given  her  employer's
      vindication of her strength of commitment, we  consider  that  was  an
      entirely proper finding.

21.   Mr Jackson has complained about the  Adjudicator's  rejection  of  his
      submission that there was a Refugee  Convention  ground  of  political
      opinion at play in this case.    We  make  no  specific  findings  and
      conclusions  on  whether  the  Adjudicator  properly  understood   the
      submissions put to him regarding this matter.  It  may  well  be  that
      these submissions were that there were more than one political opinion
       dimension, one relating to the appellant's  MDC involvement the other
      relating to her  NGO activities. However, in view of the Adjudicator's
      identification  of  an   inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  evidence
      relating to her husband, we  shall  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
      Adjudicator  was justified in rejecting the claim that  the  appellant
      was targeted because of his MDC activities. Mr Jackson sought to  rely
      on the Adjudicator's reference to it being "more likely than not" that
      the November 2002 attack on the appellant was related  to  his  active
      MDC membership. However, this was  prefaced  by  the   words  "If  her
      husband was assaulted at the same time". This cannot be equated with a
      firm finding; it was simply an analysis of what would be the  case  if
      it were accepted the husband had been assaulted.

22.   Thus if the appellant is  to  succeed  on  the  evidence  as  we  have
      analysed it, it must be  on  the   basis  that  the  appellant's   NGO
      activities were indeed perceived in political terms.

23.   We think the Adjudicator was wrong to reject the appellant's  evidence
      regarding this. Once it is accepted (as we  have)  that  the  November
      2002 incident was part of a continuation of the  adverse  interest  in
      her on the part of the official or unofficial government agents, it is
      only a very small step to recognising that her attackers viewed her in
      political terms.

24.   Even if we put to one side the issue of whether in November  2002  her
      attackers were viewing her in political  terms,  the  Adjudicator  had
      accepted  that  in  September  they  had  sought  to  halt  her   food
      distribution to  AIDS/HIV  sufferers.  In  the  light  of  the  expert
      evidence of Professor Ranger, we consider that  the  authorities   and
      those who are connected to them, ZANU-PF, war veterans, Green  Bombers
      in particular, plainly do perceive NGO  food  distribution  activities
      conducted outside their control in political terms. To put it bluntly,
      they see such activity  interfering with  their  attempts  to  control
      food distribution seen as  a reward for voting and supporting ZANU-PF.

25.   So far as current risk is concerned,  before  we  can  decide  whether
      there would again be a Refugee Convention ground of political opinion,
      we have to address the difficulty that the Adjudicator considered that
      it would be open to the appellant to avoid food distribution  contrary
      to government restrictions.  We entirely agree with Mr Jackson on this
      point that the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  effectively  require  the
      appellant to act in a way which was  contrary  to  her  own  political
      personality. The evidence was that the appellant  was a committed  aid
      worker who would continue to work in this same field upon  return.  If
      the appellant had found  it  necessary  for  genuine  reasons  to  act
      against government  restriction in the past, it was reasonably  likely
      she would act in the same way upon return. The Adjudicator should have
      borne in mind the need, as explained by  Buxton LJ  in  Danian  [2002]
      ImmAR  "to address the critical question  :  if  returned,  would  the
      asylum seeker in fact act in the way he  says  he  would  and  thereby
      suffer persecution?  If he would, then however unreasonable  he  might
      be thought for refusing to  accept  the  necessary  restraint  on  his
      liberties, in my judgment he would be  entitled  to  asylum  (emphasis
      added)."

26.   Thus we consider first of all that it would be reasonably  likely  the
      appellant would once again disregard government restrictions  on  food
      distribution and, secondly, that this would lead  to  further  adverse
      attention  from official  and/or  unofficial  agents  of  the   Mugabe
      government.

27.   We would add, as an aside, that although we have decided this case  on
      the basis that the Adjudicator  was entitled to discount,  as  a  risk
      factor, the appellant's husband's active  MDC involvement, given  that
      the Adjudicator found the appellant broadly credible,  he  should,  in
      our view, have recognised that this was an additional risk factor.

28.   For the above reasons, we have decided to allow this appeal.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
