
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 23 September 2004       |        |SM (credibility             |
|                           |        |issues-absence of appellant)|
|                           |        |Iraq [2004] UKIAT 00279     |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|05 October 2004                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr D Uljarevic, Lawson Adefope, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  appeals  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, (Professor J Ritson), who dismissed  his  appeal  against
      the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his  application  for
      asylum.  He entered the United Kingdom on 22 February 2002 and applied
      for asylum on that day.  The date of the Secretary of State's decision
      refusing the application is 28 July 2003.

2.    The Adjudicator determined the  appellant's  appeal  in  his  absence.
      The  appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel.   The  Adjudicator  was
      satisfied that the appellant had been notified of the hearing  by  his
      solicitors and by the  Appellate  Authority.   The  Adjudicator  heard
      submissions from the appellant's representative.  He was told that the
      appellant claimed to have a fear of return to Iraq as a former  member
      of the Ba'ath Party.  The Adjudicator's conclusions are  expressed  as
      follows:

      "4.   The evidence of the appellant is that when at  secondary  school
           he was forced to join the Ba'ath Party.  After  graduating  from
           University he started a teaching career in  a  secondary  school
           and was approached by members of the  Ba'ath  Party  to  promote
           their ideology.  On 12 November 2002  he  claims  to  have  been
           arrested at his school by the security  forces  and  advised  to
           change his ethnicity from Kurdish at Arabic.  Pursuant  to  this
           arrest he was detained for 80 days, claims to have been  beaten,
           held in solitary confinement, interrogated and  threatened.   He
           was then he alleges offered a conditional release on  a  promise
           that he would spy for the Ba'ath Party in Northern Iraq.  He was
           expected to report back to the Ba'ath Party two days  after  his
           release to receive further instructions on the basis of his past
           involvement with the Ba'ath Party, his arrest and detention, the
           appellant claims that he fears a return to Iraq in that  he  may
           be the victim of revenge killings.


        5.  In terms of the credibility of the appellant, I  note  from  the
           decision in Coskuner (16769) that the failure of an appellant to
           give evidence, although neutral  as  to  credibility,  where  no
           evidence is  given  is  no  need  for  an  Adjudicator  to  make
           credibility findings.  It is simply open to me to conclude as  I
           do in this instance that the appellant has  not  discharged  the
           burden  of  proof  upon  him.   Although  I  do  not  make   any
           credibility findings as such, I do find the appellant's evidence
           to be implausible that he would after a period  of  80  days  of
           detention and questioning  interrogation,  and  of  having  been
           subjected to ill-treatment, that he would  be  released  by  the
           security forces and told  to  report  back  two  days  later  to
           receive further instructions when those instructions could  more
           effectively have been given to him during detention.


        6.  Before arriving at my decision I reminded myself that the burden
           of proof in terms of both the asylum  and  human  rights  claims
           within this appeal is upon the appellant.  The standard of proof
           required of him in terms of the asylum claim  is  that  as  laid
           down in the decisions of Sivakumaran [1988] Imm AR 147 and  Kaja
           [1995] Imm AR 1 in which it was  held  that  an  appellant  must
           demonstrate that there was a  reasonable  chance  or  a  serious
           possibility, that if returned to his country of origin he  would
           be a victim of persecution for one  of  the  reasons  listed  in
           Article 1(a) of the 1951 United Nations Convention  relating  to
           the Status of Refugees as amended by the 1967 New York Protocol.
             An  appellant  must  demonstrate  both  a  subjective  and  an
           objective fear.  With regard to the human rights claim,  I  note
           from the decisions in Kacaj [2002] Imm AR 213 and  Dhima  [2002]
           EWHC 80 but it must be shown there are substantial  grounds  for
           believing that an appellant would face a real risk of having any
           of the human rights contained in the European Convention for the
           Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms violated  by
           a  return  to  the   national   country.    Notwithstanding   my
           conclusions above that the appellant has failed to discharge the
           burden of proof upon him, I have considered whether  his  return
           to Iraq  would  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
           obligations under either the Geneva or European  Conventions  on
           the basis of him being a former member of the Ba'ath Party.   In
           this context I  have  considered  the  Country  Information  and
           Policy Unit Iraq Bulletins 3, 3A and 7.  I note from Bulletin  7
           that in Section 6.1 only those former Ba'athists who were  known
           to have abused their position were being targeted for reprisals.
            There is no evidence before me to indicate that  the  appellant
           involved in any such activities and therefore I do not  consider
           on the basis of the information contained in the Iraq Bulletins,
           to which I have referred, that the appellant has a  well-founded
           fear of return to Iraq simply on the basis of his  being  forced
           to join the Ba'ath Party and his activities on its behalf.


        7.  In the circumstances and for the reasons I have given, I do  not
           consider  that  the  appellant  has  established  to  the  lower
           standard of proof required of him that he  is  entitled  to  the
           international protection he seeks by virtue of either the asylum
           or human rights claims within this appeal  which  I  accordingly
           consider should be dismissed on both counts".

3.    In the grounds of appeal  it  was  argued  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      failed to take into account the objective material.   He  had  limited
      himself to the Country Information Bulletin rather  than  the  Amnesty
      International reports.  There was no distinction, it was said, between
      former Ba'athists who were known to have abused  their  provision  and
      those who did not abuse their power.

4.    The Tribunal, in granting permission, did  not  grant  leave  on  this
      point however.  The Tribunal granted leave on the point  that  it  was
      arguable that the Adjudicator had erred in failing to make credibility
      findings.  That point raised an arguable point of  law  which  merited
      further consideration, in the Vice President's view.

5.    Mr Saville lodged before us the case of Coskuner (16769)  notified  on
      23 July 1998.  He  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  indicated  in  that
      decision that the Adjudicator's approach was  perfectly  proper.   The
      Adjudicator had also indicated that aspects of the appellant's account
      were implausible.

6.    We noticed that the appellant was present in  the  hearing  room.   We
      also noted that a large bundle of material had been submitted  to  the
      Tribunal which did not seek to explain the appellant's absence  before
      the Adjudicator.  It was noted that in the  reply  to  the  directions
      from which had been submitted prior to the Adjudicator hearing  on  22
      September 2003 the appellant's address had been given as Flat  A,  140
      Gregory Boulevard.  It was to that address  that  the  notice  of  the
      proceedings had been sent.  Subsequent to the  hearing  the  appellant
      notified a change of address to a different flat in Gregory Boulevard.
       That notice was submitted on 30 December 2003.  The Adjudicator heard
      the appeal on 29 October 2003.  It  was  promulgated  on  25  November
      2003.  There was no evidence that the appellant had  communicated  his
      change of address to anyone prior to  December  2003.   The  appellant
      could not remember when he had moved.   In  the  premises  Mr  Saville
      submitted that notice of proceedings had been properly served.

7.    We noted that there had been no complaint in the original  grounds  of
      appeal that there had been improper service of notice  of  proceedings
      and there had been no complaint about the appellant  not  having  been
      available to give oral evidence before  the  Adjudicator.   Permission
      had not been granted on this  point,  moreover,  but  on  a  different
      point.  The only point before  us  was  the  question  mark  over  the
      Adjudicator's approach to the credibility assessment.

8.    Mr Saville submitted that on the issue  before  us  the  Tribunal  had
      indicated what the approach of an Adjudicator should be  in  the  case
      that he had cited.  The  Adjudicator's  approach  had  been  perfectly
      proper.  He had moreover gone  on  to  find  the  appellant's  account
      implausible.  The appellant would not in any event be at risk as a low
      level Ba'ath Party member.

9.    The appellant's representatives submitted that the appellant would  be
      at risk and the Adjudicator had misdirected himself on the  background
      material.

10.   It is quite clear to us that the only issue before us is the  question
      of  the  Adjudicator's  approach  to  credibility  issues.   The  Vice
      President who granted permission considered that it  was  questionable
      that the Adjudicator should not make a credibility assessment  despite
      the absence of the appellant.  We note the approach of the Tribunal of
      Coskuner.  It appears to us largely  a  matter  of  semantics.   Where
      credibility is in issue as it was in the case - see the  Secretary  of
      State's refusal letter - an  Adjudicator  will  normally  look  to  an
      appellant to assist him in disposing  of  credibility  concerns.   The
      unexplained absence of an  appellant  from  a  hearing  may  lead  the
      Adjudicator to the conclusion that the points raised by the  Secretary
      of  State  have  gone  unrebutted.   The  Adjudicator  may  reach  the
      conclusion on all the  material  that  the  appellant  is  not  to  be
      believed.  It is perhaps splitting hairs to say  whether  this  is  an
      adverse credibility assessment or not.  As  the  Tribunal  put  it  in
      Coskuner:


      "We entirely endorse the view that merely not giving evidence  cannot,
      of itself, be a factor tending  to  show  the  person  is  not  to  be
      believed.  It is also, however, and  equally  clearly,  not  a  factor
      tending to show that the person is to be  believed.   If  doubts  have
      been raised about the credibility or plausibility of certain evidence,
      and the facts related by that evidence  are  not  supported  by  other
      evidence, the position may be that the fact finder remains  in  doubt.
      The consequence of a fact finders doubt is or may be that  the  burden
      of proof is not discharged and so the party  who  has  the  burden  of
      proof loses his case."


11.   The Tribunal went on to observe that the fact finder did not  in  such
      circumstances strictly need to reach any view on credibility  at  all.
      But "tactically, the position may be that if the  appellant  does  not
      answer questions or meet points made against him, the Adjudicator  may
      not be prepared to accept the evidence.   Overall,  the  Adjudicator's
      task is to decide whether the appellant has made his case."

12.   In this case  the  Adjudicator  correctly  addressed  himself  on  the
      burden and  standard  of  proof.   The  Adjudicator  was  plainly  not
      satisfied that the appellant had discharged that burden of proof.   He
      plainly found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  implausible  -  see
      paragraph 5 of the determination.  In the light of the guidance by the
      Tribunal in Coskuner he did not err in his approach.  The  Adjudicator
      had in mind the background material  when  he  made  his  conclusions.
      Permission was not granted to argue any point based  on  this  aspect.
      Permission was solely limited to the point  on  which  we  have  ruled
      against the  appellant.   The  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact  were
      properly open to him given the appellant's  unexplained  absence  from
      the hearing.  His approach to credibility issues was not flawed.

13.   Accordingly, for the reasons we have given, this appeal is dismissed.

                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President

