

 ar

GB and others (Credibility - Cross Examination) Turkey [2004] UKIAT
00143

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

HHeard at Field House
On : 4 March 2004                                                    Date
Determination notified
Prepared: 5 March 2004
               08 June 2004


                                   Before:

                      Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)
                             Mrs M Padfield, JP


Between
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr D. Jones, Counsel, instructed by Wilson & Co.
For the respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellants are all citizens of Turkey.  They  appeal  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs S.  Bayne,  who  dismissed  their
      appeals  against  decisions  giving  directions  for   their   removal
      following the refusal of their claims for asylum.

2.    The first appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  22  July  2001
      accompanied  by  the  second  appellant,  her  stepson,  and  her  two
      daughters.  The first and second appellants claimed asylum on 27  July
      2001.  On 28 August 2001 a decision  was  made  to  remove  the  first
      appellant following the  refusal  of  her  claim  for  asylum.  On  18
      September 2001 a similar decision was made following  the  refusal  of
      the second appellant's claim.  The third appellant, who is the  sister
      of the second appellant and the stepdaughter of the  first  appellant,
      has been in the United Kingdom since October  1999  when  she  arrived
      with her husband, Celal Aksu.  He claimed asylum. That application was
      refused and his subsequent appeal was dismissed on 29 July 2001.   The
      third appellant then applied  for  asylum  in  her  own  right  on  26
      September 2001 and on 13 November 2001 a decision was  made  to  issue
      removal directions following the refusal of that  claim.  The  appeals
      against these decisions were heard together by an  Adjudicator  on  12
      September 2002 and 7 November 2002.

3.    The first appellant clamed that she was born  and  brought  up  in  an
      area of Turkey where the PKK were active. Her parents, her brother and
      her three sisters all continue  to  live  in  Turkey.  She  had  three
      nephews who were involved with Dev Sol one of whom is Celal Aksu,  the
      third appellant's husband. The first appellant married Ali  Bulbul  in
      1992 and then moved to Kadiri, to the Bulbul family home.  She  became
      stepmother to the second and third appellants  as  well  as  to  their
      three siblings.  Ali Bulbul worked as a builder. He was regularly away
      from home at different building sites.  The  first  appellant  claimed
      that although she was aware that her husband was involved  politically
      with a pro-Kurdish political party, she was not aware of the extent of
      his involvement until after his death  in  2000.   She  obtained  this
      information from her husband's cousin, Husseyin Bulbul, who  had  been
      actively involved with the political party in question and had himself
      been imprisoned as a result of this involvement.  She claimed that her
      husband regularly held gatherings  in  the  home  but  she  was  never
      involved nor was she told their nature. She believed that her  husband
      had been detained by the police on many occasions.

4.    In July 2000 police officers came to the  family  home  and  took  her
      husband away. She said that this was the last time she  saw  him.  She
      was informed the following day that he had died  of  a  heart  attack.
      She believed that her husband had been killed  as  a  result  of  ill-
      treatment and torture by the police. She was visited by the police  in
      February 2001 when the second appellant  was  arrested  and  detained.
      She claimed that he returned home with a burst eardrum as a result  of
      ill-treatment by the police. This injury  needed  hospital  treatment.
      There was a further visit a few  days  after  the  second  appellant's
      operation when she was manhandled and verbally assaulted. She began to
      make arrangements to leave the  country  with  the  assistance  of  an
      agent. The second appellant was arrested again  on  5  July  2001  and
      detained. She was able to leave with the second appellant and her  two
      small children on 15 July 2001. She travelled overland concealed in  a
      lorry.  Her claim for asylum is based on an assertion that  she  would
      be arrested and ill-treated by the Turkish authorities were she to  be
      returned as a result of the political affiliations of her husband  and
      her nephews.

5.    The second appellant claimed that he had been aware  of  his  father's
      political  activities  throughout  his  life.   His  father  had  been
      arrested in approximately 1996 and then on many occasions prior to his
      last detention on 31  July  2000.  He  was  always  told  about  these
      detentions by the first  appellant.   He  claimed  that  his  brother,
      Erden, had been taken away by the police on several occasions. He  had
      last seen his father when he  was  detained  on  31  July  2000.   The
      following day the family were notified of his death and the  body  was
      returned covered in bruises. He believed that his father had died as a
      result of torture and  ill-treatment.    He  said  that  he  had  been
      arrested in February 2001 when police  officers  searched  the  family
      home.  Nothing  political  was  found  but  he  was  taken  away   and
      interrogated about his father, his uncle  and  his  cousins.   He  was
      punched in the ear by one of the police officers.  His  eardrum  burst
      and an operation was arranged the following day. He confirmed that  he
      and his stepmother decided to make  arrangements  to  flee.    He  was
      arrested again on 5 July 2001 when he was slapped and pushed.  He  was
      held until the evening before being released, having promised to  give
      information to the police.  Arrangements were finalised and they  left
      Turkey on 15 July 2001.  He claimed that he feared  arrest,  detention
      and ill-treatment from the Turkish authorities  as  a  result  of  the
      political affiliations of his family and because of his  own  previous
      arrests.  He fled having agreed to become a police informer  and  this
      would aggravate his position.

6.    The third appellant  claimed  asylum  following  the  refusal  of  her
      husband's claim because no mention had previously been made of her own
      family's political affiliations. She had been aware  of  her  father's
      political involvement and the  involvement  of  his  cousin  Husseyin.
      Her father had been arrested on many occasions. She said that his last
      arrest had been on 1 August 2000.   She  had  married  Celal  Aksu  in
      September 1997.  At that time she was unaware of his involvement  with
      Dev Sol.  Her husband was arrested on a number of occasions: six times
      during the five month period that they  lived  in  his  home  area  of
      Yekilsoy and a further six times after they moved to Goksun.  They had
      decided to flee the country.  In August 1999 her husband sold his shop
      in Goksun and went to Istanbul.  He had arranged for  her  to  go  the
      Bulbul family home in July 1999 where she remained for  three  months.
      During this period the police came twice to  question  her  about  her
      husband. They fled to the United Kingdom in October 1999.

7.    The Adjudicator accepted that all the appellants were Alevi Kurds  and
      related as described. Ali Bulbul had been a  successful  self-employed
      builder who spent a large amount of time away from the family home  on
      various building sites. All the appellants were vague in  the  extreme
      with regard to the nature of his political involvement.  She  accepted
      that there had been an occasion  in  1995/1996  when  Ali  Bulbul  was
      arrested and detained by the police overnight. She was  not  satisfied
      that he had been of any interest to the Turkish authorities or that he
      had been ill-treated in any way. He had been released  without  charge
      because he was of no  interest  to  the  Turkish  authorities  and  no
      further interest was taken in the  family  thereafter.   She  did  not
      believe that the third appellant and  her  husband  had  been  of  any
      interest to the authorities when  they  left  in  October  1999.   She
      rejected the evidence relating to the death of Ali Bulbul. She was not
      satisfied that he had been arrested and detained at all in July/August
      2000 nor, if he had died, that it was as a result of police brutality.
      She was not satisfied that any of the appellants were of any  interest
      to the Turkish authorities when they  left,  nor  that  they  had  any
      family  connections   with   prominent   members   of   a   separatist
      organisation. None of them would be viewed  as  suspected  separatists
      either in their own right or by implication.   All  the  appeals  were
      dismissed on asylum grounds. The Adjudicator went on to  consider  the
      claims under the Human Rights Convention but found that there would be
      no breach of the United Kingdom's obligations if the  appellants  were
      to be returned to Turkey.

8.    Lengthy grounds of appeal were filed against  this  determination.  Mr
      Jones accepted that they could have been drafted more succinctly. They
      can be summarised as follows.  It is  argued  that  the  Adjudicator's
      handling of the medical evidence was in  error.  The  Adjudicator  was
      wrong to permit the first appellant to be cross-examined.  She  failed
      to distinguish the two aspects of the medical evidence which had  been
      firstly,  to  determine  the  first  appellant's  level  of  cognitive
      function to ascertain whether  she  was  intellectually  impaired  and
      secondly, a mental state  examination  to  consider  whether  she  was
      suffering from functional psychiatric disorder. Further  evidence  was
      adduced in supplementary reports from Dr Romanos  and  Dr  Sheenan  to
      reinforce the contention that the Adjudicator had  failed  to  grapple
      effectively with the medical evidence.

9.    It is further argued  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  give  proper
      weight to the fact that the first appellant was  suffering  from  some
      degree of emotional disturbance. She had given too much weight to  her
      evidence compared with the  evidence  of  the  other  appellants.  The
      Adjudicator had failed properly to assess  the  expert  evidence  from
      Sheri Laizer. She had wrongly assessed the evidence  relating  to  Ali
      Bulbul's political activities and had erred in her  treatment  of  the
      evidence of Celal Aksu and the determination of  the  Adjudicator  who
      had dismissed his appeal.

10.   Mr Jones adopted these grounds in his submissions.  He  accepted  that
      he could not argue that it had not been open  to  the  Adjudicator  to
      permit the first appellant to be cross-examined on her oral  evidence.
      However, the Adjudicator had failed properly  to  assess  the  medical
      evidence and this failure undermined her assessment of the credibility
      of the witnesses' evidence.  The Adjudicator  had  been  selective  in
      which parts of the medical evidence she had accepted. She  had  failed
      to treat the first appellant's evidence with the necessary caution  in
      the light of her  mental  condition.  This  seriously  undermined  her
      assessment of the evidence.  She  had  attached  too  much  weight  to
      apparent errors in the first appellant's evidence in her assessment of
      risk.

11.   The Adjudicator had failed to give proper weight to the evidence  from
      Sheri Laizer. Her evidence was mentioned almost as an afterthought  by
      the Adjudicator.  There was no adequate basis for rejecting the second
      appellant's evidence. It was wrong to draw adverse inferences  against
      the third appellant's evidence in the light of the  findings  made  by
      the Adjudicator in her husband's appeal.

12.   Mr Deller submitted that it had been  a  matter  for  the  Adjudicator
      whether the first appellant should be  cross-examined.  There  was  no
      indication that she had been unable to give her evidence or  that  the
      Adjudicator had not dealt with it fairly.  The Adjudicator had  looked
      at the medical evidence and reached a decision properly open  to  her.
      It would be a matter for her to decide what weight to  attach  to  the
      oral evidence. This  was  not  a  case  where  the  first  appellant's
      evidence had been rejected as unreliable and then used as a  basis  to
      point to discrepancies with the other oral evidence.   Sheri  Laizer's
      report showed that the claims made by the  appellants  were  plausible
      but it was for the Adjudicator to decide whether they were or might be
      true in accordance with the lower standard of proof.  The  Adjudicator
      had highlighted at length why she was not  satisfied  that  the  basic
      facts relied on by the appellants were made out. She had looked at the
      evidence  as  a  whole  and  reached  findings  which  were   properly
      sustainable.

13.   The Adjudicator was invited  to  deal  as  a  preliminary  issue  with
      whether the respondent's representative should be  allowed  to  cross-
      examine the first appellant.   Normally  it  must  be  for  a  party's
      representative to decide whether to call oral evidence or to  rely  on
      documentary evidence. A witness  statement  can  only  stand  as  oral
      evidence if the witness submits to cross-examination. If for  whatever
      reason there  can  be  no  effective  cross-examination,  her  witness
      statement may stand as documentary evidence to be given such weight as
      the Adjudicator feels appropriate in the light of all the evidence.

14.   However, as the issue of whether the respondent  should  be  permitted
      to  cross-examine  the  first  appellant   was   raised   before   the
      Adjudicator, she cannot be faulted for dealing with it, and indeed  Mr
      Jones does not now seek to argue that her decision to permit the first
      appellant to be cross-examined was not open to her.   When considering
      this issue, the Adjudicator has referred to the reports of Dr  Sheenan
      and Dr Romanos in paragraphs 13 and  14  of  her  determination.   She
      noted that the first appellant when seen by Dr Sheenan had been unable
      to give any details of the approximate geographical  location  of  the
      region where she was born, purported to  be  confused  when  asked  to
      recount where and with whom she lived in the United Kingdom. She  said
      that she did not remember learning to read  and  write  and  that  she
      liked school a bit but was unable to  tell  him  any  more  about  her
      experiences. When she was seen by Dr Romanos on 22 May 2002, she  said
      that she loved school,  got  on  well  with  her  teachers  and  other
      children and was able to read and write in  Turkish.  The  Adjudicator
      noted that Dr Sheenan had commented that the  first  appellant  had  a
      great difficulty in answering  simple  questions.  It  was  not  clear
      whether this reflected her reluctance to  divulge  information  or  an
      inability to do so.  When she was  unable  to  complete  the  'draw  a
      person test' Dr Sheenan stated that it was unusual even for  a  person
      with a diagnosed learning  disability,  regardless  of  education  and
      cultural background, to be unable to attempt this  test.  It  was  not
      clear whether the first appellant's performance  reflected  reluctance
      or an inability to complete the task. In Dr Romanos'  report  he  said
      that the first appellant's concentration was very  poor  and  although
      she showed a reasonable memory for past events, at times she found  it
      difficult to give dates and became irritated when having  to  make  an
      effort to remember.  For the reasons which she summarised in paragraph
      24 of her determination the Adjudicator was entitled to  come  to  the
      view that there no reason why she should prevent cross-examination  of
      the first appellant.

15.   The main point made by Mr Jones in respect of the medical evidence  is
      that the Adjudicator failed properly to  take  it  into  account  when
      assessing the first appellant's evidence and  comparing  her  evidence
      with the evidence of the other witnesses. Following the hearing before
      the Adjudicator a further report was obtained from Dr Romanos. He  has
      commented on the Adjudicator's findings and  remains  of  the  opinion
      that the first appellant's mental state at the time of his  assessment
      made her unable to cooperate with cross-examination as it  was  likely
      that she would have had difficulties in  understanding  questions  and
      giving detailed and accurate answers.  A cross-examination would  have
      been likely to result in a further deterioration of her  mental  state
      with potential harmful effects. This report really does not  take  the
      matter  any  further.  Having  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first
      appellant  it  was  for  the  Adjudicator  to  assess  it  and   reach
      conclusions in the light of all the evidence. Mr Jones argues that the
      Adjudicator's assessment of credibility is undermined and made  unsafe
      by the fact that she failed to approach the  expert  evidence  in  the
      right  way.   It  is  argued  that  she  misunderstood  or  failed  to
      appreciate the distinction between the level of the first  appellant's
      cognitive function in deciding whether she was intellectually impaired
      and whether she was suffering from a psychiatric disorder:  ground  3.
      It is said that irrespective of the cause  of  the  first  appellant's
      disability, the fact remained that she was unlikely to  prove  capable
      of presenting a  reliable  history  and  in  these  circumstances  the
      Adjudicator was wrong to assess her evidence in the ordinary  way  and
      wrong to treat her as capable of adducing coherent evidence as opposed
      to assessing the evidence of competent and rational witnesses such  as
      the second and third appellants and letting it  take  precedence  over
      her evidence: see grounds 13 and 15.

16.   In our judgment there is no substance in these grounds.  Having  heard
      the oral evidence it was for the Adjudicator to assess it.    There is
      no reason to believe that she did not take into  account  the  medical
      evidence which had been  adduced.  She  considered  it  when  deciding
      whether it was right for the first  appellant  to  be  cross-examined.
      There is no basis for finding that she then left that medical evidence
      out of account when assessing what weight to attach to her evidence.

17.   The grounds go on to argue that  the  Adjudicator  should  have  given
      more weight to the expert evidence in the report from Sheri Laizer and
      that she failed to review the background evidence  in  general.  Sheri
      Laizer's reports, which appear at A71-80 and 163-173,  were  commented
      on by the Adjudicator in paragraph  103  of  her  determination.   The
      Adjudicator made the point that Sheri Laizer's opinion was based on an
      account which the Adjudicator found to be unreliable. The  Adjudicator
      came to the view that in the light  of  her  findings  the  appellants
      would not be seen as separatists  by  the  Turkish  authorities.   The
      expert evidence was based on an assumption that the accounts given  by
      the appellants were true. The expert evidence may  show,  as  in  this
      case, that the  accounts  were  plausible.  However,  it  is  for  the
      Adjudicator to assess whether the accounts are true in accordance with
      the relatively low standard of proof.

18.   It is also submitted that the Adjudicator erred  in  his  findings  on
      Ali Bulbul's political involvement. At the hearing a number of refugee
      status letters were produced showing that  other  relatives  had  been
      granted asylum. It is argued that the Adjudicator failed  to  consider
      the  fact  that  their  relative  Husseyin  Bulbul  was  a   prominent
      politician in Turkey and that one of his sons was a recognised refugee
      in the United Kingdom.  The relevance of  these  issues  was  for  the
      Adjudicator to assess. The Adjudicator has considered the position  of
      Husseyin.  He  is  referred  to  paragraphs  28,  55  and  99  of  the
      determination.  The Adjudicator makes it clear that she has taken into
      account the fact that Husseyin Bulbul, who  was  reportedly  the  most
      active political member of the family, was still living in  Turkey  as
      were the first appellant's siblings and the parents of Celal Aksu.  It
      is also argued that the Adjudicator was wrong in the way  she  treated
      the evidence relating to Celal Aksu. His appeal had been dismissed  in
      a determination issued in 2000. In paragraph 82 of  her  determination
      the Adjudicator commented that Celal Aksu's statement of 23 April 2002
      did not reflect what had been said to the Adjudicator at  the  hearing
      of his own appeal.  In our judgment, the Adjudicator was  entitled  to
      take into account the first determination and to give it  such  weight
      as she felt appropriate when assessing the credibility of the evidence
      before her.

19.   In summary the Tribunal are not satisfied that the  Adjudicator  erred
      in her assessment of the evidence in  such  a  way  that  renders  her
      findings unsafe. She has not taken irrelevant factors into account  or
      left relevant factors out of account. Having considered the  evidence,
      she has set out her findings and reasoning  in  paragraphs  74-104  in
      respect of the asylum claim and in paragraphs 105-114  in  respect  of
      the human rights claim.  The Adjudicator took the view  that  all  the
      appellants were vague in the extreme with regard to the nature of  Ali
      Bulbul's  political  involvement:  paragraph   74.   She   noted   the
      contradiction in the evidence of the third appellant who described two
      specific occasions when Ali Bulbul was arrested at the family home  in
      1993 whereas the first  appellant  had  made  no  reference  to  those
      incidents.

20.   The Adjudicator did note  the  consistency  in  the  evidence  of  one
      incident in 1995/1996 when Ali Bulbul was arrested. In  the  light  of
      the background evidence it was not unusual for the  police  to  arrest
      someone of Kurdish ethnicity whom they  suspected  might  be  involved
      with the PKK.  She accepted that there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood  that  this  arrest  had  taken  place.   She   noted   the
      conflicting accounts given of the period between  1995/1996  and  July
      2000.  The second appellant asserted that Ali Bulbul had been arrested
      on many occasions and that he had been told  by  the  first  appellant
      that his father had been taken  away.  The  Adjudicator  assessed  the
      third appellant's evidence, taking into account the evidence that  had
      been given at the hearing of her husband's  appeal.  Her  comments  in
      this respect set out at paragraphs 82 and 83  were  properly  open  to
      her.

21.    When  considering  the  issue  of  the  death  of  Ali  Bulbul,   the
      Adjudicator noted  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  which  she  has
      highlighted in  paragraphs  86-88  of  her  determination.    For  the
      reasons which she  gave  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  document
      purporting to be an official record was a genuine document  but in any
      event noted that it gave no indication as to the cause of  death.  She
      took into account the fact that there was some  inconsistency  between
      all the appellants relating to the purported arrests and detentions of
      Erkan. She noted that   a consistent account was given of  his  arrest
      on 5 July 2001 but, in the light of her other findings; she  found  it
      highly unlikely that he had been arrested on this occasion.

22.   Looking at all these factors, in our view, it  is  not  arguable  that
      the Adjudicator's findings and conclusions were not properly  open  to
      her for the reasons she gave. She has looked at both consistencies and
      inconsistencies in the evidence and then looked at the evidence  as  a
      whole.

23.   The grounds of appeal do  not  seek  to  challenge  the  Adjudicator's
      findings on human rights issues save to assert that her  findings  are
      grounded in her review of the facts relating to the  claim  under  the
      Refugee Convention. It is argued that she erred in her  assessment  of
      the medical evidence relating to the first appellant  and  has  failed
      properly to contemplate the  extensive  family  ties  enjoyed  by  the
      appellants in the United Kingdom. The Tribunal are  not  satisfied  on
      the medical evidence that claims under Article 3 have any prospect  of
      success in the light of the Court of Appeal judgments in N [2003] EWCA
      Civ 1369 and Djali [2003] EWCA Civ 1371. When considering  family  and
      private life, the  Adjudicator  noted  that  only  one  of  the  first
      appellant's stepdaughters had leave to remain. The  other  members  of
      the family were either failed asylum seekers or were waiting decisions
      in respect of their immigration status. Whatever family life  existed,
      it had been formed in the full knowledge of  the  tenuous  immigration
      status of all parties. She was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  any
      insurmountable obstacles to the appellants continuing family  life  in
      Turkey nor that removal would  be  disproportionate.   These  findings
      were clearly properly open to her on the evidence.

24.   In summary, in the view of the  Tribunal  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
      substance amount to an attempt to re-argue issues of fact  which  have
      been fully considered by the  Adjudicator  who  has  reached  findings
      which were properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

25.   Accordingly, these appeals are dismissed.






                                                               H.J.E. LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                                     -----------------------
      1


