
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |AH (Disputed Nationality -  |
|                           |        |Risk on return - Rohingya   |
|                           |        |Muslim ) Burma [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00085                       |
|On:  16 April 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|..........27/04/2004.....................                         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Mr P R Lane                                                       |
|Mr P Bompas                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms K Maciel of Counsel instructed by Amin  Welch
                 & Co. Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office  Presenting  Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal from the determination of Mr Mitchell sitting on 13
      October 2003.  The claimant, whose appeal this is,  claims  to  be  a
      citizen of Burma.  He says that he is a Rohingya  Muslim  of  Bengali
      ethnicity from the far west of Burma.  The Adjudicator  came  to  the
      conclusion that he was not Burmese at all and also  came  to  various
      other conclusions about his claimed history.

2.    Although there  were  challenges  to  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings in the grounds of appeal these were not pursued before us in
      oral argument, with the exception of the Adjudicator's findings as to
      the nationality of the claimant.

3.    We will first, therefore, deal with the facts as presented before  us
      insofar as they appear to be  relevant  to  the  issues  we  have  to
      decide.

4.    The claimant was born on 1 October 1962.  His language is Bengali. He
      said that he left Burma on 4 February 2003 and arrived in the  United
      Kingdom on 11 February 2003 by lorry from France.    He  applied  for
      asylum only on 5 March 2003 but stated that he had attended at a firm
      of solicitors the day after his arrival to set  an  asylum  claim  in
      motion.

5.    On his account he was born and lived until adulthood in  the  village
      of Necharbagal in the region of Maungdaw in Burma.   He was a farmer.



6.    He said that he had been arrested in May 1990  because  of  political
      activities but was released after a few days.  Then, in March 1992 he
      and his family were forced out of Burma into Bangladesh and  remained
      there in a  camp  until  1996  when  they  were  returned  under  the
      supervision of the UNHCR to Burma.

7.    The account that he gave  of  what  happened  to  him  thereafter  as
      accepted by the Adjudicator was that he had little or no trouble from
      the authorities from 1996 until 2003 and lived his life as a farmer.

8.    He did assert, however, that he was arrested and detained in  January
      2003  although  he  did  not  give  consistent  reasons  behind   his
      detention.   However, whatever the reason for his detention  was,  if
      it occurred, he was released  on  payment  of  a  bribe  having  been
      detained only for a very short period of time.    He then decided  to
      leave Burma.

9.    The Adjudicator was not satisfied that his account of  being  Burmese
      was true at all.   In  coming  to  that  conclusion  the  Adjudicator
      relied heavily on  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusal
      letter.   That  letter  makes  a  number  of  assertions  which   the
      Adjudicator adopted, amongst which were that  the  claimant  did  not
      speak the particular dialect of Bengali which he would speak were  he
      of the  Rohingya tribe, that he did not have any sufficient knowledge
      of the area of Burma from which he said he came, that  he  could  not
      speak  Burmese  at  all,  and,  although  this  is  not  specifically
      mentioned by the Adjudicator that he said he was being persecuted  by
      people called the "Maugh" of whom the Secretary of State  could  find
      no trace.  The Adjudicator also  came  to  the  conclusion  that  his
      geographical knowledge was  imperfect  because  the  Adjudicator,  on
      materials before him,  could  not  verify  the  geographical  details
      provided by the claimant, such as rivers, villages or town names that
      were given.

10.   We have been provided with better material than the  Adjudicator  had
      and we have also had access to the Times Atlas which covers Burma  in
      considerably greater detail than that available to  the  Adjudicator.
      That shows that close to where the claimant says he came  from  there
      is indeed a river called the Naf as he asserts.  This river forms the
      southernmost part of the border  between  Bangladesh  and  Burma  and
      flows past the town of Maungdaw to which the claimant  also  referred
      and to which municipal area he said his village belonged.

11.   It seems to us that the point that appeared to the Adjudicator to  be
      of importance; that is his relative lack of geographical knowledge of
      the area he claimed to come from, is not a strong point, and  we  are
      of the view that his geographical knowledge is stronger than had been
      thought.

12.    Another  point  that  clearly  impressed  the  Adjudicator  was  the
      assertion by the Secretary of State that he did not speak  the  right
      dialect  of  Bengali.   This  was  mentioned  specifically   by   the
      Adjudicator in his determination.

13.   When granting leave the Tribunal also was  concerned with this  point
      and specifically mentioned it in the grant of leave as being a matter
      of importance.  This was  reinforced  when  further  directions  were
      given on 3 March 2004 and the parties were invited to  submit  expert
      evidence as to the  linguistic  question.   The  reason  this  matter
      appeared to be of importance was because it seemed to be  capable  of
      being decisive of the factual issues in this case.

14.   In submissions before  us  the  Home  Secretary  stated  through  his
      representative that  he  also  considered  this  a  matter  of  vital
      importance.   In those circumstances it is greatly  to  be  regretted
      that the Home Secretary has not provided  any  evidence  whatever  to
      back up the assertion as  to  dialect  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter.    We have no idea whether there  is  any  validity  in  that
      assertion whatever.  Counsel for the claimant told us that  on  their
      part her solicitors had attempted to obtain expert evidence  but  had
      not succeeded in the time available.  That  cannot  excuse  the  Home
      Office's failure to adduce such evidence if it exists,  because  this
      has been a matter that they have considered to be of  importance  and
      of which they claim to have had  knowledge  since  the  date  of  the
      reasons for refusal letter, which was 18 June 2003.

15.   We are left in the position where the only evidence of  a  linguistic
      nature that is before us is the evidence of the claimant himself  and
      he says that the dialect that  he  and  other  Rohingya  speak  is  a
      dialect of Bengali that is distinct but not greatly distinct from the
      main form of that language.  There is no evidence to contradict this,
      the Home Secretary has had sufficient notice to adduce  evidence,  if
      it exists, to the contrary but he has not done so  and  therefore  we
      accept the claimant's evidence that the dialect that he speaks is the
      dialect that one would expect a Burmese Rohingya Muslim to speak.

16.   A further point that was made  was  that  of  the  inability  of  the
      claimant to speak Burmese.

17.   The background material shows that the Rohingya are largely  excluded
      from mainstream Burmese society and further that they live in an area
      of Burma very close to the Bangladeshi border and would seem to  have
      little  contact  with  the  remainder  of  the  country.   In   those
      circumstances it does not seem surprising to us, in  the  absence  of
      any evidence to the contrary, that a poorly educated farmer  immersed
      in his own Rohingya  Muslim  culture  and  surroundings  would  speak
      Bengali and no other language despite the fact that the  language  of
      the state is Burmese.

18.   A final point that was in the refusal letter is the identity  of  the
      Maugh.   This matter has been cleared up to our satisfaction  by  the
      claimant's solicitors who have produced an ethnologue document  which
      shows that the Arakanese, who are Burmese speakers, albeit they speak
      a distinct dialect, are known, amongst other names as  the  Maugh  or
      Mogh both in Burma and in Bangladesh.

19.   We have come to the conclusion, having had  the  benefit  of  greater
      detailed  explanation  of  the  various  factual  matters  than   the
      Adjudicator  had,  that  to  the  lower  standard  the  claimant  has
      established that he is indeed what  he  claims  to  be,  which  is  a
      Rohingya Muslim from Burma.

20.   That being the case the question that falls to be decided is whether,
      as a Rohingya Muslim, he would be at  real  risk  of  persecution  on
      return to Burma.   This would be against the background that  he  had
      been part of a mass expulsion  by  the  Burmese  authorities  in  the
      earlier 1990s but had returned in 1996  and  had  been  arrested  but
      released after a very short period on payment of  a  bribe  in  early
      2003.    He gave three  reasons  for  his  arrest  and  detention  in
      January 2003 all of which were rejected by the  Adjudicator,  but  as
      the Adjudicator went on to say, even if he had been  detained  as  he
      claimed it appears the authorities have got no interest in him.

21.   The first point that was made on his behalf was that the  Burmese  do
      not accept deportees back to Burma.  That may be the position but  we
      cannot allow that to  influence  our  judgment  as  to  whether  this
      claimant has the status of refugee in this country, for that turns on
      whether, if actually back in Burma, he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
      persecution.

22.   The next matter that was raised was that because he left the  country
      illegally to go  to  the  west  he  would  be  perceived  to  have  a
      particular political opinion. We can deal  with  this  point  shortly
      because we have no evidence that that would be the case. There is  no
      material before us that shows that a failed asylum seeker is at  risk
      of persecution on return unless he has a political profile.

23.     Finally it was submitted that because he is of the  ethnicity  that
      he is that in itself would put  him  at  real  risk  of  persecution.
      There was not a great deal of information placed before us that would
      assist on this particular point but we did have the  benefit  of  the
      CIPU Bulletins on Burma that have been produced and  are  dated  June
      2002 and February 2003.   These show that large numbers  of  Rohingya
      fled across the border to Bangladesh in  1991  and  1992  because  of
      security force atrocities in Burma.  Repatriation began in 1995  when
      about two hundred thousand people were marked as returnees.  In  1996
      a further twenty three thousand were  repatriated  amongst  whom  the
      claimant says he is one.  They were felt by the UNHCR to be  safe  in
      October 1997 although the Burmese authorities were reluctant to grant
      full citizenship and maintained travel restrictions upon them.  Since
      then there have been occasional returns of Rohingya, the most  recent
      known to us being on 24 November 2002 when either three thousand five
      hundred or five thousand arrived outside  the  UNHCR  office  in  the
      relevant region of Bangladesh.

23.   The position of Rohingyas in  Burma  appears  to  us  to  be  one  of
      marginalisation.   They  are  not  fully  accepted  by  the   Burmese
      authorities as  being  equal  citizens  and  they  are  subjected  to
      restrictions on travel by those authorities.   There is, however,  no
      evidence before us to show that being a Rohingya, or more  particular
      being a Rohingya with the background of this claimant, would lead  to
      a real risk of persecution  on  return.   The  claimant  it  will  be
      remembered lived without difficulty from 1996 to 2003 in his area and
      when detained was released after only a short period  of  time.    We
      infer from the material that has been placed before us that  being  a
      Rohingya could well lead one to harassment and to discrimination  but
      that is not the same as persecution.

24.   It seems to us that if the claimant were returned to Rangoon he would
      almost certainly be found by the authorities to be in breach  of  the
      travel restrictions on Rohingyas, but that in our judgment would lead
      to the Burmese authorities returning him to the area where Rohingyas,
      according to them, should be and  remain.

25.   In all the circumstances, therefore, and for  the  reasons  which  we
      have given above we consider that  this  appeal  must  be  dismissed,
      albeit our findings on fact are different from some of those  of  the
      Adjudicator.





                                                   His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                                              Vice President

