
LSH | |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 14 June 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|VK (Risk on return- Rwandan heritage) Democratic Republic of Congo|
|[2004] UKIAT 00337                                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|29 September 2004                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                              |
|Dr J O de Barros                                                  |
|Mr G F Sandall                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr S Vokes, of Counsel, instructed by
                       MacLaren Britton, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J G Jones

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with  leave  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mr I F Taylor,  who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
      refusal to recognise him as a  refugee  and  the  setting  of  removal
      directions.

   2. Leave to appeal was granted based on paragraphs 19, 20 and 42  of  the
      Tribunal's decision in the country  guidance  case  of  M  (DR  Congo)
      [2003] UKIAT 00017 M (DR Congo).

   3. The core facts as found  by  the  Adjudicator  are  as  follows.   The
      appellant was born on 12 May 1976 in Kinshasa DRC.     He  is  married
      with no children; his wife is still in Kinshasa although he has had no
      news from her.   The appellant is from  the  Luba  tribe  as  was  his
      father.    His mother however was Rwandan and  a  Hutu.    His  father
      died in 1986 and his mother was killed in 1998 by the Tutsis.

   4. On 15 February 2002  at  the  age  of  26  the  appellant  joined  the
      Association D'Entr'Aide des Congolais Orphelins (AECO),  a  self  help
      group of people having one or both parents from Rwanda (either Hutu or
      Tutsi) intended to assist at times  of  difficulties  or  bereavement.
      The  appellant  became  the  Secretary  of  that  organisation,  which
      attracted suspicion from the DRC authorities because  of  its  obvious
      Rwandan connections:  it was accused of communicating with  the  rebel
      forces from the east of the DRC.   A meeting was disrupted  in  around
      October 2002; on 20 January 2003  soldiers  came  to  the  appellant's
      house about a warrant and arrested him taking  him  to  the  notorious
      group Litho Moboti Prison (GLM Prison).

   5. The Adjudicator found that on a true construction  of  evidence  about
      the AECO, it was irrelevant whether a person's parents  were  Hutu  or
      Tutsi, so  long  as  they  were  Rwandan.    It  was  the  nationality
      identification  which  was  crucial.    He  also  accepted  that   the
      authorities would have been suspicious of the  organisation  and  felt
      that the AECO was lending assistance  in  rebels  in  the  east.    He
      considered that the appellant suffered some mistreatment (paragraph 10
      of the determination) but that his account  in  connection  with  this
      appeal was exaggerated.  He accepted the account of the  detention  in
      the GLM Prison for a short period after which, no  doubt  having  been
      mistreated, the appellant was released as of no  further  interest  to
      the authorities.  That is as high as the appellant can put his case.

   6. The question for the  Tribunal  is  whether  if  this  appellant  were
      returned today that profile is sufficient to put him at risk.

   7. The Tribunal has the benefit of two skeleton arguments,  one  prepared
      by instructing solicitors and one prepared and served by Mr  Vokes  on
      the Friday before the hearing.    Mr Vokes  indicated  that  he  would
      only be relying on his own skeleton argument; accordingly we have  not
      delved into the skeleton argument  which  appears  in  the  bundle  of
      documents filed on the appellant's behalf.

   8. Mr Vokes' skeleton is most helpful.   It sets out the facts  which  we
      have just summarised ; it draws the  Tribunal's  attention  to  [2003]
      UKIAT 00017 M (DR Congo) which says this:

      "16.        At page 62 of the objective evidence  bundle  there  is  a
            letter dated  27  June  2002  from  the  UNCHR  to  a  firm  of
            solicitors  in  the   United   Kingdom.      Apparently   those
            solicitors had requested information on the  current  situation
            in the DRC in relation to the  return  of  unsuccessful  asylum
            seekers.  In that letter the UNCHR emphasises "the need  for  a
            case by case approach in examining all asylum applications;  in
            assessing whether or not an asylum seeker may  be  returned  in
            safety.    Within a particular country context each case should
            be examined on its own merits with due weight  being  given  to
            the specific  background;  profile  of  the  applicant".    The
            letter then went on  to  look  in  more  detail  at  particular
            categories of persons who might be at risk on return.  "Against
            this backdrop persons originating from rebel  held  territories
            such as Goma are held in suspicion; liable to adverse attention
            - sometimes amounting to persecution - from the authorities  in
            Kinshasa.   By a similar token persons of Rwandese  origin  are
            also at risk of adverse attention.    This is not least because
            Rwandese and Rwanda supported forced  or  prominent  among  the
            armed elements ranged against the Kinshasa authorities"."


   9. Mr Vokes also relied upon page 85-6 of his bundle, a  passage  in  the
      expert's report of Mr Kennes -

       "I have no specific information about this case  and  cannot  confirm
      whether or  not  his  story  is  true.     However,  the  story  of  [
      ] seems on the whole consistent with the state of affairs in  the  DRC
      as it is known to me.   Several elements may be pinpointed:

      - the general aggression against anybody considered to be Tutsi.    It
      is very important to note  that  the  name  Tutsi  refers  to  anybody
      considered to be a  collaborator  of  Rwanda  or  the  RCD/Goma  rebel
      movement.   A  Hutu  or  even  a  Congolese  may  be  called  "Tutsi".
      Supporters of the UDP are called "Tutsi" because their party  made  an
      alliance with the Rwanda-dominated RCD movement.   The name Tutsi  may
      already trigger aggression:  it  is  sufficient  for  somebody  to  be
      considered as Tutsi to experience problems  independently  of  his/her
      real ethnic affiliation...

      - The general  suspicion  against  anybody  who  is  thought  to  have
      contacts with the rebel movement especially the ones linked to Rwanda.
        If an organisation for orphans helps Congolese and Rwandan  children
      it will certainly be met with great suspicion  in  the  parts  of  the
      country under government control.    Its leaders may be  suspected  of
      having contacts with movements.

      - The use of the GLM Prison.   This was  officially  closed  in  March
      2001 but according to a research carried  out  by  a  collaborator  in
      Kinshasa (during my trip in Kinshasa in May 2003) the  GLM  has  never
      really been closed it is still in use especially for the  imprisonment
      of "sensitive" (political) detainees."

      At page 86 there are comments on the Home  Office  Refusal  letter  on
      similar lines.

  10. Mr Vokes submitted that if the Adjudicator  had  the  benefit  of  the
      decision in M, he would certainly have reached a different conclusion.
      The Adjudicator's determination was written in September 2003;  the  M
      decision had been promulgated by 15 August 2003,  but  apparently  was
      not argued before the Adjudicator.

  11. Mr Vokes also relies on paragraph 42 and 43 of the M decision:

      "42.  The final letter, to which reference needs to be made,  is  that
           of 156 June 2003 from Human Rights Watch to Mr Behbahani.   This
           refers to


           "continued threats and difficulties faced by those who have,  or
           are presumed to have, Rwandan  connections  or  are  of  Rwandan
           origin in Kinshasa and other parts of the DRC".


           Reference is then made to a continued threat


            "for  those  individuals  who  are  suspected  by  the  Kinshasa
           authorities of having close links to Rwanda".


           Given the findings of the Adjudicator, to the effect  that  even
           whilst he was married, the problems described by  the  appellant
           did not occur, and given that he is not at  present  married  to
           anyone who has Rwandan connections,  Mr  Behbahani  appeared  to
           accept that this letter could be of  little  assistance  to  the
           appellant.


      43.   The Tribunal's conclusions are accordingly, as follows:


      a)    On the information available to it, as at 9 July 2003, it is not
           the fact that a person returned to the DRC is, by reason only of
           being a failed asylum seeker, at real  risk  of  persecution  or
           Article 3 ill treatment.


      b)    In order to run a real  risk  of  being  taken  into  detention,
           following the screening of a returnee at Kinshasa airport, there
           must be something further in the returnee's background  such  as
           past political or military activities or nationality of a  state
           regarded as hostile to the DRC."


  12. He relied also on decisions in L DRC and I Democratic Republic of  the
      Congo, (considered below),  both  recent  country  guidance  decisions
      intended to give guidance on the risks to returning asylum seekers  in
      the DRC.  Finally, Mr Vokes referred to a  newspaper  report  dated  4
      June dealing with increased tensions in  relation  to  round-ups.   He
      argued that there was a background of instability; there  had  been  a
      failed coup attempt in Kinshasa on Friday 11 June 2004. Mr Vokes asked
      us to allow the appeal.

  13. For the Secretary of State,  Mr  Jones  reminded  us  that  it  was  a
      question of particular facts and circumstances; the Adjudicator  found
      the appellant's account of the treatment meted out to  be  exaggerated
      (paragraph 10) although he accepted that there was  some  risk.    The
      Adjudicator disbelieved  the  whole  of  the  appellant's  account  in
      relation to his escape; he found that in September 2003 there  was  no
      current interest in the appellant.

  14. In reply, Mr Vokes pointed out that  it  was  the  membership  of  the
      Orphan Association which delineated this  appellant  from  any  normal
      returning asylum seeker; his position with that organisation gave rise
      to a present and future risk.    The act of returning him would  bring
      him to the attention of the authorities; there was a  current  climate
      of suspicion in relation to Rwandans as a whole and the intentions  of
      Rwanda towards the DRC.  The new CG cases were pertinent and should be
      taken into account.   He asked the Tribunal to allow the appeal.

  15. We have therefore considered the passages to which we have taken in  L
      (DRC) paragraphs 93-94:

      "93.  Our essential focus in this determination has been on the  issue
           of failed asylum seekers.  However, the Adjudicator in  allowing
           this appeal made reference to one further risk  factor,  namely,
           being a woman with a very young child:  see  paragraph  22.   In
           view of the analysis set out in M and in preceding paragraphs of
           this determination, we also have to consider whether  there  was
           another possible risk category into which she would  fall,  with
           reference to identification by the Tribunal in M of two definite
           risk categories as follows:


      a)    nationality or perceived nationality  of  a  state  regarded  as
           hostile to the DRC (in particular those who have or are presumed
           to have Rwandan connections or are of Rwandan original);


      b)    having or being  perceived  to  have  a  military  or  political
           profile or background.


      94.   As explained earlier, we consider that  M  00071  reached  sound
           conclusions and we adopt its conclusions in this respect as well
           as others.  We note that both the latest UNHCR evidence and  the
           latest  report  of  Dr  Kennes  lend  further  support  to   the
           identification of these two categories.  They also lend  support
           to  inclusion  of  a  third  category,  being   without   travel
           documents, but this does not arise in the UK context for reasons
           already given".

      In I (DRC), the relevant paragraphs are paragraphs 24-5 -


      "24.  The predecessor UNCHR letter which was in the same terms and the
           position  of  returning  failed  asylum  seekers  to   DRC   was
           considered at length  in  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal,
           [2004]  UKIAT  00007  L  (DRC).   That  case  was   particularly
           concerned with whether there was a risk to  those  who  returned
           merely because they were failed asylum  seekers.   It  concluded
           that there was not.  It recognised that there were possible risk
           categories, including those who had or were perceived to have  a
           military or political profile or background, or  who  came  from
           rebel held areas or who were a family of mixed ethnicity or were
           perceived to be Tutsi.  There was however  no  significant  risk
           arising from the fact that a returned failed asylum seeker was a
           woman, nor indeed from being as in that case, a low  level  IDPS
           member.   At  paragraph  100  it  pointed  out  that  the  UNCHR
           description of "military or political profile or background" did
           not draw a distinction between high had low  level  individuals,
           nor did it suggest that merely being a member of  an  opposition
           party such as the UDPS sufficed to place on in a risk  category.
           Nor did the UNCHR letter state that  persons  in  that  category
           were necessarily at risk but rather that they were likely to  be
           at  risk  and  therefore   deserved   particular   and   careful
           consideration.


      25.   The Tribunal concluded that although the category was of a broad
           definition, it could only apply to those  whose  activities  had
           brought themselves to the adverse notice of the  authorities  so
           they acquired a certain profile in their eyes before they left."


  16. In relation to the newspaper report the relevant  passage  appears  in
      the fourth column:

           "In Kinshasa President Joseph Kabila used  belligerent  language
           to condemn both the  UN  and  neighbouring  Rwanda  raising  the
           political temperature and sparking fears of Congo's third  major
           war in less than 10 years.

           Rwanda which started the 1996  and  1998  wars  was  behind  the
           attacks on Bukavu he said "Once again Rwanda has made  it  clear
           it does not want peace" he told the BBC "If war is imposed on us
           we will most definitely fight back".


           Rwanda's  Foreign  Minister   Charles   Muligande   denied   the
           accusation.    The UN spokesman in  Bukavu  said  "We  have  had
           reports of [Rwanda troop movements in  Congo]  but  for  now  we
           cannot confirm them".  Some UN military observers also  reported
           seeing UN  military  aircraft  in  Congolese  airspace  west  of
           Bukavu.

           The South African and Uruguayan peacekeepers started  patrolling
           the streets of Bukavu last night the UN mission was tumbling  in
           disarray.  Some UN officials blamed the lack  of  resources  and
           the lack of political world from the international community for
           the swelling fiasco and  recriminations  have  already  started.
           "Quite frankly [this chaos] was coming for a long time.   Nobody
           was willing to take the hard decision to prevent it.   It is  no
           surprise  to  us  at  all."  said  one  official  in  Bukavu.  "
                  (Independent, 4 June 2004)

  17. The Tribunal retired at  the  end  of  the  hearing  to  consider  its
      determination which was given orally at the hearing.  We  accept  that
      each case turns on its individual facts.   In  this  particular  case,
      this young man at the age of 26 publicly identified himself  with  his
      Rwandan heritage and as a war orphan.   The Adjudicator found that  he
      was detained and ill-treated, however briefly; the authorities will be
      aware of his Rwandan heritage and his position as  Secretary  of  that
      organisation.

  18. The appellant left the DRC on 29 January 2003, very shortly after  his
      release.  As Mr Justice Ouseley said in I, before leaving  in  January
      2003 this appellant established "a certain profile" in the eyes of the
      authorities.  We do have regard to the present situation in the DRC  ;
      we consider that it is at least reasonably likely, alternatively  that
      there is a real risk, that on return the profile which  the  appellant
      has in the eyes of the Democratic Republic of  the  Congo  authorities
      would cause him to be identified and detained again.

  19. Accordingly, although as Mr Jones pointed out it may well be that  his
      past treatment was not at a level which amounted  to  persecution,  we
      find that he has established a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  of
      future persecution by the Congolese authorities, or  alternatively,  a
      real risk of a breach of Article 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

  20. For all the above reasons, this appeal is allowed.



                                             Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                                             Vice President

                                             Date: 16 June 2004

