
H-AM-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |SA (GBTS Records) Turkey CG |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00229          |
|On 31 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane, Vice President                                       |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Mrs J Holt                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Appearances

For the Appellant:           Mr A Zaidi,   Counsel,  instructed  by  Messrs
                 Ahmed & Co Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  A  Hutton,  Senior  Home  Office   Presenting
      Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appeals with  permission  against
    the Determination of an Adjudicator, Mr M  Cullum,  sitting  at  Taylor
    House, in which he dismissed on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent on
    9 May 2001 to give directions for  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant, born in  1978,  is  a  Turkish  national  of  Armenian
    ethnicity.  He worked as a hairdresser  from  1991  to  1998  and  then
    completed his military service.   He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely with his wife in February 2000.  The couple  now  have  a
    child, born in the United Kingdom, who is (like the wife)  a  dependant
    on the Appellant's claim.

3.    The Appellant told the Adjudicator that he had been detained on three
    occasions:-

    (a)    in May 1996, for five days, following his attendance  of  a  May
         Day celebration in Istanbul.  He was questioned  about  his  links
         with the DHKP-C and beaten by the police.  He was released without
         charge;


    (b)    on 5 March 1998, for three days,  after  attending  a  march  to
         protest against extrajudicial killings in Turkey.  Again,  he  was
         beaten and then released without charge;


    (c)    in November 1998, for five days, following his participation  in
         a march to protest against the  Turkish  government's  failure  to
         provide adequate aid after an earthquake.  On  this  occasion  the
         Appellant said that he was "told by the police that he would spend
         the rest of his life in prison and once more he was brutalised and
         released without charge" (determination ,paragraphs 16-18).


4.    The  Adjudicator,  at  paragraph  19,  records  that  "the  Appellant
    remained undeterred as to his low-level activities in support of  DHKP-
    C".  However, the Appellant said that what caused him to  leave  Turkey
    was a raid on his home on 24 January 2000, when  he  was  not  present.
    His wife, he said, was  detained  for  one  night  by  the  police  who
    appeared "to use her in order to entice the  Appellant  to  the  police
    station".  When that did not work, the police released  her.   However,
    during her time in detention the Appellant's wife was said to have been
    "sexually assaulted and harassed" (paragraph 20).

5.    Following this, the Appellant paid an  agent  to  bring  him  to  the
    United Kingdom.

6.    Whilst here, the Appellant told  the  Adjudicator  that  he  had  had
    telephone contact with his family in Turkey who "have revealed that the
    police have enquired  three  times  about  him  at  his  house  at  the
    beginning of 2003" (paragraph 23).

7.    At paragraph 33 of the  determination,  the  Adjudicator  begins  his
    findings of fact and credibility.  He  found  first  that  it  was  not
    credible that the Appellant, as a sympathiser of the DHKP-C, would have
    been unaware of least of allegations that the organisation he purported
    to have sympathised with had been involved in various atrocities.   The
    Adjudicator had noted at paragraph 24 how the Appellant  had  told  him
    that the DHKP-C "is a non-violent organisation".  It was  submitted  on
    his behalf that the Appellant could have been forgiven for not  knowing
    this "because of his mistrust of the Turkish media".

8.    The Tribunal finds that the Adjudicator was entitled to discount  the
    explanation put forward on behalf of the Appellant.  At Annex C of  the
    October 2003 CIPU Report on Turkey, there is a section on  the  DHKP-C.
    It is a Marxist-Leninist organisation  which  has  the  avowed  aim  of
    seeking to overthrow the existing Turkish system of government by armed
    revolution.

9.    At paragraph 35, the Adjudicator concluded that the Appellant's  lack
    of knowledge of the DHKP-C "either reflects a lack of interest in  that
    organisation or an  especially  low  level  involvement  with  it".   A
    reading of the paragraphs of the determination  that  follow  makes  it
    plain  that  the  Adjudicator  came  down  in  favour  of  the   second
    possibility.  In essence, the Adjudicator concluded that  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that the Appellant had been detained  at,  or  in
    the immediate aftermath of, various marches and  demonstrations.   That
    the Turkish authorities may have  observed  some  linkage  between  the
    Appellant's presence at these  various  gatherings  and  a  sympathetic
    attitude  on  his  part  toward  the  DHKP-C  is  acknowledged  by  the
    Adjudicator at paragraphs 46 and 47.  At paragraph 46, the  Adjudicator
    accepts that the Appellant "may have previously been  detained  by  the
    police" and that as a result "it must be a possibility that he  was  at
    the same time beaten by the police having been detained as a  political
    opponent".  The following paragraph reads as follows:-

      "47. However, I do not accept that the Appellant was and indeed is of
              ongoing  interest  to  the  authorities.   He  was   possibly
              interested in DHKP-C but  certainly  was  not  a  member  and
              displays  insufficient  knowledge  of   that   organisation's
              activities to be considered a real active supporter".


10.   The Tribunal is in no doubt that the Adjudicator was entitled on  the
    evidence to that finding.  What flows from it,  in  terms  of  risk  on
    return to Turkey, we shall consider in due course.

11.   These  three  detentions  were,  in  fact,  the  only  parts  of  the
    Appellant's account of his experiences in Turkey that  the  Adjudicator
    was prepared to believe.  The Adjudicator specifically disbelieved both
    the account of  the  raid  on  the  house  in  January  2000,  and  the
    consequent ill-treatment of the Appellant's wife.

12.   At paragraph 37, the Adjudicator gives two reasons  why  he  did  not
    believe the account of that raid.  First, if the purpose  was,  as  the
    Appellant suggested, to hold the wife in order to entice the  Appellant
    himself to the police station, the Adjudicator considered it incredible
    that the authorities would release the wife after as short a period  as
    24 hours.  In this regard, the Adjudicator  noted  that  the  Appellant
    himself had been held for between three and five days, during his three
    detentions.  Secondly, the Adjudicator found there to be "no suggestion
    that the wife of the Appellant deserved detention" in  her  own  right.
    Finally, "there is no  suggestion  of  any  specific  activity  by  the
    Appellant that would cause there to be a raid on his house.  Each  time
    previously that he had been detained the Appellant had been  identified
    as being involved in a demonstration and had been detained specifically
    for that involvement".

13.   For  the  Appellant,  Mr  Zaidi  submitted  that,  according  to  the
    Appellant's statement, he  had  been  continuing  his  admittedly  "low
    level" (page A24) DHKP-C activities and "DHKP-C members conducted their
    meetings at my house  but  I  never  participated  in  these  meetings"
    (A25/26).  Thus, Mr Zaidi submitted that the police could well have had
    a reason to raid the house in January 2000.

14.   The Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  there  is  anything  in  the
    Appellant's statement, from which we have just quoted,  that  prevented
    the Adjudicator, as a matter of law, from finding at paragraph 37  that
    "there is no suggestion of any specific activity by the Appellant  that
    would cause there to be a raid on his house" (our  emphasis).   In  any
    event, it was plainly not irrational of  the  Adjudicator  to  conclude
    that, if the police had been  serious  about  trying  to  "entice"  the
    Appellant to the police station, they would not have released his  wife
    after so short a period of  time  as  24  hours.   In  conclusion,  the
    Adjudicator at paragraph 37 of the Determination has,  we  find,  given
    legally sustainable reasons for his finding that the alleged events  of
    24/25 January 2000 never occurred.

15.   The Tribunal also consider that the Adjudicator was fully entitled to
    disbelieve the assertion that, in early 2003, the police in Turkey went
    to the family home on three occasions, to enquire about the appellant's
    whereabouts.  Given the Adjudicator's quite justified  findings  as  to
    only very low level involvement with  DHKP-C  demonstrations,  and  his
    rejection of the account of the raid on the house in 2000, it is simply
    not credible that, some three years later, the police  would  start  to
    enquire about him.

16.   On the basis of his findings of fact, which  we  have  concluded  the
    Adjudicator was permitted to make, would the Appellant today be at risk
    on return to Turkey?

17.   The Adjudicator concluded that he would not.  Having  considered  the
    factors regarded by the Tribunal  in  Hayser  [2002]  UKIAT  07083,  as
    potentially relevant to risk on return, the Adjudicator noted that,  in
    addition, the Appellant "does not have a valid Turkish passport":-

         "50.     This clearly means that the Appellant will be detained at
                the airport but by my finding would not be at any real  risk
                of being  transferred  to  the  Anti-Terror  Branch  of  the
                authorities.  Were this to be the case then it appears  that
                there would be a real risk of the Appellant  being  tortured
                or at least receiving  treatment  in  breach  of  his  human
                rights.


           51.    The Appellant by my finding falls into  the  category  of
                returned  failed  asylum  seeker  that  would  undergo   the
                unpleasant and no doubt  distressing  initial  investigation
                and assessment by the Turkish authorities but who  would  be
                released without difficulty thereafter".


18.   As the  Tribunal  has  recently  observed  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    determination in O (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00038, an enquiry in  relation
    to risk on return in Turkish cases has in recent years focussed on what
    is reasonably likely to happen to a Turkish citizen  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom, upon his or  her  arrival  at  Istanbul  airport.   The
    Tribunal in that paragraph made reference to the case of  Acdog  [2003]
    UKIAT 00034, where it was generally accepted that immigration officials
    at Istanbul airport have access  to  the  Central  Information  System,
    known as the GBTS, upon which personal data is stored.

19.   At the time of the hearings in Acdog, the general assumption was that
    the GBTS held records of individuals who had at any time been  detained
    by the Turkish authorities, whether or not as a  result  of  an  arrest
    warrant, and whether or not the  individual  concerned  had  ever  been
    charged with an offence.

20.   As a result of information  made  available  to  the  United  Kingdom
    government by the Turkish government in  September  2003,  the  October
    2003 CIPU Report on  Turkey  provides,  at  paragraphs  5.39  to  5.43,
    detailed information as to the extent of the material recorded  on  the
    GBTS.  According to the Turkish government, the GBTS does  not  contain
    data regarding detentions of the  kind  we  have  just  described.   An
    analysis of the relevant provisions of the CIPU Report is to  be  found
    at paragraphs 30 to 38 of the determination in O (Turkey).

21.   In the present case, Mr Zaidi quite properly  acknowledged  that  the
    three detentions suffered by the Appellant  were  also  of  this  kind.
    Accordingly, if the GBTS was the only information system  available  to
    the immigration authorities at Istanbul airport, those detentions would
    not cause the Appellant to be recorded on it.

22.   On behalf of  the  Appellant,  a  "Note  on  GBTS  (Turkey's  General
    Information Gathering System)" by David McDowall has been submitted  to
    the Tribunal.

23.   As footnote 1 to this Note states, Mr McDowall  is  a  specialist  in
    Middle East Affairs with a particular interest in the Kurds.  He is the
    author of numerous publications on the Kurdish question as well as  the
    author of a report published by Asylum  Aid  entitled  "Asylum  Seekers
    from Turkey: The Dangers They Flee".   In  addition  he  "has  prepared
    reports regarding the background of at least 300 asylum Appellants over
    the past four or five years".  As the Tribunal in Kaya  (HX/47165/2001)
    observed  in  2002,  Mr  McDowall  has  "a   distinct   anti-government
    viewpoint".  Clearly,  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  that.   It  does,
    however, mean that Mr McDowall is not (and no doubt would not  seek  to
    categorise himself as) an expert witness in the  sense  in  which  that
    term is understood in other  civil  proceedings.   His  Note  does  not
    contain any "expert witness statement"  acknowledging  a  duty  to  the
    Tribunal.  In essence
    Mr McDowall's Note is a piece of written  advocacy  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, albeit of a generalised nature, whose purpose (as stated  on
    page 1) is "to express doubt" regarding the inference  in  the  October
    2003 CIPU Report that the GBTS forms "the basis for screening  returned
    asylum seekers on re-entry to Turkey... or that it is likely to be  the
    principal means of screening these returnees".  Again, there is nothing
    wrong in this.  It is, however, important to be aware that,  whilst  Mr
    McDowall may be a well-informed observer  on  Turkish  (and  especially
    Kurdish) matters, he is also a partisan one.

24.   At page 3 of the Note, Mr McDowall poses the question of "whether the
    filter as applied by GBTS (as described here) is in  itself  sufficient
    to serve Turkey's security needs.  My own  view  is  that  it  is  not.
    Either GBTS covers a much wider  range  of  security  interest  or  the
    security forces operate another computerised screening system including
    recourse to individual police and gendarmerie stations across  Turkey".



25.   The passage which immediately follows is worth quoting in full:-

      "We are informed, for example, by  the  Human  Rights  Foundation  of
         Turkey (THIV), noted for its scrupulous  handling  of  data,  that
         those who enrolled  in  the  supposedly  voluntary  village  guard
         system, and those villagers and villages  that  refused  to  enrol
         were duly listed by JITEM (gendarmerie intelligence).  This  means
         that all those who desert or refuse service in the village  guards
         are supposedly on record, even though service in the village guard
         system is voluntary and even though it is  completely  apart  from
         compulsory military service.  We also know,  to  consider  another
         example, that Turkish security keeps a very close eye  on  Kurdish
         ex-patriot  communities  in  the  European  Union.   It  would  be
         extraordinary if it did not.  After all, ever since the foundation
         of the first  Kurdish  newspaper,  Kurdistan  in  Cairo  in  1895,
         Kurdish  ex-patriots  have   provided   vital   intellectual   and
         ideological  stimulus  for  the  Kurdish   nationalist   movement.
         Moreover, there seems to be a universal conviction,  and  possibly
         evidence,  that  the  PKK  operated  an  effective  money  raising
         operation that may have amounted to blackmail  among  Kurdish  ex-
         patriots.  Turkish security can obtain information by  penetrating
         ex-patriot  community  organisations  and  also  by  interrogating
         returned  asylum  seekers  believed  to   have   frequented   such
         organisations.  It strikes me as very unrealistic to suppose  that
         Turkish security does not use both these methods.  The evidence of
         case studies of returnees in ASFT2 Appendix A6 does indeed suggest
         that interrogation of returnees with this  purpose  in  mind  does
         happen, although we do not know how consistent it is.


      It is for such reasons that I believe some wider "lens" than GBTS (as
         described) must be used.  It is possible that the  third  category
         [of cases said to be registered in the GBTS: see paragraph 35 of O
         ([Turkey)] covers this much wider latitude.  There must be a  very
         substantial number of suspected Kurds and  Leftists  against  whom
         there may  be  nothing  specific,  beyond  being  reckoned  to  be
         sympathetic to Kurdish or Leftist groups,  but  who  are  strongly
         suspected of knowing information that is wanted  by  the  security
         forces.  Can one really assume they will not be on a  list  easily
         accessible while filtering incomers to Turkey? One would certainly
         not expect the Turkish  security  system  to  be  candid  publicly
         regarding the filter it applies to the movement of persons  across
         boundaries".


26.   It is important to keep in mind the central  question  in  this  case
    and, indeed, many other similar cases involving Turkish  citizens  that
    come before Adjudicators and the Tribunal.   Is  it  reasonably  likely
    (or, to adopt  Mr  McDowall's  own  central  question,  does  it  serve
    Turkey's security needs) for computerised records to be kept  available
    for use at Istanbul airport regarding the detention, without arrest  or
    charge, of a person with a low-level political profile?

27.   At paragraph 5.38 of the October 2003 CIPU Report reference  is  made
    to material contained in Mr McDowall's "Asylum Seekers from Turkey  II"
    (2002):-

       "5.38       In  its  report  for  1998,  the  Turkish  Human  Rights
         Organisation Mazlim-Der reported that out of 35,914 people whom it
         knew who had been  taken  into  detention  the  number  of  people
         actually arrested was only  1,279,  approximately  3.5%  of  those
         detained.  A large proportion of  detentions  at  police  stations
         appear to go unrecorded in a formal sense.  Statistics, which  are
         not comprehensive and which merely record cases which  would  come
         to the notice of various human rights organisations, indicate that
         over 95% of people detained by the police in 1998  and  1999  were
         released without charge.  It is only once  a  defendant  has  been
         formally charged/arrested  that  he  is  able  to  get  access  to
         documents relating to his case.  Anyone who has been detained  and
         released without charge will be unable to  prove  it  without  any
         form of documentary evidence".


28.   At paragraph 6.20 of the October 2003 Report  reference  is  made  to
    certain  Turkish  human  rights  groups  reporting  that  Turkish   law
    enforcement officials do not register suspects when they are  initially
    taken into detention, "the allegation being that if  a  suspect  should
    die during questioning then there will be no record of them having been
    detained".  Although the Turkish government in 1998 instituted a system
    of  detention  registers  "Turkish  NGOs  have  complained   that   the
    provisions are frequently ignored".

29.   At least one of the reasons set out above for the police not  keeping
    records of detainees hardly puts those authorities  in  a  good  light.
    The inescapable conclusion is, however, that in a  case  such  of  that
    with which we are concerned, it is highly unlikely that any  record  of
    the Appellant's detention will have been kept in any form at  all,  let
    alone that it is kept on the centralised computer system  available  to
    immigration officials (see also paragraph 62 of O (Turkey)).

30.   What Mr McDowall has to say about information regarding  the  village
    guard being listed on JITEM is  both  somewhat  beside  the  point  and
    vague.  Mr McDowall refers  to  information  on  those  who  refuse  to
    perform such service being "supposedly" on record.  Even if  it  is  on
    record, we are told nothing as to what the nature of that record  might
    be.

31.   Likewise, in the context of the precise question to  be  answered  in
    the present case, what Mr McDowall has to say  about  Turkish  security
    keeping "a very close eye on  Kurdish  ex-patriot  communities  in  the
    European  Union"  is,  again,  beside  the  point.   Like   any   other
    government, the Turkish authorities no doubt do their best  to  monitor
    the activities abroad of those who pose a real threat to  the  security
    of Turkey.  As Mr McDowall himself says, it would be  extraordinary  if
    they did not. Having said this, there appear to be  significant  limits
    in practice on the extent of any such monitoring.   The CIPU Report has
    this to say on the matter:-

      "5.71      The Turkish Intelligence  Agency,  MIT  (Milli  Istihbarat
         Teskilati, National  Intelligence  Organisation)  allegedly  keeps
         close tabs on political activities against Turkey.  Given manpower
         constraints, routine surveillance by the MIT seems to  concentrate
         on leading figures.   Information  on  people  of  lower  rank  is
         apparently obtained by 'chance'".


32.   But none of this in any way  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that computerised records are available  at  Istanbul
    airport  in  respect  of  persons  detained   and   released   in   the
    circumstances  of  the  present  Appellant.   There  is   no   evidence
    whatsoever that he has done anything whilst in the United Kingdom  that
    might attract the adverse attention of the Turkish Intelligence Agency.
    Using Mr McDowall's own words, there is nothing in  his  background  to
    suggest  that  the  Appellant  is  "strongly   suspected   of   knowing
    information that is wanted by the security  forces".   In  short,  this
    Appellant is simply not going to feature on a list of persons wanted by
    the security forces.

33.   A good deal of the remainder of Mr McDowall's Note is given  over  to
    describing alleged inefficiencies in the GBTS, as  a  result  of  which
    people whose cases featured on it tend to remain on  it.   Again,  that
    has no bearing upon somebody who, like the Appellant, would not  be  on
    the system in the first place.

34.   Likewise, it is impossible  to  put  any  significant  weight  on  Mr
    McDowall's statement at page 5 of the Note that "I have also  consulted
    Amnesty International and my impression is that it  believes  that  the
    GBT system is highly arbitrary. While genuine suspects might be on  the
    list, others might be omitted".  The reference to genuine  suspects  in
    the passage  is  imprecise  but  in  any  event  would  not  appear  to
    contradict what is recorded in the October 2003 CIPU  Report  regarding
    the data held on the GBTS (which includes those who are subject to  "in
    absentia" warrants).

35.   The following passage of the report supports what the Tribunal say at
    paragraphs 61 to 63 of O (Turkey):-

      "Furthermore, I understood it also to  be  AI's  distinct  impression
         that one might pass through immigration  control  and  a  computer
         check, only to be harassed  and  possibly  detained  and  tortured
         somewhere else in Turkey, usually one's  neighbourhood  of  former
         residence.  I also understood from AI that it is possible to  live
         for years without any problems and then for no apparent reason  to
         hit problems, for example after moving elsewhere".


36.   The only place in Mr McDowall's Note which comes  close  to  directly
    contradicting the information in the  CIPU  Report,  derived  from  the
    Turkish government,  is  at  page  8,  where  a  Hayri  Zarer  Korknaz,
    described as "ex-para-legal Baker & Co" is  quoted  as  asserting  that
    "Where the person detained is alleged to have been  politically  active
    or is otherwise perceived as an opponent of the State, it  is  practice
    for their detentions to be recorded on the GBT."

37.   No information regarding the background and qualifications  of  Hayri
    Zarer Korknaz is given, save that he appears to be associated with  the
    Kurdish Human Rights Project.

38.   As the  Tribunal  observed  in  O  (Turkey)  (paragraph  54),  it  is
    difficult to  see  what  motivation  there  might  be  in  the  Turkish
    government deliberately misleading the United Kingdom government as  to
    the question of whether detainees  who  are  not  arrested  or  charged
    feature on the GBTS system. In  any  event  the   category  of  persons
    "alleged to have been politically active or... otherwise  perceived  as
    an opponent of the state" is vague in the extreme.  In  particular,  it
    leaves open the criteria by which the Turkish authorities decide how  a
    person met the necessary requirements It does not by any  means  follow
    that a person who is briefly detained and then released without  charge
    will, as such, fall within that category.

39.   In short, the passage at the top of page  8  of  the  Note  casts  no
    significant doubt on the information in the October  2003  CIPU  Report
    regarding the nature of the GBTS system.  Nor does anything  under  the
    heading "Anecdotal evidence" towards the end of the Note.

40.   Accordingly, on the facts as found by the Adjudicator in the  present
    case, the Adjudicator was, we find, right to conclude that there was no
    reasonable likelihood of the Appellant, upon arrival in Istanbul, being
    transferred to the Anti-Terror Branch where there would be a real  risk
    of torture.

41.   That, however, is not the end  of  the  matter.   We  must  determine
    whether there is a real risk that the Appellant would face persecution,
    were he to return to his home area and, if  so,  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to some other part of Turkey.

42.   Given that the Adjudicator found the Appellant's three detentions  to
    be directly related to his participation in marches and gatherings, and
    given his rejection of the Appellant's assertion that the  police  have
    recently been looking for him, we do not consider that there is a  real
    risk of his coming to the adverse attention of the Turkish  authorities
    in his home area, should he  return  there.   The  position  might,  of
    course, be different if the Appellant  could  show  that  he  would  be
    reasonably likely to re-kindle any interest he may have had in the DHKP-
    C and attend gatherings which it had organised or at which  it  was  in
    some way represented.  There is, however, an  absence  of  evidence  to
    show that such a course of action on  the  part  of  the  Appellant  is
    likely.  He has, after all chosen to end all association with the DHKP-
    C, however tangential that may have been, by leaving Turkey.  There  is
    no evidence that, whilst in the United Kingdom, he has  taken  part  in
    any ex-patriate DHKP-C activities or even kept  in  touch  with  DHKP-C
    people in Turkey.

43.   Even if we are wrong about that matter, however,  the  Appellant  has
    available the option of internal relocation.

44.   In this  regard,  it  is  important  to  remind  ourselves  that  the
    Appellant is an ethnic Armenian.  Paragraph 6.161 of  the  CIPU  Report
    observes that "there are about 50,000 Armenians  in  Turkey,  including
    Gregorians, Protestants and Catholics, most of whom live in  Istanbul".
    There is no indication in the CIPU Report that Armenians are subject to
    discrimination.  Indeed, the Appellant  himself  (at  page  10  of  the
    Tribunal  bundle)  accepts  that  Armenian  rights  are  respected   in
    Istanbul.

45.   Mr Zaidi acknowledged that large numbers of  persons  (in  particular
    Kurds) currently live within Turkey, without having formally registered
    their presence.  He  submitted,  however,  that  the  Appellant,  as  a
    married man with a young child, would not be able to exist elsewhere in
    Turkey, on an unregistered basis, since failure to register would  mean
    that the family would have no access to health or  education  services.
    In this regard, he referred to a passage (page 72  of  the  Appellant's
    Adjudicator bundle) from
    Mr McDowall's "Asylum Seekers from Turkey II" report.

46.   Mr McDowall states that not carrying an ID card renders the  offender
    liable to three  days'  detention.   However,  obtaining  such  a  card
    involves  registering  with  the  neighbourhood  muhtar   or   headman.
    According to one muhtar "the ID office has a list of 'wanted'  persons,
    supplied by the police.  If a name comes up as 'wanted' the police  are
    informed.  Notification is also passed to the police or gendarmerie  at
    the place of birth.  It is not only the  officially  'wanted'  category
    that is liable to detention.  Many others are  detained  on  suspicion.
    Not being on the 'wanted' list in no way implies one is safe".

47.   A close reading of this part of Mr McDowall's report, however,  fails
    to disclose a real risk or reasonable likelihood that a person  in  the
    position of this Appellant, were he to register with a muhtar in,  say,
    Istanbul, would find himself subjected to serious ill-treatment by  the
    authorities.

48.   There is scant evidence as to what a muhtar is required to  do,  when
    faced with an application for registration.  In  particular,  there  is
    only some slight anecdotal evidence that the muhtar  would  notify  the
    police or gendarmerie at the place of birth  that  an  application  has
    been made.  Even if that happens, however, we are  back  to  the  point
    mentioned earlier: namely, it is unlikely that any actual  record  will
    exist  of  the  Appellant's  having  been  detained  by   the   police.
    Accordingly, any risk would seem to depend upon those local police  who
    might be consulted remembering having detained  the  Appellant  several
    years previously, and upon those police transmitting  that  information
    to the muhtar.  What the muhtar then  does  with  that  information  is
    itself speculative.

49.   In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that the Appellant  could  register
    himself and his family in Istanbul, without real risk of persecution or
    Article 3 ill-treatment.

50.   The appeal is dismissed.





                                                                    P R LANE
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT







