

                      AA (Shala - DP 3/96) Sudan [2004] UKIAT 00240




IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



Heard:      16.08.2004
Signed:     17.08.2004
Sent out:   27.08.2004


             NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM ACTS 1971-2002


Before:
                       John Freeman (a vice-president)
                       Charles Bennett and
                       Martyn Griffiths JP

Between:
                                      ,
                                  appellant
and:
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
                                 respondent


Mr T Cooray (counsel instructed by Noden & Co) for the appellant
Mr G Elks for the respondent

                             DECISION ON APPEAL

   This is an appeal from a  decision  of  an  adjudicator  (Dr  R  Keki?),
   sitting at Hatton Cross on 17 October 2003,  dismissing  an  asylum  and
   human rights appeal by a citizen of the Sudan. Permission to appeal  was
   given, on 23 February 2004, on the basis that "There is, conceivably, an
   Article 8 or a Shala point here ...", on the footing of the Home  Office
   having taken six years to make their decision, and the  claimant's  wife
   (now a British citizen) being from Ethiopia, rather than the Sudan.

2. It may not have been clear at that stage that Shala [2003] EWCA Civ  233
   was a decision on its own unusual set of facts, and not  intended  as  a
   general encouragement to the appellate authorities to  compensate  delay
   on the part of the Home Office  with  decisions  leading  to  indefinite
   leave to remain. That certainly has been clear  at  least  since  [2004]
   UKIAT 00024 M* (Croatia),  and  the  views  expressed  there  have  been
   confirmed by those of the Court  of  Appeal  themselves  in  Alihajdaraj
   [2004] EWCA Civ 1084. For the ratio in Shala to  operate  in  any  other
   case, the following elements must be present:

     a) undue delay by the Home Office; and
     b) a general policy at the date by which a decision  should  have  been
        made (usually a year after the application) such that some  form  of
        leave to remain would likely have been given then; and
     c) the loss of some opportunity which leave would have provided.


3. In this case there certainly was undue delay; and, if there had been  any
   general policy likely to lead the Home  Office  to  grant  leave  at  the
   proper time for a decision, then the appellant would have  been  able  to
   make a marriage application with  a  right  of  appeal  from  within  the
   jurisdiction, if refused; and not subject to refusal on an Amjad  Mahmood
   [2002] Imm AR 229 basis. So points a) and c) are satisfied, and the Shala
   point, if there is one, turns on b). The Home  Office  PF1  and  attached
   documents give a lamentably inadequate account of  the  history  of  this
   case. What actually happened, so far as relevant, was this:


   26.03.96 appellant effects clandestine entry into this country
   29.03.96 claims asylum
   29.08.00 marries
   20.09.00 refusal letter, citing non-compliance with procedure
   01.10.00 notice of illegal entry, with removal  directions:  appealed  by
   appellant
   16.11.00 Home Office withdraw non-compliance decision
   15.12.00 child born to appellant and wife
   23.07.01 marriage application
   05.09.02 refusal letter on merits of asylum and human rights case
   09.09.02 refusal letter on marriage application
   10.10.02 removal directions now under appeal


4. The letter of 9 September 2002 was neither included nor  referred  to  in
   the Home Office appeal bundle, which would have saved  a  great  deal  of
   public expense and confusion. We cannot understand why it  was  made  the
   subject of a separate letter in the first place, since the letter of  the
   5th had considered the appellant's marriage on an article  8  basis.  The
   letter  of  the  9th  did  consider  the  then  current  policy  on  such
   applications (which Mr Cooray had contended, till it came to  light,  had
   not been done): that was DP 3/96. No point was taken on  the  genuineness
   of the  marriage;  the  reasonableness  or  otherwise  of  expecting  the
   appellant's wife to join him in the Sudan was dealt with (whether rightly
   or wrongly we are not concerned with for the moment).

5. Only the second criterion in DP 3/96, according to  Mr  Cooray,  was  not
   considered properly at all. That requires the marriage  to  pre-date  the
   service of an enforcement notice by at least two years. Mr Cooray  argued
   that no effective enforcement notice was served till 10 October 2002, the
   date of the decision now under appeal; so the marriage had been over  two
   years before that.

6. We disagree. The point of DP 3/96  was  to  give  full  consideration  to
   marriage relationships which were already well settled before any  notice
   was given to the parties that one  of  them  might  have  to  leave  this
   country. Though the notice of 1 October 2000 was no longer  effective  to
   bring about the appellant's removal, once the Home Office had  recognized
   they had wrongly  refused  him  asylum  on  non-compliance  grounds,  and
   withdrawn that decision, it had most certainly given him notice  that  he
   was liable to removal. The Home Office were entitled to take the view, in
   their letter of 9 September 2002, that his marriage on 29 August 2000 did
   not pre-date such notice by at least two years.


7. That in our view means Shala cannot apply on our point b) [see 2  above]:
   there was no general policy in effect at  the  date  of  the  appellant's
   marriage application which should have resulted in its being granted; and
   Mr Cooray was unable to refer us to evidence of  any  such  policy  which
   would have been likely to result in his asylum claim leading to  a  grant
   of leave, if considered within a year of its making.

8. It follows that this appeal could only succeed on the basis that, on  the
   facts of the individual case, no reasonable  Home  Secretary  could  have
   pursued the appellant's removal: see 24 M* (referred to at 2).  The  only
   point put forward by Mr Cooray  on  that  was  that  his  wife  has  back
   trouble, and he is a help to her around the house. Admirable as such help
   would no doubt be, there is no medical evidence  of  the  degree  of  any
   disability of the wife's, and nothing to suggest that she and their child
   could not cope with ordinary life, if necessary with  the  help  of  this
   country's social services, while the appellant  was  back  in  the  Sudan
   getting a visa to rejoin them.

9. On the adjudicator's findings (quite rightly not appealed  by  Mr  Cooray
   on this point), there would be no real risk for the  appellant  in  doing
   that; and we see no reason in the light of Mahmood why he should  not  be
   expected to do so. Whether the Home Office actually insist on it is up to
   them

Appeal


                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman

                                      (approved for electronic distribution)
