
jh
|Heard at Field House       |        |PK ( Sri Lanka - risk on    |
|                           |        |return - exclusion clause)  |
|                           |        |Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00089|
|On 11 March 2004           |        |                            |
|Prepared 11 March 2004                                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Mr G H Getlevog                                                   |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation
For the appellant:           Miss T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:          Mr P Haywood, Counsel



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mrs S Brookfield, who dismissed the  respondent's  appeal
      on asylum grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds  against  the
      decision made on 17 October 2001 refusing to grant him leave to  enter
      following the refusal of his claim for asylum.  In this  determination
      the Tribunal will refer to  the  respondent  to  this  appeal  as  the
      applicant.

2.    The applicant left Sri Lanka by plane on  18  August  2001  travelling
      first to Hong Kong where he was refused entry.  He was  then  able  to
      travel on to the United Kingdom where he  claimed  asylum.   He  is  a
      Tamil who lived in Jaffna.  His family have  strong  connections  with
      the LTTE.  His older brother was granted asylum in Norway in 1989  and
      his other brother refugee status in the United Kingdom on  5  February
      2000.  His brother-in-law has also been recognised as a refugee in the
      United Kingdom. He has cousins who are senior members  of  the  LTTE's
      political and civil wings and an uncle was a  founder  member  of  the
      LTTE who went missing in 1999.

3.    It was the applicant's claim that he joined the LTTE in 1994  becoming
      a full time member  of  the  military  wing  in  1995.   He  witnessed
      atrocities committed by the Sri Lankan authorities and  then  took  up
      arms against them after being in training for over twelve months.   He
      took part in the Mulliatilivu battle and  other  attacks  on  the  Sri
      Lankan forces.  In November 2000  he  was  being  taken  to  India  to
      recover from injuries.  His boat was intercepted.  He was arrested and
      identified as an LTTE member.  He was beaten  and  tortured  and  then
      made to sign a statement in Sinhala.  He was released when  his  uncle
      paid a bribe on 23 July 2001.  He was able to leave Sri  Lanka  on  18
      August 2001.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted that the applicant had willingly  joined  the
      LTTE and had been involved in combat as he described.  His  left  foot
      had been injured during a battle at Elephant Pass and he  spent  three
      months in hospital when it was decided that  he  should  be  taken  to
      India for further treatment.  Medical evidence was produced to confirm
      that his left leg was shortened with scarring to the front  and  outer
      surfaces of the lower leg.  His injuries are consistent with  shrapnel
      injury and the scarring  on  the  back  of  the  leg  consistent  with
      surgical  intervention  for  orthopaedic  purposes.   The  Adjudicator
      accepted that the applicant was detained on the ship carrying  him  to
      India.  He was ill-treated whilst in detention.

5.    On the basis that the  applicant  had  been  a  willing  member  of  a
      terrorist group in Sri Lanka and had been responsible for  the  deaths
      of a number of wounded soldiers the  Adjudicator  found  that  it  was
      reasonably likely that he had committed a crime against peace,  a  war
      crime or a crime against humanity and it followed that the  provisions
      of the 1951 Convention did not apply to him.

6.    However, she went on to consider whether there would be  a  real  risk
      of a breach of Article 3.  There was a computerised database of wanted
      persons in Sri Lanka including persons  of  interest  in  relation  to
      suspected LTTE links.  No amnesty had been declared for members of the
      LTTE.  The Adjudicator was satisfied that there was a real risk of ill-
      treatment on return.  Although checks on returnees at Colombo  airport
      had eased with many failed asylum seekers being  waved  through  since
      December 2001, the Adjudicator was not persuaded that  this  applicant
      with his lack of identity, obvious injuries and known connections with
      the LTTE would simply be waved through at the airport.   He  would  be
      regarded as a terrorist and there was a real risk  that  he  would  be
      mistreated by the authorities because of his  LTTE  connections.   The
      appeal was therefore allowed under Article 3 and also under Article  8
      because the Adjudicator was satisfied that, because of the applicant's
      mental health problems and psychiatric condition,  any  removal  would
      not be proportionate to a legitimate aim at the present time.

7.    In the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal it is  argued  that  the
      Adjudicator erred when making her findings on the issue of whether the
      applicant would still be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities due
      to his previous involvement with the LTTE and the fact that  he  would
      be detained and ill-treated due to his lack  of  identification.   She
      had failed to deal with the  case  of  Tharmakulaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
      03444 which dealt with the inferences to  be  drawn  from  release  on
      payment of a bribe.  She had failed to state why the  applicant  would
      be mistreated and how this mistreatment would reach the minimum  level
      of severity required for a breach of Article 3.   She  had  failed  to
      indicate why he would be of interest  in  the  light  of  the  current
      ceasefire.  The grounds also challenged the findings under Article  8.
      By letter dated 7 July 2003 the  applicant  submitted  a  respondent's
      notice.  It is argued that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  apply  the
      exclusion provisions.  She failed to give the parties  an  opportunity
      of addressing this issue and in any event her conclusions were against
      T v Secretary of State [1996] 2 All ER 865 as  his  actions  were  not
      aimed at non-combatants and he was entitled to combatant status.

8.    At the hearing before  the  Tribunal  Miss  Hart  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had failed to give proper weight to the ceasefire  and  to
      the fact that no amnesty had been declared.  On his  own  account  the
      applicant had been released from detention by payment of a bribe.   He
      would hardly have been released if he had been of any adverse interest
      to the authorities or was suspected of being  an  LTTE  fighter.   The
      Adjudicator had attached undue weight  to  the  lack  of  an  identity
      document. The applicant would not  be  returning  undocumented.   Even
      though he had been a willing member of the LTTE, there was  no  reason
      to believe that he would  now  be  of  any  further  interest  to  the
      authorities.

9.    Mr Haywood submitted that the Adjudicator was entitled to conclude  on
      the evidence before her that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3.  The applicant had a high profile.  He was from
      a family well-known for its links with the LTTE.  He had not just been
      a member or supporter but a  fighter.   The  fact  that  he  had  been
      released on payment of a bribe did not without more indicate  that  he
      would not be of interest to the authorities on  return.  The  risk  of
      further ill-treatment had not been eliminated  by  the  ceasefire  and
      peace agreement.  Mr Haywood referred the Tribunal to the report of Dr
      Goode and to the views of the UNHCR  that  each  case  must  still  be
      looked at in the light of the applicant's own profile and background.

10.   Both Mr Haywood and Miss Hart agreed that  the  Adjudicator  had  been
      wrong to apply the exclusion clauses on the particular facts  of  this
      appeal.  The Adjudicator relied on the answer given to question 14  of
      his interview when the applicant was asked how  many  members  of  the
      army did he think he had killed He replied, about eight  soldiers  and
      most of them were injured.  This answer must be read in  context.   It
      followed a question asking whether the  applicant  had  been  actively
      involved in the battles he had just described. There is no  basis  for
      inferring that the applicant was admitting to the unlawful killing  of
      wounded soldiers. The Tribunal are not satisfied that the  applicant's
      participation and conduct fighting for the LTTE bring him  within  the
      exclusion clauses nor that his participation in this conflict amounted
      to a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against  humanity  as
      defined in international instruments such as the 1945 London Agreement
      and Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

11.   Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention provides  that  the  provision
      of the Convention shall not apply to any person with respect  to  whom
      there are serious reasons for considering  that  he  has  committed  a
      crime against peace, a war crime, or  a  crime  against  humanity,  as
      defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in
      respect of such crimes.  The Tribunal in Amberber  (00/TH/01570)  made
      it clear that participation in a war of aggression would  not  without
      more bring a claimant within this  clause.   We  were  referred  to  a
      report prepared by Karen Parker entitled "On the Legal Status  of  the
      War in Sri Lanka and the Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Eelam".   This
      report argues that as there has been a war in Sri  Lanka  between  the
      government forces and the LTTE, the LTTE have combatant status and the
      right to engage in combat.  It was the applicant's admission  that  he
      had killed about eight Sri Lankan army soldiers in battle not that  he
      had unlawfully killed wounded soldiers.  The Tribunal is not satisfied
      on this basis that he is  disqualified  from  the  protection  of  the
      Convention under Article 1F(a).  His participation in the war does not
      give rise to serious reasons for considering  that  he  has  committed
      either a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity.
       The cross-appeal refers to T.  The Adjudicator did not find that  the
      applicant was excluded by Article 1(f)(b) which was considered  in  T.
      The applicant's activities were carried out in the  course  of  combat
      and cannot be categorised as serious non-political crimes.

12.   The Tribunal now turn to the Secretary of State's appeal  against  the
      decision to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds.   Ground  2  argues
      that the Adjudicator erred in her findings of fact that the  applicant
      would still be of interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  because  of
      his previous involvement with the LTTE and that he would  be  detained
      and mistreated on his return due to his lack of  identification.   The
      Tribunal agrees that  his  lack  of  identification  is  a  factor  of
      relatively limited importance but the applicant's previous involvement
      with the LTTE is more significant.  There is clear evidence  that  the
      Sri Lankan authorities  remain  interested  in  those  who  have  been
      involved with the LTTE.  The applicant's involvement  was  at  a  high
      level and he is from a family with a high political profile.  In these
      circumstances the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to come to the view that the applicant would be of continuing
      to the authorities on return.

13.   It is also submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  give  proper
      weight to the fact that the applicant  was  previously  released  from
      detention on  payment  of  a  bribe.   It  is  argued  that  in  these
      circumstances he would be of no further interest to  the  authorities.
      The Adjudicator referred to the determination in  Tharmakulaseelan  in
      paragraph 11(i) of her determination but she has not dealt with it  at
      any great length if at all in her reasoning.   However,  it  is  clear
      that she has taken into  account  the  fact  that  the  applicant  was
      released on payment of a bribe.  It was for her to assess in the light
      of all the evidence whether this indicated that he would now be of  no
      further interest to the authorities.   Her finding that  there  was  a
      real risk of detention on return was properly open to her.

14.   It is also submitted that the Adjudicator has failed  to  give  proper
      weight to the peace agreement.  The Adjudicator has referred  to  this
      in paragraph 15(vii) of  her  determination.   She  has  balanced  the
      information in the CIPU report with the report from Dr Goode about the
      computerised database of wanted persons including  those  of  interest
      with suspected LTTE links.  In our view there is no proper basis for a
      challenge to the Adjudicator's assessment of risk.

15.   In  summary  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to conclude that there was a real risk  that  this  applicant
      might be detained and ill-treated on return.   In  the  light  of  his
      profile and background her findings are properly  sustainable  on  the
      evidence.  This is a case where subject to the exclusion clauses,  the
      refugee claim stands or falls with the claim under Article 3.   As  it
      is now accepted that the applicant should not  be  excluded  from  the
      Refugee Convention, his claim should succeed under that Convention  as
      well as the Human Rights Convention.  The  applicant's  appeal  should
      have been allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

16.   In these circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.
      The cross-appeal is allowed and the Adjudicator's determination varied
      so that the applicant's appeal is allowed on  both  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.



                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President



