
  | |
|                            |        |AU (Adjournment - variation |
|                            |        |of grounds - Bihari)        |
|                            |        |Bangladesh [2004] UKIAT     |
|                            |        |00121                       |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|Heard at Field House                                               |
|On 16 April 2004                                                   |
|Prepared on 16 April 2004   |        |Date determination notified |
|                            |        |              21 May 2004   |
|                            |        |Renotified:                 |
|                            |Before: |                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr H J E Latter - Vice President                                   |
|Mr M E A Innes                                                     |
|Mr D R Bremmer JP                                                  |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                            |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                            |        |                            |
|                            |and     |                            |
|                            |        |                            |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                     |
|                                                                   |
|                            |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation
For the appellant:                 Miss J Rahman, Solicitor
For the respondent:             Mr A Mullin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.          The  appellant,  a  Bihari  who  lived  in   Bangladesh   before
      travelling to the United Kingdom, appeals against the determination of
      an Adjudicator, Mrs C M Phillips, who dismissed  his  appeal  on  both
      asylum and human rights  grounds  against  the  decision  made  on  24
      October 2002 giving directions for his removal following  the  refusal
      of his claim for asylum.

2.         There is no record of the appellant's date and  method  of  entry
      into the United Kingdom.  He applied for asylum on 12  December  2000.
      He was requested to complete and return a statement of  evidence  form
      but failed to do so.  He also failed to attend an interview on 11 July
      2001.  In these circumstances his application was  dismissed  on  non-
      compliance grounds.

3.         He appealed against this determination.  The  procedural  history
      is set out in paragraphs 7-10 of the Adjudicator's determination.   At
      the hearing before her the appellant was  unrepresented  but  attended
      with two friends in support.  He requested an  adjournment  to  obtain
      legal representation.  His application was refused and the Adjudicator
      proceeded to hear the appeal.

4.         In his oral evidence the appellant gave his  last  address  as  a
      refugee camp in Chittagong.  He had travelled from Bangladesh by  ship
      to France and then by lorry to the United Kingdom.  He  had  left  his
      wife, children and father in Bangladesh.  Since the age of 20  he  had
      been involved with  promoting  the  rights  of  Bihari  refugees  from
      Pakistan.  He worked openly and was beaten on a number of occasions by
      the police and by Bangladeshi people.  An arrest warrant was issued in
      his name because he was a Bihari refugee who was  politically  active.
      He had to leave or be arrested.  He feared both the followers  of  the
      Awami League and the police.  He hid in various different camps before
      he came to the United Kingdom.  He  said  that  his  father  had  been
      detained a few times because  the  authorities  could  not  find  him.
      People from the refugee camp bailed his father out.  He  was  involved
      with the Freedom Party which promoted the rights of Bihari refugees.

5.         He had lived in the refugee  camp  since  independence.   He  was
      hiding with the Freedom Party from the  end  of  1991  until  he  left
      Bangladesh on either 19 or 29 May 2000.  He had been attacked for  the
      first time in February 1990 or 1991.  There had been a  second  attack
      in June 1996.  The police were looking for him as  they  said  he  had
      attacked them when in truth they had attacked him.  From 1991 to  1996
      he came to the refugee camp at  night  to  visit  his  wife  and  then
      returned to the Freedom Party.  He discovered that they were  throwing
      bombs at the general public.  He was asked to make bombs at the end of
      1998 but he did not do that.  He could not leave earlier as he did not
      have an opportunity of doing so.   He  feared  return  as  he  had  no
      nationality and was staying as a refugee in a camp.  If found he would
      be arrested and killed or sent to prison for life.

6.         In his submissions he referred to  an  arrest  warrant.   He  had
      written to the camp asking for  documents  including  a  copy  of  the
      warrant.  This was not sent although other documents were.

7.         The Adjudicator rejected arguments that the appellant  should  be
      excluded from the Convention under the provisions of either Article 1D
      or E.  She summarised the basis of his fear of future  persecution  as
      being based on the attacks on him in 1990/91 and 1996,  harassment  by
      the police and general public, his  refusal  to  make  bombs  for  the
      Freedom Party and the existence of an arrest  warrant.  The  appellant
      did not know what the warrant was about. He had not been  charged  but
      he thought it was because of his political  involvement  in  promoting
      the rights of the Bihari people.  The police had been looking for  him
      since 1996.

8.          The  Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
      suffered past  persecution  in  Bangladesh.  She  described  his  oral
      evidence as vague  and  somewhat  implausible.   His  account  of  the
      activities of the Freedom Party was not  supported  by  the  objective
      evidence.  She did not accept that he  had  been  in  hiding  for  any
      extended period from about the end of 1991 until  his  departure  from
      Bangladesh in May 2000 nor that he was wanted by the  police  for  any
      extended period of time.  If he had been wanted she did not accept  he
      would have been able to avoid arrest during the period  from  1996  to
      2000.  She found his evidence about the warrant to be  so  vague  that
      his fear was based on speculation. Due to the  implausibility  of  his
      account that the police had been unsuccessfully looking for him  since
      1996, she did not accept that there was currently a  warrant  for  his
      arrest.  She referred to paragraph 56  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook  which
      stated that persecution must be distinguished from  punishment  for  a
      common law offence.  She was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
      discharged the onus of proof upon  him  to  show  that  any  potential
      prosecution  for  bomb-throwing  resulted  from   the   discriminatory
      application of the law or that it was being  used  as  a  vehicle  for
      persecution on political grounds.  She was not  satisfied  that  there
      was any credible evidence that the  appellant  was  currently  of  any
      interest  to  the  state  authorities  or  to  non-state   agents   in
      Bangladesh.  The appeal was dismissed on both asylum and human  rights
      grounds.

9.          In  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is  argued  firstly  that  the
      Adjudicator was  wrong  not  to  grant  an  adjournment  and  secondly
      reliance is placed on an affidavit from the appellant's  father  which
      produced what was said to be the translation of  a  warrant  from  the
      Office of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in Chittagong.

10.       The Vice  President  refused  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision to refuse an adjournment.  He commented that the  Adjudicator
      had given the most careful consideration to the submissions  which  he
      heard and had come to  a  conclusion  which  was  not  susceptible  to
      challenge.  Permission was granted so that the Tribunal could consider
      the documentary evidence about the  warrant.   He  directed  that  the
      document should be made available  to  the  Home  Office  and  to  the
      Tribunal so that its  validity  and  implications  could  properly  be
      assessed.

11.       At the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  Miss  Rahman  applied  for
      permission to vary her grounds of appeal to be allowed  to  argue  the
      issue of whether the Adjudicator was wrong to refuse  an  adjournment.
      She submitted that if a lawyer had been present the appeal would  have
      been properly presented.  The Adjudicator had failed to  take  account
      of relevant documents such as the affidavit and  the  arrest  warrant,
      although Miss Rahman did concede that those documents had not in  fact
      been in front of the Adjudicator.  It was clear from the Adjudicator's
      record of proceedings that the appellant had been distressed at points
      during the hearing.  The original documents were with Gray &  Co  (see
      paragraph 17).  There was now an inquiry by the Scottish Law  Society.
      She had not been able  to  obtain  the  original  documents.  She  had
      received a telephone call from a solicitor at Blair  Cadell  who  were
      handling the intervention which she said confirmed that the  files  at
      Gray & Co were in a state of muddle and confusion.

12.       Miss Rahman explained that the appellant had instructed Gray &  Co
      after Messrs Drummond Miller  had  formally  withdrawn  following  the
      refusal  of  an  application  for   an   adjournment.    The   current
      representatives had made attempts to obtain  papers  from  Mr  Michael
      Gray but they were unclear whether the  original  documents  could  be
      obtained:  see the explanatory statement at A13.

13.       Mr Mullin objected to the application to vary  the  grounds.   The
      Adjudicator's decision to refuse an adjournment was properly  open  to
      her.  The grounds had no real prospect of success.

14.       A decision whether to grant an adjournment is  a  matter  for  the
      Adjudicator's discretion  to  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  the
      relevant provisions of the Procedure Rules.  It is provided by Rule 40
      that an Adjudicator must not adjourn a hearing on the application of a
      party unless satisfied that the appeal or application cannot otherwise
      be justly determined.  The Adjudicator  has  set  out  the  background
      leading to the adjournment  application  in  paragraphs  7-14  of  her
      determination.  On 22 October 2002 the notice of first hearing  on  13
      November 2002 and full hearing on 4 December  2002  was  sent  to  the
      appellant and her then  solicitors,  Guild  &  Guild.   At  the  first
      hearing it was noted that Guild & Guild  were  no  longer  acting  and
      Drummond Miller were asked to confirm whether they were acting.  On 26
      November 2002  a  further  notice  of  hearing  was  served  upon  the
      appellant and his then representatives Skene Edwards.  On 27  November
      2002 Skene Edwards asked for  an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  on  4
      December 2002.  This was granted and a notice of full hearing  for  16
      January 2003 was issued.  On 10 December 2002  Skene  Edwards  advised
      that they were no longer acting for the appellant and had advised  him
      to seek alternative solicitors.

15.        On  20  December  2002  Drummond  Miller  wrote   requesting   an
      adjournment of the hearing  on  16  January  2003  as  they  had  only
      recently taken over as agents and were not in a position  to  proceed.
      That application was refused  by  the  Regional  Adjudicator  for  the
      reasons set out in paragraph 7 of the determination.   A  request  for
      that decision to be re-considered was made but the decision to  refuse
      an adjournment  was  upheld.   The  request  was  renewed  before  the
      Adjudicator on 16 January 2003.  In the light of the past  history  of
      the proceedings the Adjudicator took  the  view  that  an  adjournment
      would not necessarily lead to the appellant being represented  at  any
      future hearing.  Drummond Miller  had  indicated  that  they  were  no
      longer acting.  The appellant had brought  documents  to  the  hearing
      with  him.   The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  proceeding  in   these
      circumstances would not prevent the just disposal of the appeal.

16.       It is argued in the grounds that the Adjudicator erred in  failing
      to  determine  the  reason  for  the  appellant  being  without  legal
      representation and penalised him by not granting the adjournment.   It
      is argued  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  take  note  of  the
      disclosure of a confidential letter from Skene Edwards  advising  that
      in their view there were no prospects of success in the appeal.   That
      letter should not  have  been  placed  before  the  Adjudicator.   The
      appellant had suffered prejudice.

17.       When refusing permission, the  Vice  President  clearly  took  the
      view that this ground had no real prospect of success.  We agree  with
      that decision.  In our judgment the Adjudicator has taken all relevant
      matters into account and has reached a decision properly open  to  her
      on this issue.  There is no reason to believe that she has given undue
      weight to the letter from Skene Edwards of 10 December  2002.   It  is
      clear from reading the determination that  the  Adjudicator  gave  the
      appellant every opportunity of putting his case. She  kept  a  careful
      record of proceedings.  When the appellant was distressed she  offered
      him a break and there was a short adjournment of 20 minutes.  Reliance
      is now placed on an affidavit and an arrest warrant a copy of which is
      before the Tribunal.  The original is said to be in files  at  Gray  &
      Co.   There  has  been  ample  opportunity  to  obtain  the  original:
      permission to appeal was granted in May 2003.  There is no  indication
      how long it will take to retrieve the original document from Gray & Co
      even assuming it can be located. The Tribunal reached no conclusion on
      the allegations made against Gray & Co, its practitioners or Mr  Gray;
      the allegations as far as could be seen, had not been put to  them  as
      they should have been and they have not been able to respond so as  to
      deny them if untrue.  The Tribunal has subsequently received a  letter
      from the  appellant's  representatives  making  it  clear  that  their
      submissions did not refer to the Glasgow firm of Gray & Co.

18.       Rule  20(2)  of  the  Procedure  Rules  provides  that  where  the
      Tribunal has refused permission to appeal on any ground  it  must  not
      grant permission to vary the grounds of appeal to include that  ground
      unless it is satisfied that,  because  of  special  circumstances,  it
      would be unjust not to allow  the  variation.   The  Tribunal  is  not
      satisfied that there are any such special  circumstances  or  that  it
      would be unjust not to allow the variation.

19.       Miss Rahman went on to address the Tribunal on the  issue  of  the
      arrest warrant.  She submitted that this was a genuine  document.   It
      indicated that in August 1992  an  accusation  was  made  against  the
      appellant under the Ammunition Act.  Various attempts had been made to
      serve the warrant but it had always been recorded that  the  appellant
      with the co-accused had absconded.  If he returned to Bangladesh there
      was a real risk that he would be arrested, detained and put on  trial.
      Miss Rahman asserted that there was a risk that he would  be  tortured
      when in custody.  He would not have enough money to obtain  bail.   He
      would not receive a fair trial because he was a Bihari and would  have
      very few rights in Bangladesh.

20.      Mr Mullin submitted that there was no adequate  explanation  as  to
      what the document was.  The document relied on did not appear to be  a
      warrant but an information leading to the issue of  a  warrant.  There
      was no evidence to suggest that the appellant would not get bail  even
      if he was arrested nor that he would not receive a fair  trial  before
      the courts in Bangladesh.

21.       The Tribunal asked Miss Rahman whether there was  any  information
      about how this document came into the possession  of  the  appellant's
      father.  She took instructions and the  Tribunal  was  told  that  the
      document had been served on his father at his  home address.   He  had
      then obtained a translation from a solicitor.

22.       The first issue for the Tribunal to consider is whether  there  is
      a reasonable degree of likelihood that this is a genuine document.  Mr
      Mullin put in evidence a letter from the British  High  Commission  in
      Dhaka  dated  1  December  2003  which  confirms   that   forged   and
      fraudulently obtained documents are readily  available  in  Bangladesh
      and  are  frequently  submitted  in   support   of   entry   clearance
      applications.  It records that the most successful  way  of  verifying
      documents is by visiting the establishment issuing them but  this  has
      met with mixed results.  Where there are local manual  records  as  at
      police stations assistance is generally given and the authenticity  of
      documents  can  be   confirmed.    Unfortunately,   given   the   poor
      infrastructure in Bangladesh coupled  with  the  climatic  conditions,
      many locations are inaccessible for much of the year  and  even  short
      journeys to make enquires in  and  around  Dhaka  can  be  very  time-
      consuming and labour-intensive.  The High Commission does not have the
      resources to undertake such enquiries.

23.       In  any  event  the  High  Commission  have  not  been  given  the
      opportunity of considering the authenticity  of  this  document.   The
      bundle of documents was only served  on  the  respondent  on  the  day
      before the hearing and then only photocopies.  The only explanation as
      to how this document came  into  the  possession  of  the  appellant's
      father is that it was served upon him.  It is difficult to  think  why
      the authorities should now take this course of action bearing in  mind
      that the document is dated  25  June  1992.   There  are  six  monthly
      endorsements on the document that the warrant has  not  been  returned
      and that the accused have absconded.  The final endorsement is dated 5
      July 2001 confirming that the police have not been able to arrest  the
      accused and the Police Commissioner is asked to implement the  warrant
      for arrest and to send a message to border  security  to  prevent  him
      leaving.  There is nothing to explain why that action  was  not  taken
      earlier than July 2001.

24.       On the basis of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  we  are  not
      satisfied that there is any reasonable degree of likelihood that  this
      is a genuine document evidencing that the appellant is still wanted by
      the authorities.

25.       However,  even  if  the  document  is  genuine  and  there  is  an
      outstanding arrest warrant, the  appellant  fails  to  show  that  any
      subsequent detention and trial would lead to persecution or  would  be
      motivated for a Convention reason.

26.       The Tribunal has been referred to  the  CIPU  Country  Report  for
      Bangladesh October 2003.  This records at paragraph 5.34 that there is
      a system of bail for criminal offences and bail  is  granted  commonly
      for both violent and non-violent crimes.  The lower courts remain part
      of the executive and are subject  to  its  influence  but  the  higher
      levels of the judiciary display a significant degree  of  independence
      and often rule against the government:  paragraph 5.13.  Trials are in
      public and  the  law  provides  the  accused  with  the  right  to  be
      represented by  counsel,  to  review  prosecution  material,  to  call
      witnesses and to appeal against verdicts:  paragraph 5.16.  The report
      also records that there is widespread police corruption  and  lack  of
      discipline and that police  abuses  go  unpunished.   There  are  also
      reports of politically motivated detentions.  The position of  Biharis
      is considered in paragraphs 6.55-64.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
      that a Bihari is less likely to receive a fair hearing than any  other
      citizen of Bangladesh.  Looking  at  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  the
      Tribunal is not satisfied that there is any basis for interfering with
      the Adjudicator's findings that any prosecution would not be motivated
      for a Convention reason.

27.       In summary, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the  documents  now
      produced are genuine or show that the authorities of  Bangladesh  have
      any adverse interest in the appellant.  Even if they are  genuine  and
      there is a risk of prosecution, there is no real risk  of  persecution
      for a Convention reason or treatment contrary to Article 3.  There  is
      no proper basis for a finding that the appellant would not  receive  a
      fair trial.

28.       In these circumstances this appeal is dismissed.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President

