
ar

TB (Blood Feuds - Relevant Risk Factors)  Albania  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00158



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of Hearing: 8 June 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                21 June 2004

                                   Before:

                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)
                              Mr A J Cragg CMG
                              Mr C J Hodgkinson





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant    : Ms J. Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Messrs  Clore  &
Co. Solicitors
For the respondent : Ms T. Hart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a citizen of Albania, appeals with  permission  against
      the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr A.J. Olson, sitting at  Hatton
      Cross, in which he dismissed on asylum and human  rights  grounds  the
      appellant's appeal  against the decision of  the  respondent  to  give
      directions for the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

   2. The appellant's account was essentially as follows. He and his  family
      lived in Tirana, Albania, having gone to that city in  1982  from  the
      north east of the country.  In December 2002 the appellant's   brother
      was involved in an accident between his vehicle  and  a  motorcyclist.
      The motorcyclist later died in hospital.  The appellant and his family
      arrived at the hospital to find the family of the  motorcyclist  in  a
      distressed state.  They abused the  appellant's  family,  saying  that
      they would never be forgiven for  what  had  happened.  The  appellant
      inferred that a 'blood feud was started  at  this  point'  (statement:
      B6).


3.    After leaving the hospital, the appellant's family decided  that  they
      would ask one of their neighbours to intervene with the motorcyclist's
      family.  This neighbour called 'Zymer' went with two  other  men  from
      the community to speak to the victim's family.

4.    That same night, the appellant said that his  brother  'left  home.  I
      think that the situation was too much for him and he was very  afraid.
      He did not tell anyone that he was leaving. I have no  idea  where  my
      brother is now.'

5.    The neighbour who went to the other family was  told  that  they  were
      intent on getting revenge. Having returned, the  neighbour  said  that
      the funeral of the motorcyclist would be held on 30 December 2002  and
      the appellant's family asked the neighbour to see whether it would  be
      possible for them  to  attend  the  funeral  in  order  to  pay  their
      respects. The neighbour did so but  replied  that  the  motorcyclist's
      family did not want any Catholics at the funeral. The appellant in his
      statement says that 'I am not sure how they found out that  my  family
      were Catholic'.

6.    Earlier in his statement (B5) the appellant had described how  in  the
      area of Tirana where they lived

             'My family were subjected to harassment and discrimination, on
             account of our religion. Tirana is not a big town  really  and
             in our area I would say that everyone knew that my family  was
             Catholic. I would estimate that over 60% of the population  in
             the area where we lived were Muslims.  We were often  verbally
             abused, especially if we  were  spotted  going  to  church  or
             buying pork, for example. I have been called a "stupid, idiot,
             Catholic" and "dirty Catholic scum" on many occasions. I  have
             never been seriously physically abused but I have been slapped
             around the face and had stones thrown at me".

7.    On 10 January 2003  the  appellant  said  that  he  left  home  to  go
      shopping and 'heard the voices of two men approach  him  from  behind.
      They called him by his name, Tonin, and said that his life was gong to
      end, referring to him as 'dirty Catholic scum'. The appellant hid in a
      bunker and heard gunshots aimed at the field nearby.  Having  remained
      in a bunker for about an hour he left  and  went  home.  He  told  his
      family what had happened. Thereafter he stayed in his house  for  fear
      of being killed.' (determination, paragraph 2.7).

8.    At paragraph 2.8 of the determination, the Adjudicator  records  that,
      on the following day, the appellant said his father had  gone  to  the
      police in order to seek assistance.  The police checked the  file  and
      said that the motorcyclist's family had 'not reported the accident and
      were not pressing official charges'. The  appellant  appears  to  have
      assumed that the family had 'taken the law into their own hands'.  The
      appellant claimed that the police had told his father that  there  was
      nothing the police could do in a situation  like  this  and  that  the
      police were afraid for their own lives because  of  the  rise  in  the
      numbers of blood feuds.

9.    At paragraph 2.9, the Adjudicator noted that  the  appellant's  family
      did not think that any reconciliation organisation  could  help  them.
      There was then a further incident on 18 January 'when the  appellant's
      wife noticed a car parked outside the home with some men  in  it'.  At
      this point the appellant sought  the  assistance  of  his  father  who
      arranged for the appellant to travel to the United Kingdom.

10.   After arriving in the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  said  that  he
      walked around for two or three hours before stopping a passer  by  and
      explaining that he was from Albania and wanted to seek  asylum.   That
      person apparently took him to Croydon on the train and showed him  the
      way to the Home Office where he made his claim (2.11).

11.   The Adjudicator, at paragraph 6.15, considered  that  the  appellant's
      story of what happened to him after he arrived in the  United  Kingdom
      was 'totally lacking in credibility'. As  a  result,  the  Adjudicator
      'concluded that the appellant's credibility was seriously undermined'.

12.   That said, however, it is apparent from paragraphs 6.1 to 6.14 of  the
      determination that the Adjudicator accepted to  the  requisite,  lower
      standard of proof that the appellant's brother had been involved in  a
      road accident as a result of which a motorcyclist had died,  that  the
      bunker  incident  of  10  January  2003  had  occurred  and  that  the
      appellant's wife had seen people sitting in a car outside the house on
      18 January 2003.  The Adjudicator, however, did not  accept  that  the
      appellant was the object of an Albanian blood feud (paragraph 6.5) but
      found that, even if he was,  the  appellant  could  safely  return  to
      Albania  without  the  other  family  becoming  aware  of  his  return
      (paragraph 6.14).

13.   The grounds of appeal contend that the Adjudicator  was  not  entitled
      to find that a blood feud  had  not  arisen  between  the  appellant's
      family and the family of the deceased motorcyclist.   It  is  asserted
      that the Adjudicator, in reaching his conclusion on  this  matter  (at
      paragraphs 6.5 to 6.8 of the determination) failed to have  regard  to
      the  appellant's  account,  which  described  the  attitude   of   the
      motorcyclist's family towards the appellant's family, when  both  were
      present  at  the  hospital,   that  they  would  never   forgive   the
      appellant's family for what they had done  and  that  they  wanted  to
      avenge the death of the motorcyclist.

14.    The  grounds  also  contend  that  during  cross-examination  of  the
      appellant, he said that  at  least  one  of  the  men  who  supposedly
      followed him on 10 January 2003, was a member  of  the  motorcyclist's
      family '100% because they call me by my name and I  do  not  have  any
      quarrel with anyone else who will go to such lengths'.

15.   The nature of Albanian blood feuds is set out at paragraphs  6.130  to
      6.136 of the April 2004 CIPU Report on Albania.  The  blood  feud  has
      its origins in  customary  practices  of  mediaeval  or  even  earlier
      origin.  The rules of  the  blood  feud  were  formalised  during  the
      fifteenth century and have become known as the Kanun or  'the  law  of
      Lek'.  The institution of the blood  feud  is  most  apparent  in  the
      mountain regions of northern Albania (6.133) and 'the vast majority of
      contemporary feuds were the result of disputes  over  land  and  water
      rights'  (6.132).  According  to  paragraph  6.135,  the   Kanun   has
      traditionally served 'as the foundation of social behaviour and  self-
      government for the clans of  northern  Albania.   In  particular,  the
      Kanun regulates killings in order to stop the  total  annihilation  of
      families.'  Having  re-emerged  as  a  significant  social  phenomenon
      following the fall of the Communist regime in Albania, it can be  seen
      from the table set out in paragraph 6.143 that blood feuds appeared to
      reach their height during the late 1990s.  Since that time,  at  least
      according to US State Department figures, there has been a falling off
      in the number of deaths due to blood feuds.  In  2003,  the  US  State
      Department records there were more than fourteen killings, although it
      has to be said that the World Food  Programme  (sic)  is  recorded  as
      stating that there were a thousand such deaths.

16.   One of the criticisms levelled at the Adjudicator's  determination  by
      the appellant is that the Adjudicator wrongly relied upon the Tribunal
      determination in Koci [2002] UKIAT 08006 and, in  particular,  in  the
      finding of the Tribunal that  the  Albanian  authorities  were  taking
      effective steps to deal with blood feuds.

17.   Before this Tribunal, Ms  Fisher  relied  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal
      judgments in Koci [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1507,  in  which  the  Tribunal's
      determination was overturned.

18.   The Court of Appeal's basic criticism of  the  Tribunal  in  Koci  was
      that  it  had  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the   individual
      circumstances of the appellant, in determining  risk  on  return.   At
      paragraph 31 of the judgments Keene LJ set out the account given by Mr
      Koci:

             'The unchallenged evidence was that his father had killed  two
             members of the Shtefni family  as  recently  as  August  2001.
             This, therefore, was not ancient history.   Moreover,  it  had
             happened, as Mr  Gill  emphasises,  in  public,  so  that  the
             killing of the members of the Shtefni family was obvious to  a
             number of others.  When the appellant's  father  emerged  from
             hiding in September that year he was shot and killed. When the
             appellant emerged from hiding in the capital, Tirana,  he  was
             immediately shot at. These facts  give  this  case  particular
             force, and yet there is no reference  to  them  in  the  IAT's
             decision and no attempt  to  consider  whether,  even  if  the
             Tribunal  were  right  about  the  general  situation  as   to
             effective protection from blood  feuds,  this  appellant  fell
             within that general situation.'

19.   Paragraph 35  is worth quoting in full:

           '35.   I do emphasise that every case has to  be  considered  on
                 its merits. I do not for  one  moment  suggest  that  every
                 Albanian who reaches these shores and has been involved  at
                 some stage in a blood feud, however remotely or indirectly,
                 is automatically to be regarded as someone  who  cannot  be
                 removed without  breaching  his  Article  2  or  Article  3
                 rights.  The  outcome,  as  always,  would  depend  on  the
                 details of his case and on the evidence about conditions in
                 Albania at that time. I am dealing in  this  judgment  only
                 with the instant case. However,  in  this  instant  case  I
                 conclude that the IAT  was  wrong  to  interfere  with  the
                 findings made by an Adjudicator. He was not  plainly  wrong
                 in the conclusions reached. Having arrived,  as  I  do,  at
                 that conclusion, it is unnecessary to deal with the various
                 other arguments canvassed on behalf  of  the  appellant  in
                 writing. I, for my part, would allow this appeal.'

20.   Longmore LJ concurred:

            '37.  Mr Eicke for the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  if
                 this appeal were to be allowed, asylum  would  have  to  be
                 granted to all applicants who plausibly claimed  that  they
                 were the subject of a blood feud.   I  cannot  accept  that
                 submission. The facts of cases in which  a  blood  feud  is
                 asserted will all be different. It is for  the  Adjudicator
                 in each  case  to  decide  whether  the  state  can  afford
                 sufficiency   of   protection   in   all   the   individual
                 circumstances   of   the   case   before   him.   Important
                 circumstances might include, for example, the notoriety  or
                 the publicity of the original killings, the time which  has
                 elapsed since the last  killing,  what  the  applicant  did
                 during that time, and the number of  those  who  have  been
                 killed on either of the  sides  which  constitute  a  blood
                 feud.'

21.   In the present case,  despite  the  Adjudicator's  references  to  the
      Tribunal determination in Koci, it is apparent  that  the  Adjudicator
      has adopted a case-specific approach to  the  blood  feud  issue.   In
      particular, he has analysed  the  evidence  before  him  in  order  to
      determine whether it showed, to the requisite standard of proof,  that
      a blood feud in the commonly accepted sense of the  term  in  Albania,
      had arisen between the respective families.

22.   In our view, the Adjudicator has not erred in law in  concluding  that
      question in the negative.

23.   It is necessary to bear in mind that the road traffic accident  which,
      according to the appellant, led to the institution of a blood feud, is
      a highly unusual way for such a feud to begin.   As  we  have  already
      noted, most blood feuds arise as a result of a killing committed  over
      land and water rights, mainly in the rural north of Albania.  At  page
      12 of the appellant's bundle, in the report of Antonia  Young  of  the
      University of Bradford, we find that:

             'Whereas in the past a few  could  begin  by  discourtesy  and
             shepherds leading herds past one another on pathways,  today's
             equivalent can be found in the chaotic traffic  situations  of
             Albania's towns.  Furthermore,  currently  bloodfeuds  do  not
             follow strict patterns, each case is different,  and  directed
             by the party to whom "blood is owing".'

24.   Later on that page, Ms Ward refers to the 'absurdly  congested'  roads
      and the poor traffic regulations that exist on them.

25.   Be that as it may, if there were any significant  instances  of  blood
      feuds arising in  the  capital  city  of  Albania,  Tirana,  following
      vehicular accidents of a kind with which we are  here  concerned,  the
      Tribunal considers that there would be specific objective evidence  of
      these.   Ms Fisher was unable  to  draw  our  attention  to  any  such
      evidence.

26.   Against this background, the Tribunal can see no reason why it  should
      overturn the Adjudicator's finding  that,  on  the  specific  evidence
      before him, he was not satisfied that a blood feud  had  arisen.  What
      the (no doubt) distraught family of the  deceased  motorcyclist  might
      have said at the hospital, upon learning the news of  his  death,  and
      immediately thereafter to  the  neighbour  in  no  way  compelled  the
      Adjudicator to the conclusion that  a  blood  feud  had  been  set  in
      motion.  The incident described by the appellant as  occurring  on  10
      January 2003  has,  as  the  Adjudicator  observed,  certain  peculiar
      features.  The appellant's claimed perception of the incident was  not
      one that the Adjudicator had  to  accept.  At  paragraph  6.5  of  the
      determination the Adjudicator has noted that a likely explanation  was
      that the appellant was on that occasion experiencing  another  of  the
      abusive encounters described in his own statement as arising from  the
      fact that he lived in an area of Tirana that was  predominantly  of  a
      different religion from that of him and his family.

27.   It is submitted that the calling of the appellant's first name  is  an
      indication that those involved were threatening the appellant as  part
      of a blood feud. There is, however, no evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      that  this  is  so.  Furthermore,  as  the   appellant   had   himself
      acknowledged, his family were known in their predominantly Muslim area
      to be Catholics.

28.   By the same token, the Adjudicator was entitled at  paragraph  6.6  of
      the determination to conclude that the incident on  18  January,  when
      the appellant's wife 'noticed a car parked outside the home with  some
      men in it' was not evidence that  a  blood  feud  was  being  directed
      against the appellant.

29.   Two further matters serve to reinforce the  Adjudicator's  conclusions
      on this issue. First,  the  person  who  actually  collided  with  the
      motorcyclist was not, of course the appellant himself but his brother.
       According to the evidence, the brother left home the  same  day  that
      the motorcyclist had died in hospital, without  saying  where  he  was
      going, following which no-one has heard anything from him.   There  is
      no evidence whatsoever to suggest that this brother has left  Albania.
      Given that the family of the appellant, who remain living  in  Tirana,
      have not been informed that  this  brother  has  been  killed,  it  is
      reasonable to infer that the family of  the  motorcyclist  lacked  the
      means or inclination (or  both)  to  hunt  down  the  person  who  was
      responsible for  the  death  of  the  motorcyclist.  Furthermore,  the
      appellant's father, who was aged sixty  in  2003,  remains  living  in
      Tirana and there is no indication that he has gone into hiding.  Given
      that blood feuds involve the killing of adult  males,  the  fact  that
      there is no evidence to show there has been any  adverse  interest  in
      the father is significant.

30.   Miss Fisher sought to counter this point by drawing our  attention  to
      an article on blood feuds, to be found at  pages  38  and  39  of  the
      appellant's bundle. Here it is stated that there are strict  rules  in
      the Kanun as to how revenge is to be carried out and that there  is  a
      prohibition on the 'the retribution killing of women, children and the
      elderly'.  There is, however, no evidence to show that a man of  sixty
      would, even by Albanian standards, be regarded as so elderly as to  be
      exempted from a blood feud attack.

31.   Another reason which caused the Adjudicator to find that a blood  feud
      was not in operation in the present  case  was  that  the  appellant's
      family had made no attempt 'to approach one of  the  several  agencies
      which provide reconciliation services to families  involved  in  blood
      feuds, despite  the  fact  that  Albanian  officials  appear  to  have
      recognised problems posed by the Kanun and  have  pledged  to  address
      them' (paragraph 6.7).

32.   The appellant's response to this is that, having got nowhere by  using
      the neighbour as an intermediary, the appellant's family could see  no
      point in taking the matter to  one  of  the  relevant  agencies.  That
      response, however, does not mean that the Adjudicator was wrong  as  a
      matter of law to reach the conclusion he did. Paragraph 6.153  of  the
      April 2004 CIPU Report has this to say:

           '6.153 In addition  to  the  work  of  the  government,  several
                 agencies provided reconciliation to  families  involved  in
                 blood feuds, although according to the International Crisis
                 Group there has been no concerted and coordinated  strategy
                 devised  to  compound  this  growing  and  deeply  damaging
                 phenomena.   The   Association   for   Fraternisation   and
                 Reconciliation aims to  settle  disputes  between  families
                 through dialogue. The Albanian Peace  Union,  formerly  the
                 Albanian Reconciliation Mission was  founded  in  1991.  It
                 claims over a thousand members and to have  resolved  three
                 thousand feuds in the last ten years.'

33.   It is plainly  one  thing  to  use  the  services  of  an  unqualified
      neighbour and quite another to engage an organisation with  particular
      expertise in reconciling families involved in blood  feuds.  That  the
      appellant chose not to avail  himself  of  the  services  of  such  an
      organisation but, rather, to arrange more or less  instantaneously  to
      leave Albania for the  United  Kingdom,  was  plainly  a  matter  that
      entitled the Adjudicator to conclude that, in reality,  a  blood  feud
      was not in being.

34.   What, though, if both the Adjudicator and ourselves are  wrong  and  a
      blood feud between the families did arise following the death  of  the
      motorcyclist?   The  Adjudicator  deals  with  this   alternative   at
      paragraphs 6.10 to 6.14 of the determination.  The grounds  of  appeal
      contend that the Adjudicator should,  in  effect,  have  followed  the
      Tribunal in Brozi [2003] UKIAT 06978 where  the  Tribunal  found  that
      'The Albanian government does not have in place a system which  offers
      sufficiency of protection. There is no reasonable willingness  by  the
      police to detect, prosecute and punish  those  responsible  for  blood
      feuds'. (paragraph 14 of the determination). The  Adjudicator  in  the
      present case is criticised for following the Tribunal determination in
      Koci, where it was found that the authorities  were  taking  effective
      steps to deal with blood feuds.

35.   In the light of the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Koci,  the  blanket
      'negative' assessment in Brozi on the issue of the state protection in
      Albanian blood feuds must be seen to be as wrong as  was  the  blanket
      'positive' assessment in Koci at Tribunal  level.   As  the  Court  of
      Appeal emphasises 'Every case has to be  considered  on  its  merits'.
      Merely because a finding of fact has  been  made  that  a  blood  feud
      exists, it cannot automatically be assumed that the appellant will  be
      at real risk if returned to Albania.

36.    Building   upon   Longmore   LJ's   suggested   list   of   important
      circumstances, the Tribunal finds that the following matters  will  be
      relevant in determining the nature of the risk on return:

      (a)   whether the dispute can be characterised as a  'blood  feud'  at
           all;


        b) even if it can, the extent to which its origins and  development
           (if any) are to be  regarded  by  Albanian  society  as  falling
           within the classic principles of the Kanun;


     c)       the history of the  feud,  including  the  notoriety  of  the
        original killings and numbers killed;


      (d)  the past and likely future  attitude  of  the  police  and  other
           authorities towards the feud;


     e)      the  degree  of  commitment  shown  by  the  opposing   family
        towards prosecuting the feud;


     f)     the time that has elapsed since the last killing;


      (g)   the ability  of  the  opposing  family  to  locate  the  alleged
           potential victim anywhere in Albania;


      (h)   that person's profile as a potential target for the blood  feud;
           and


      (i)   the prospects for eliminating the feud, whether by  recourse  to
           the  payment  of  money,  a   reconciliation   organisation   or
           otherwise.

37.   In the  present  case,  it  is  manifest  that  if  (contrary  to  our
      conclusions) the appellant is the subject of a blood feud, it  is  one
      of an unusual  kind.  The  more  one  moves  away  from  the  paradigm
      situation, the more difficult it will become for a person to rely upon
      so much of the current objective evidence as indicates an inability or
      unwillingness on the part of the police and other authorities to  take
      effective  action  to  protect  the  possible  victim.  Against   this
      background, the Adjudicator  was,  the  Tribunal  finds,  entitled  at
      paragraph 6.11 of his determination to find that:

           '6.11  Despite the views expressed in the expert's  report  that
                 'it is highly likely that the police would  choose  not  to
                 follow up on a case where the accidental death had not been
                 reported' this did not mean that they would not take action
                 on a complaint of an attempted shooting of the appellant in
                 the circumstances described in his claim.'

38.   Furthermore, the fact that the  motorcyclist's  family  did  not  even
      seek to get the police to take action against the appellant's  brother
      in connection with the accident is a  further  indication  that  their
      outburst at the hospital did not  translate  itself  into  a  vendetta
      against the appellant's family.

39.   For the Secretary of State, Miss Hart relied upon  certain  paragraphs
      in the April 2004 CIPU Assessment, which do not appear  to  have  been
      available to the Court of Appeal in Koci :

           '6.150 Following criticism from the  European  Union  (EU)  that
                 failure to adequately address the problem  of  blood  feuds
                 might pose  a  barrier  to  further  EU  integration  [t]he
                 Albanian government held a round table conference  in  June
                 2003 to focus on  an  action  plan  to  deal  with  ancient
                 phenomenon  [sic].  The  government's  moves  are  strongly
                 backed by Albanian President Alfred Moisiu,  who  told  the
                 meeting he was totally committed to reducing  blood  feuds.
                 In President Moisiu's address to the Albanian Assembly on 5
                 October, he said that the 'growing tendency towards  family
                 crime and the increased number of victims in  the  name  of
                 the Kanun is a blow to the state'.  It  was  reported  that
                 during 2002 the  Ombudsman's  Office  also  contributed  to
                 resolving a number of highly controversial cases  involving
                 blood feuds.

           6.151 Following a Presidential decree, Albania's  Serious  Crime
                 Court was inaugurated on 1 January  this  year.  The  Court
                 provides a parallel structure to the ordinary court  system
                 and will specifically deal with criminal offices carrying a
                 minimum sentence of 10 years. On 7 January President Moisiu
                 appointed  12  prosecutors  who  will   target   what   are
                 considered to be more serious crimes,  including  organised
                 crime,  human  and  drug  trafficking  and   blood   feuds.
                 According to US State Department  Report  on  Human  Rights
                 Practices in 2003 (US SDI  2003)  'Blood  feud  cases  were
                 adjudicated in a Special Crimes Court. Blood  killings  are
                 distinguished from homicide cases and carry a  sentence  of
                 no  less  than  25  years'  imprisonment;   in  comparison,
                 homicide carries a sentence of 15-25 years. Although  blood
                 feud  prosecution  rates  were  not  available,   estimates
                 indicated that 60-65% of all case were brought to court and
                 nearly all of them ended up at appellate level.

           '6.152 In March 2004,  the  government  chaired  a  round  table
                 conference in Shkoder with the aim of reducing  the  impact
                 of blood feuds in the worst afflicted part of the  country.
                 Representatives attending the conference were from  central
                 and local government, regional police,  religious  leaders,
                 local legal representatives and civic leaders. The Minister
                 for Public Order, Igli Toska, announced the setting up of a
                 special dedicated unit within  Shkoder  Police  Department,
                 charged with the dual aims of preventing  blood  feuds  and
                 introducing institutional reconciliation.'

40.   Whilst it is plainly too early to say that any potential victim  of  a
      blood feud of the 'classic' type can now look to the authorities for a
      sufficiency of protection, the willingness of the Albanian authorities
      to act is growing and this factor will need to be taken  into  account
      in any assessment under paragraph 36 above.

41.     Despite the targeting of the  new  initiatives  on  those  parts  of
      Albania where blood feuds are most  prevalent,  it  is  reasonable  to
      assume that the government's initiatives are  particularly  likely  to
      make themselves felt, in  terms  of  institutional  attitudes,  within
      Tirana itself. Accordingly, looking at the individual circumstances of
      this case, the CIPU paragraphs we have  quoted  are  of  relevance  in
      assessing the extent to which this particular appellant  could  expect
      protection from the authorities. In saying this, we are aware  of  the
      evidence given to the Adjudicator, that  the  appellant's  father  had
      reported the incident of 10 January 2003 to the police. Given that, at
      that time at least,  the  appellant  was  saying  that  he  could  not
      recognise those who supposedly followed him, it is not surprising that
      the police said that there was nothing they could do. It also  has  to
      be said that the Adjudicator was sceptical of the appellant's  account
      of his father's discussions with the police, as the former makes plain
      in paragraph 6.6 of the determination. As we have already  noted,  the
      Adjudicator  found  (paragraph  6.15)  that  the  appellant's  overall
      credibility had been 'seriously undermined' by his totally  incredible
      account of his experiences once he reached the  United  Kingdom.  That
      specific finding was the subject of one of the grounds  of  appeal  to
      the Tribunal but was specifically (and in our view  rightly)  excluded
      when permission to appeal was granted.

42.   At paragraph 6.14 the  Adjudicator  found  that  'If  [the  appellant]
      returned to Tirana or indeed other parts of Albania, there  is  little
      likelihood that the family of the  deceased  motorcyclist  would  know
      that he had returned and there is very  little  possibility,  if  any,
      that he would be pursued even if the alleged blood feud  had  existed.
      His  father,  wife  and  child  still  lived  in  Tirana  despite  the
      appellant's claim that Albania was only a small country and  there  is
      no escape when a blood feud has been activated'.

43.   Again, on the facts of this case, the Adjudicator was  fully  entitled
      to that conclusion. As we have already noted, there is no evidence  to
      show that the brother who collided  with  the  motorcyclist  has  left
      Albania or suffered any kind of  violence  there.  Nor  is  there  any
      evidence that the appellant's father is regarded by the motorcyclist's
      family as too feeble to be worth killing. Accordingly,  his  continued
      presence in Tirana is a strong indicator that  the  appellant  himself
      would be equally safe there. At page 14 of the appellant's bundle,  we
      note that Antonia Young considered that the appellant 'could  not  get
      far away, since Albania is a very small country,  about  the  size  of
      Wales, with a population of just over three million'. However, in  the
      circumstances of this case, it is big enough, given the absence of any
      evidence to show that the motorcyclist's  family  have  the  means  or
      inclination to pursue  the  father  or  brother.   Contrast,  in  this
      respect, the factual situation in Koci where 'the appellant is  a  man
      whose father has already been killed, probably in a  blood  feud,  who
      has himself been shot at when he came out of hiding in another part of
      the country, and where the Adjudicator appears to  have  accepted  the
      Shtefni family would seek to track him down and kill  him'  (paragraph
      18).

44.   In conclusion, approaching the case upon a  fact-specific  basis,  and
      having regard to the considerations we have set out  in  paragraph  36
      above, the Tribunal finds that the Adjudicator was not wrong in law to
      conclude that the appellant would not be at  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR, were he to be returned to Albania.

45.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.







                                               P.R. LANE

                                           VICE PRESIDENT












                           -----------------------
      1


