
KH | | | |
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On:  1 July 2004           |        |OI (Late reliance on fresh  |
|                           |        |evidence) Somalia [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00196                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           06.07.2004                                      |
|Issued:            16/07/2004                                     |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr JG Freeman (vice-president)                                    |
|Mrs L H S Verity (legal member)                                   |
|Mr N Kumar JP                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |appellant                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr S Muquit, counsel instructed by Freemans
For the respondent:     Mr DS Saville


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is an appeal against the decision of  an  adjudicator,  Mr Charles
   Vaudin d'Imecourt, in which he dismissed, on  asylum  and  human  rights
   grounds, an appeal by someone who claimed to be a  citizen  of  Somalia.
   The first issue in the case is not whether the appellant was  a  Somali;
   but whether he was from Somalia or not.   If not there was no basis  for
   accepting his individual history.  There  was  a  further  issue  as  to
   whether he was in fact, as the adjudicator found, from Ethiopia.

2. Permission was given by Judge Huskinson VP, in the following terms:

   1. At the end of paragraph  31  of  the  determination  the  adjudicator
       states that having considered the claimant's evidence he was  simply
       not satisfied that he was a Somali national from  Somalia.   In  the
       immediately following text in paragraph 32  the  adjudicator  states
       this:




       "It is for the appellant,  albeit  to  the  low  standard  mentioned
       above, to prove his case.  On the facts before  me  in  the  present
       case I found that this appellant has failed to discharge the  burden
       on him and failed to prove his case.'


   2. The reference to the 'low standard mentioned above' is a reference to
       paragraph 22 where the correct low standard is set out.


      (and here we have inserted letters for clarity in what follows)


    a) In view of the foregoing there may  well  be  no  substance  in  the
       claimant's contention in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  wrong
       standard of proof, namely 'a balance of probabilities' has  been  or
       may have  been  applied  by  the  adjudicator  on  the  question  of
       nationality.   This  contention  is  advanced  by  reason   of   the
       concluding words in paragraph  35.   However  the  point  is  (just)
       reasonably arguable and permission is granted to argue it.
    b) Permission is also granted to argue the question  of  what,  if  any
       significance  there  is  (so  far   as   concerns   the   claimant's
       nationality) in the fact that he appears to have been interviewed in
       the Somali language and to have  given  evidence  through  a  Somali
       interpreter.

3. Mr Muquit's application, which was admirably concise, raised  point  (a)
   only; and point (b) appears to have arisen from the fact that the  vice-
   president who gave permission was not fully aware that the issue was not
   on this appellant's ethnic, but his national origins.  Mr Muquit rightly
   concedes that the positive finding that the appellant was from Ethiopia,
   which appears at paragraph 35 of the adjudicator's decision, was made to
   the correct standard of proof for positive findings against an appellant
   (balance of probabilities)  as  set  out  by  the  Tribunal  (Collins  P
   presiding) in Hamza  [2002]  UKIAT  05185*;  and  at  paragraph  32  the
   adjudicator applies to the findings which he makes at paragraph  31  the
   lower standard of proof mentioned in Kaja [1995]  IAR  1,  to  which  he
   refers at paragraph 22. This, as is  well  known,  is  to  a  reasonable
   likelihood only.

4. Mr Muquit's case is based on the application of  that  standard  by  the
   adjudicator to the facts of the case before him.   The adjudicator dealt
   with these at some  length  at  paragraph  31,  in  terms  both  of  the
   appellant's individual history  and  of  what  might  be  called  Somali
   ethnography.  Having  done  so,  he  expressed  his  conclusion  in  the
   following words:


  I was inexorably led to believe that this appellant was not a Somali from
                     Somalia and not a Somali national.

   The adjudicator then went on,

   I also noted that he based his claim to be a Somali national on the fact
   that the lady he called and he said that she was  his  mother  had  been
   accepted as a Somali national.  I note that at the time the Secretary of
   State had given the witness leave to remain in the United Kingdom he had
   done so on the basis of the civil war in Somalia.  He  had  not  granted
   her indefinite leave to remain on the basis of the  Refugee  Convention.
   There is no indication that any in depth consideration had been given to
   her claim.  In any event I am not concerned with  the  witness's  status
   but with this appellant's status.  Having  considered  his  evidence  in
   this case I was simply not satisfied that he was a Somali national  from
   Somalia.


5. At paragraph 33, on  the  human  rights  claim,  the  adjudicator  dealt
   specifically with what might be called the family evidence as follows:

   After considering the evidence given by his  witness  and  himself  with
   regard to family details such as the name of the appellant's husband and
   the name of the appellant's father the fact that the  appellant  claimed
   that his mother had a sister with two  children  living  in  the  United
   Kingdom and that the witness said that she  did  not  have  any  sisters
   living in the United Kingdom and that her only sister did not  have  any
   children, the fact that the appellant had claimed that his mother had no
   brothers and yet the witness said she had a brother living in  Ethiopia,
   I found that there was no family relationship between this  witness  and
   the woman he called to give evidence on his behalf.


6. Mr Muquit now seeks to challenge that finding of fact, with reference to
   a DNA test report dealing with  the  claimed  relationship  between  the
   appellant and the lady he put forward as his mother.  It will help if we
   give the timescale of the various events in this case.    Permission  to
   appeal was notified to the appellant's  solicitors  on  7  January  this
   year. They obtained the DNA results on or about  23  April.   The  first
   step taken by the solicitors to notify the Home Office or  the  Tribunal
   that they were seeking to rely on them was taken on Friday 18 June  when
   the DNA report was served, as one item in a general bundle  of  evidence
   to be relied on at the hearing of the appeal.  That did  not  reach  the
   presenting officers' unit or the Tribunal until 23 June, only eight days
   before the hearing.

7. The notice of hearing which  accompanied  the  grant  of  permission  to
   appeal contained the following directions:

   You must no later than 14 days before the hearing  serve  on  all  other
   parties and in triplicate  on  the  Tribunal  a  full  paginated  bundle
   containing all the documents on which you ask the Tribunal to rely ...


8. The first step Mr Muquit needs to take is  to  get  leave  to  vary  his
   grounds of appeal.  This is dealt with at rule 20 of the 2003  Procedure
   Rules:

   (1)     A party may vary his grounds of appeal only with  permission  of
       the Tribunal.
   (2)     Where the Tribunal has  refused  permission  to  appeal  on  any
       ground it must not grant permission to vary the grounds of appeal to
       include that ground unless it is satisfied that because  of  special
       circumstances it will be unjust not to allow the variation.


9. The second step, relating to fresh evidence, is set out in rule 21:


   (2)     If a party wishes to ask the Tribunal to consider evidence which
       was not submitted to the adjudicator he must file with the Appellate
       Authority and serve on the other party written notice to that effect
       which must,


       a) indicate the nature of the evidence; and
       b) explain why it was not submitted to the adjudicator.


   (3)     A notice under paragraph 2 must be filed and served as  soon  as
       practicable after the parties have been notified that permission  to
       appeal has been granted.


10. There is no draft before us of any amendment to the grounds of  appeal,
   or of any written  notification  of  intention  to  rely  on  additional
   evidence. No doubt that could have easily been rectified  by  Mr  Muquit
   but the question is whether at this stage he  ought  to  be  allowed  to
   amend his grounds of appeal, or to rely on further evidence at all.  The
   crucial  word  in  the  rules  which  we  have  read  out  is  "unjust":
   essentially we need to be satisfied that it would be unjust not both  to
   allow the amendment proposed to the grounds of appeal, and the admission
   of the further evidence on which it is based.

11. The evidence is relevant to an issue on  which  the  adjudicator  found
   against  the  appellant,  because  it  shows  a  very  high  degree   of
   probability that the lady put forward as his mother was related  to  him
   in that way.   However,  as  the  adjudicator  himself  pointed  out  at
   paragraph 31, in the passage which we have read, that is not  the  whole
   story, because he took the view that there had not been what  he  called
   any in depth  consideration  of  the  mother's  claim  to  be  a  Somali
   national.  It seems that, at the time she arrived and  made  her  claim,
   exceptional leave was given to those who  appeared  to  fall  into  that
   category, and that is what happened in her case.

12. The other point, for which we have had no explanation at  all,  is  why
   this evidence, or even notice of intention to rely on it, in terms of an
   amendment to the grounds of appeal or otherwise, was not served, despite
   the warning in the notice of hearing in January, until two months  after
   the evidence was obtained, and only eight days before the hearing.    In
   our view to seek to introduce fresh evidence at a second appellate stage
   in that way is a serious abuse of the appellate procedure.   While  what
   is put forward here is relevant and probative, it is not crucial because
   of the adjudicator's reservations at paragraph  21,  to  which  we  have
   referred.

13. In our view it would not only not be unjust to allow the amendment  and
   the fresh evidence, but it would be  an  interference  with  the  proper
   administration of justice were we to do so after an application made  at
   this stage.  To do so would be  an  invitation  to  all  those  advising
   claimants, not only to seek to produce fresh  evidence  at  this  second
   appellate stage, but to spring it on the Home Office,  without  anything
   to draw their attention to its importance, at a very late  stage  before
   this second appellate hearing.

14. We have already set out in some detail the nature  of  the  grounds  of
   appeal and the basis on which permission to appeal was granted.   Having
   refused to admit, for the reasons we have just given, the DNA  evidence,
   we invited Mr Muquit  to  continue  his  submissions  on  the  grant  of
   permission in the terms in which it stands. Mr Muquit sought to rely  on
   a number of detailed points relating to the  adjudicator's  findings  at
   paragraph 31 of his decision.

15. In particular Mr Muquit suggested that the background  evidence,  again
   not served until the bundle which arrived on  23  June,  suggested  that
   lack  of  knowledge  of  sub-clans  might  not  be  of  any   particular
   significance for the Benadiri.  He  also  relied  on  the  adjudicator's
   distinction between the appellant's  claimed  mother's  stating  of  the
   language of the Reer Hamar as "Af-Hamar" when in fact  it  was  "Af-Reer
   Hamar".  That may possibly be a somewhat fine distinction; but  it  must
   at best questionably amount to an error of law.

16. There was, however, no indication in the grounds of appeal or the grant
   of permission that anything other than the point of law already set out,
   as to the terms on which  the  adjudicator  made  his  decision  on  the
   appellant's background and history was  being  challenged,  and  in  our
   judgment that is the only issue before us.  Mr Muquit seeks  to  suggest
   that the issues he sought to bring in before us as to the  adjudicator's
   detailed findings suggested that in fact the adjudicator was applying  a
   more exacting standard.   We  see  no  warrant  for  that  at  all:  the
   adjudicator very clearly applied the right standard at paragraph 32.

17. There  was  a  further  submission  by  Mr  Muquit  that,  because  the
   adjudicator was dealing at paragraph 31, not only with  the  appellant's
   individual history but with his  national  origins,  that  in  some  way
   imported  an  inappropriate  standard  of  proof.   We   disagree:   the
   adjudicator made a clear distinction between  the  negative  finding  of
   nationality at paragraph 31, on which he correctly said at paragraph  32
   that the lower standard applied; and the positive finding  of  Ethiopian
   nationality at paragraph 35, where, again correctly, he  said  that  the
   higher standard of balance of probabilities applied.

18. We  see  nothing  in  the  challenges  which  have  been  made  to  the
   adjudicator's decision and the appeal is dismissed.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman

                                      (approved for electronic distribution)


