
H-VB-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 26 July 2004            |        |CE (KK Confirmed - McDowall |
|                           |        |Report) Turkey CG [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00233                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|20 August 2004                                                    |
|Decision reserved                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes - Vice President                                      |
|Mrs R M Bray                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr M Hinsworth, Counsel instructed by YVA,
            Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Ironside, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey of Kurdish ethnicity born on  15
    May 1975 who arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14  November  1997  and
    claimed asylum on the same day.  He was interviewed also  on  that  day
    but for reasons to which we are not privy  nothing  further  transpired
    until on 5 April 2001 the Secretary of State  refused  his  application
    for the reasons set out in a letter of that date.  On 8  May  2001  the
    Secretary  of  State  issued  directions  for  his  removal  to  Turkey
    following refusal of  leave  to  enter  after  refusal  of  his  asylum
    application.  The Appellant appealed against that  decision  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds but, again for reasons to  which  we  are  not
    privy, it was not until 18 August 2003 over two years  later  that  the
    Secretary of  State  sent  the  statutory  bundle  to  the  Immigration
    Appellate Authority in order  to  initiate  the  appeal  process.   His
    appeal was heard on 10 October 2003 by Mr R D Crawford, an Adjudicator,
    who dismissed his appeal.  The Appellant now appeals with permission to
    the Tribunal against that decision.   The  Adjudicator  summarises  the
    Appellant's case from his written statement  at  paragraph  14  of  his
    Determination in the following terms:

      "He is an Alevi Kurd from the Bingol area of Turkey.  He was detained
        for a week and beaten on the soles of his feet on 1 May 1995 by the
        Turkish authorities.  He was beaten again in June 1997 when Kurdish
        literature and music was found in his car.   He  was  detained  for
        four days on his second detention.  He was  detained  for  a  third
        time on 10 August 1997 when he was questioned about  his  political
        activities and  those  of  his  friends.   Two  of  his  cousins  [
        ] and [              ] are separatists and members of the  PKK.   [
            ] codenamed Zerdes is the man shown  on  the  video  asking  to
        become area commander for Bingol.  [          ]  and  [           ]
        lived next door to the Appellant at his  village  in  Turkey  where
        they were farmers.  The Appellant fled his village in 1994 and went
        to Istanbul where he stayed.  The Appellant  sympathised  with  the
        aims and objectives of the PKK and  upon  arriving  in  the  Untied
        Kingdom became  involved  with  the  PSK.   The  Appellant  attends
        Kurdish cultural centres and  events.   When  Abdullah  Ocalan  was
        detained in Turkey the Appellant demonstrated in London.

      The Appellant used to attend a Kurdish Centre  in  Istanbul  and  was
        asked by the police to become an informer against the PKK on behalf
        of  the  authorities.   The  Appellant  refused   to   assist   the
        authorities and believes if he is returned to  Turkey  he  will  be
        targeted by the Turkish government because of the activities of his
        cousins as active PKK  members.   The  Appellant  left  Turkey  and
        travelled to the United Kingdom by lorry clandestinely.  He arrived
        in the United Kingdom on 14 November 1997.

      In the year 2002 the Appellant's father received a letter from  state
        security informing him that he is to be  prosecuted  for  assisting
        the PKK.  Because he is disabled he has not been in imprisoned  but
        he fears for the future as he has provided food and shelter for the
        PKK."

2.    The Adjudicator then records at paragraph  15  the  evidence  at  the
    hearing before him as follows:

      "In evidence in chief the Appellant adopted his written statement and
        gave evidence as to the contents of the video.   He  said  that  he
        received the video about a month ago.  He confirmed he had been  in
        Istanbul for most of the time since 1994, although he  occasionally
        went back to his village  in  the  Bingol  district.   He  told  Ms
        Dickinson [the Presenting Officer] that  he  did  national  service
        beginning in 1995 for 19 months.  He used to meet up with [       ]
        in Istanbul.  He confirmed the date of his three detentions  as  he
        stated in his written statement  and  accepts  that  he  was  never
        charged nor brought before a court.  He told Ms Dickinson  that  he
        assisted the PKK from 1992 to 1994 by giving them food  and  drink.
        He accepted that he only became interested  in  PSK  activities  in
        London.  He has not been involved in PSK since opening his shop  in
        Southport.  He  used  to  visit  the  PSK  centre  in  London.   Ms
        Dickinson asked the Appellant why he did not mention  his  father's
        involvement with the PUK in interview but  only  referred  to  that
        involvement in his statement.  The Appellant said that he  did  not
        know why he did not mention it in his interview."

3.    The Appellant also said that he had spoken to his father  and  mother
    in Turkey from the United Kingdom and that the authorities  were  still
    looking for him; soldiers had been asking  about  his  whereabouts  and
    those of [        ] and [        ], last year in their village.

4.    The Adjudicator accepted part of the Appellant's  claims.   He  noted
    that it was nine years since the  Appellant  was  himself  involved  in
    assisting the PKK in his home village by providing food and shelter for
    them and he accepted that [       ] and [          ] were low level PKK
    activists in the 1990s.  He did not believe the Appellant's claims that
    his father had been involved with the PKK noting that at interview  (A8
    and A9) when the Appellant, who said he  lived  with  his  parents  and
    siblings with an uncle nearby, was asked  whether  any  member  of  the
    immediate family was involved with separatist parties his response  was
    that two paternal cousins were involved  with  the  PKK  and  that  the
    family suffered harassment from the army and the special team who would
    come and question them about his two  cousins.   Although  he  had  the
    opportunity at that interview to say  whether  other  immediate  family
    members were involved with the PKK it was not until much later that  he
    made any such claim in respect of his father and the Adjudicator was of
    the view that this was  something  that  he  would  have  expected  the
    Appellant to mention from the outset.

5.    The Adjudicator was not prepared to give any weight to the video  and
    transcript which had been  produced.   He  deals  with  this  issue  at
    paragraph 31 as follows:

      "The video purports to show events at the 1996 PKK conference.  Apart
        from Abdullah Ocalan the faces of approximately twelve  to  fifteen
        supposed PKK activists are portrayed.  I find that this video would
        have been closely guarded by the PKK.  If it fell  into  the  wrong
        hands, such as the Turkish government security service, all  people
        portrayed would be at grave risk of torture or worse.  I find  that
        it is highly unlikely that such a video would  be  brought  out  of
        Turkey and handed over to the Appellant to assist  the  Appellant's
        asylum claim.  The Appellant says he received  the  video  about  a
        month ago from a PKK guerrilla who smuggled it out of  Turkey.   By
        handing this video to the Appellant to assist his asylum claim this
        guerrilla would be taking a risk that all the men portrayed on  the
        video might be exposed.  This is not a risk which I believe the PKK
        would take to support one asylum claim.  I have grave doubts as  to
        the genuineness of the video and whether it truly  portrays  events
        which took place in 1996 at the PKK conference.  I do  not  accept,
        on the basis  of  this  video,  that  the  Appellant's  cousin  was
        appointed commander of the Bingol district in  Turkey  by  Abdullah
        Ocalan.  I find that the video has been  produced  to  convince  me
        that the level of activity of the Appellant's cousins  in  the  PKK
        was at a higher level then I am prepared to accept."

6.    We note that at no point in the interview  is  there  any  suggestion
    that either of his paternal cousins was a high ranking  member  of  the
    PKK and the most that he says as to their involvement is "Two  paternal
    cousins involved with PKK" and, a little later, "They  would  come  and
    question them [other family members] about  my  two  cousins  who  were
    involved with the PKK."

7.    The third issue which the Adjudicator takes into account in  arriving
    at his credibility findings is his delay in  leaving  Turkey  which  he
    deals with at paragraph 32 in the following terms:

      "The Appellant stayed in Turkey for three months after being asked to
        be an informer for the  Turkish  government.   He  was  effectively
        hiding from the authorities.  When he was  detained  on  10  August
        1997 the Appellant  was  asked  to  help  the  government  security
        forces.  He agreed to do so.  They thought he was going to  assist.
        When he initially went into hiding they would not have been looking
        for him as he did not say that  he  would  not  co-operate.   There
        would be no reason for the authorities to search for him initially.
         There would certainly be no need to keep him  under  surveillance.
        I find that if the Appellant had wanted to leave  Turkey  he  could
        have done so immediately after his  third  detention  or  within  a
        short period of it.  A genuine refugee, in fear of his life,  would
        leave Turkey immediately and not hang around for  three  months  so
        that the authorities would realise he was not  going  to  help  him
        [sic] and begin to search for him."

8.    The Adjudicator noted that the first two detentions were not  due  to
    the Appellant's political activities but rather because he had attended
    a May Day celebration on the first occasion when he had  been  arrested
    in a general round up, and on the second occasion he was stopped  in  a
    road check and  detained  because  he  was  in  possession  of  Kurdish
    literature and music.  It  is  difficult  to  know  whether  the  third
    detention in August 1997 can be properly regarded as a detention at all
    on the evidence before us.  At interview the Appellant said that he was
    simply stopped in the street and asked  to  become  an  informer  in  a
    conversation which last about an hour before being released to  proceed
    on his way.  He described the incident at interview as follows:

      "On 10 August 1997 the police took me from the caf� to the  outskirts
        of the city and there I was questioned  about  the  Kurdish  youths
        activities, they wanted me to give  them  information  about  these
        things, about what kind of activities, associations involved  with.
        I was also questioned if I had  any  friends  involved  in  illegal
        activities and organisations and they wanted me to help them.  If I
        helped them they will stop harassing them [sic] and be protected by
        the police."

      A little later he said:

      "If you accept our offer come to  the  police  station  and  we  will
        discuss the matter, tell you how these things operate.   I  thought
        about it for a long time, if I had accepted  their  offer  I  would
        have been a traitor to my country, to my friends, to my people  and
        I will live with this..."

      He said it took about a month for him to reach this decision.

9.    The Adjudicator summarised the position at paragraphs 34  and  35  of
    his Determination as follows:

      "34.  For the avoidance of doubt I find as follows:

            (i)  The Appellant was a Kurd;

            ii)  Two of the Appellant's  reasonably  close  relatives  were
                    active in the PKK;

            (iii)      I do not accept  that  the  Appellant's  father  was
                    active in the PKK;

            (iv) I do not accept the Appellant was being  searched  for  by
                    the authorities from August until November 1997;

            (v)  The Appellant's assistance of the PKK  was  low  level  in
                    providing food and shelter;

            (vi)  I do not accept that a close relative  of  the  Appellant
                    was a commander in the Bingol area for the PKK.

            (vii)      I do not accept that the Appellant has made  himself
                    a target of the Turkish authorities by  any  activities
                    he has engaged in in the United Kingdom."

      "35   I find that any little interest the Turkish  authorities  might
               have had in the Appellant, will, by  the  passage  of  time,
               have now diminished to nothing.  I do not  accept  that  the
               Appellant  was  a  target,  in  any  way,  of  the   Turkish
               authorities."

10.   The grounds of appeal seek to challenge the Adjudicator's findings on
    two limited bases only.  The first is that he erred in law in rejecting
    the video evidence  which  was  relevant  to  establish  the  level  of
    involvement of one of his family members.  The grounds of appeal, which
    Mr Himsworth had settled and upon which he relied before us, criticised
    the findings in paragraph 31 because the Adjudicator failed to  specify
    why he considered the risk to the PKK was so great and  submitted  that
    they would be prepared to indulge in any risk involved  by  giving  the
    video to one of their members to bring to the cousin of another  member
    for limited use in an asylum appeal in this country.   Further  it  was
    averred that a video of the type shown  was  inherently  likely  to  be
    distributed,  albeit  perhaps  in  small  numbers  amongst  appropriate
    personnel, and that given the level of his cousin's involvement it  was
    more likely that he could persuade them to release the  video  for  the
    benefit of the Appellant.  Finally it was submitted that there  was  no
    reason why this specific video might not have been deemed suitable  for
    'general release' because (for instance) the people shown had consented
    or had already been prosecuted and, finally, because  it  purported  to
    show the 1996 PKK conference it was quite possible that the video might
    have been released because of its age.  We understood from Mr Himsworth
    that these were all submission which he had made to the Adjudicator.

11.   The other  ground  of  appeal  was  that  the  Adjudicator  had  made
    erroneous and contradictory assessments of the evidence.  The basis for
    this challenge was that  in  paragraph  13  of  the  Determination  the
    following passage appears:

      "The second man on the video, the Appellant says  is  [            ],
        who is the Appellant's nephew.  [             ]  has  been  granted
        asylum by the Home Office on 28 April 2003.  In the video         [
                 ] asks Abdullah Ocalan for the commandership of the Bingol
        area on behalf of the PKK."

12.   Dealing first with that last challenge,  it  is  undoubtedly  correct
    that the Adjudicator has made mistakes in the short  passage  which  we
    have quoted but as will be seen from the  summary  of  the  Appellant's
    case at paragraph 14 of the Determination which we have quoted  earlier
    in this Determination, it is  quite  clear  that  the  Adjudicator  did
    clearly understand the basis of  the  Appellant's  claims  and  that  [
         ] was somebody distinct from [              ] who had  later  come
    to the United Kingdom and been granted asylum.  It seems to us that the
    reference to [              ] in the video in paragraph 13 is simply  a
    slip of the pen and it does not in our view have any  effect  upon  the
    outcome of the Adjudicator's deliberations or  demonstrate  a  lack  of
    understanding of the  essential  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  as
    paragraph 14 and the remainder of the Determination makes quite clear.

13.   So far as the  main  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  video  is
    concerned, we have carefully considered all  that  Mr  Himsworth  urges
    upon us, as no doubt did the Adjudicator. But it would  be  appropriate
    to interfere with the Adjudicator's findings in this respect only if we
    were satisfied that he  had  erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to  the
    credibility findings.  In this respect it is not appropriate to look at
    specific findings in isolation but rather to look at  the  totality  of
    the findings.  The first adverse finding is in  relation  to  the  late
    claim that his father had been involved in the PKK.   That  finding  is
    not  the  subject  of  challenge  and  seems  perfectly  open  to   the
    Adjudicator on the evidence which was before him for the reasons  which
    he gives.  The Adjudicator also disbelieved the Appellant's claims that
    he was in fear of arrest for the three months prior to  leaving  Turkey
    and accepted the force of the Secretary of State's submission  in  this
    respect that delay of that nature was hardy appropriate in someone  who
    had a real  fear  of  persecution.   Additionally,  we  note  from  the
    Appellant's own  description  of  events  in  his  interview,  that  he
    pondered  the  position  for  about  a  month  before  coming  to   any
    conclusion.  It does not seem to us that there is any error on the part
    of the Adjudicator in taking that  point  against  the  Appellant  and,
    indeed, it is again not the subject of challenge before us.  There are,
    therefore, two bases upon which the Appellant's credibility has already
    been to some extent undermined.  It  is  appropriate  to  consider  the
    Adjudicator's findings in respect of the video against that background.
     Whilst it would have been open to the Adjudicator to  have  reached  a
    different conclusion, for the reasons which Mr Himsworth had urged upon
    him, we think Mr  Ironside's  submission  that  those  reasons  are  in
    themselves highly speculative and unsupported by any objective evidence
    is well made.  There is also force in  his  submission  that  what  the
    cousin in claimed to say in the transcript of the video  is  supportive
    of the Adjudicator's reasoning.  The passage concerned is where  he  is
    asked why he cannot be active in the metropolitan area and he  answered
    that he fears  being  decoded,  by  which  we  assume  he  means  being
    discovered, "As I was involved in illegal activities  in  Istanbul  for
    many years and many people know me.  I fear that I will bring  harm  to
    my party.  I wish to be given the commandership of the Bingol area as I
    know the area very well."  We do not, having given due consideration to
    the submissions made to us, consider that there is any error of law  on
    the part of the Adjudicator in his approach to his findings in  respect
    of that part of the evidence.  His reasoning is clear and it  seems  to
    us, cogent.  It was in our judgment a finding which was  properly  open
    to him on the totality of the evidence.

14.   The Adjudicator then went on to consider whether the Appellant  would
    have a real risk of persecution or treatment in breach of his protected
    human rights under  Article  3  of  the  European  Convention  if  then
    returned to Turkey.  He concluded that he did not but that is a line or
    argument which has again been run before us with our  consent  by  both
    parties in the light of the most recent guidance on the  issues  as  to
    risk on return.

15.    The  Adjudicator  considered  this  issue   against   the   Tribunal
    Determinations in Hayser (which he wrongly refers to  as  Hasysal)  and
    Ay.  The latter decision is now a reported  case  and  has  accordingly
    been anonymised.  It  is  now  known  by  the  acronym  ACDOG  or  more
    properly, as [2003] UKIAT 00034 A  (Turkey)  Et  al.   It  indicates  a
    number of the issues which it may be pertinent to consider  in  Turkish
    asylum appeals at paragraph 46 of the determination,  making  it  clear
    that these are simply factors which "inexhaustively we consider  to  be
    material in giving rise to potential suspicion  in  the  minds  of  the
    authorities concerning a particular Claimant."   On  the  Adjudicator's
    factual findings the Appellant could not in our judgment be said to  be
    particularly engaged in the majority of those factors although  one  of
    them is whether the Appellant has family connections with a  separatist
    organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.

16.   The Adjudicator considered those matters as he  makes  clear  in  his
    Determination and concluded that on the facts they were not such as  to
    be reasonably likely to bring the Appellant to he adverse attention  of
    the authorities and, again, we see  no  arguable  basis  on  which  the
    Adjudicator was not justified in making that finding  on  the  accepted
    evidence.

17.   Since that time, there have been a number of other important Tribunal
    decisions dealing particularly with the risk at  Istanbul  airport  and
    what is reasonably likely to be revealed by the computer  system  there
    known as GBTS.  This hinges upon the distinction in Turkish law between
    detention and arrest, the latter being something which requires a court
    decision and it was held in HO  (National  Records)  Turkey  CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 0038 that it is only the latter type  of  arrest  which  will  be
    recorded on the GBTS system having regard to the extensive  documentary
    evidence considered in that appeal.  Since then a contrary opinion  has
    been expressed by Mr McDowall in a  note  dated  March  2004  which  he
    accepts is largely speculative  and  inferential  on  his  part.   That
    report was carefully considered by the Tribunal in  KK  (GBTS  -  Other
    Information Systems - McDowall)  [2004] UKIAT 00177.  At  paragraph  23
    of that Determination the Tribunal carefully  considers  Mr  McDowall's
    note and concludes that it is not one to which  any  weight  should  be
    given, as it is based in part on speculation and in part on information
    from parties about whom very little information is provided.  We do not
    need to set out what  is  said  there  at  length  but  we  adopt  that
    reasoning for the purposes of this decision.  The most recent  case  is
    MS (Turkey GBTS Info at Borders) Turkey [2004] UKIAT  00192  which  was
    promulgated on 13 July 2004.  In that decision the Tribunal reviews  at
    length the reports of Mr Kanat, a Turkish defence lawyer, as well as  a
    report from Ms Sheri Laizer dated 16 March 2004 and the 18  March  2004
    report from Mr McDowall which had also been considered in  KK.    After
    carefully considering those three reports at paragraphs 21 to  26  (and
    again we adopt the reasoning of  the  Tribunal  in  that  appeal),  the
    Tribunal then concludes at paragraph 27:

      "We feel that we are driven to the conclusion  by  all  the  material
        that we have heard  some  of  which  comes  from  sources  entirely
        unconnected with the authorities in  Turkey,  that  on  arrival  in
        Turkey a person will be screened by being checked on the GBTS.   We
        have neither information, nor any reason to suppose, that any other
        means of checking up is used."

18.   MS then goes on to consider what  is  meant  by  undocumented  travel
    which it is suggested may lead to detention for checks to be made  from
    sources other than the GBTS.  Based on consideration of the CIPU Report
    and the Report of the German Immigration Authority of  July  1999,  the
    Tribunal held that undocumented returnees did  not  include  those  who
    were travelling on a valid Turkish travel document either held in their
    own right or comprising a one-way emergency travel document  issued  by
    the Turkish Consul General in London.  A person in possession of either
    of those documents would  not  be  likely  to  be  given  the  in-depth
    questioning referred to and, as the Tribunal rightly points  out  there
    it is a matter for the Claimant if he wishes to obtain his own passport
    from the Turkish Embassy since it  is  established  that  Turkey  gives
    passports to undocumented would be Turkish returnees, even  though  the
    one-way emergency travel document referred to would equally be a  valid
    Turkish travel document.

19.   In the Appellant's bundle there were, in addition to a later note  by
    Mr McDowall to which we shall refer below, the generic report on Turkey
    of January 2004 by Sheri Laizer and an addendum to that report of April
    2004.  Mr Himsworth was of the view that this was not the report of  16
    March 2004 referred to in MS and he relied on paragraph 3(iii)  talking
    of parallel methods  of  record  keeping  in  suspected  dissidents  in
    addition to the GBTS system.  That sub-paragraph was  an  assertion  by
    Sheri Laizer that her own name appeared  in  the  GBTS  system  at  the
    airport in Istanbul in 1998 when she was sent to Turkey to  report  for
    the BBC.  She said her name appeared there primarily  because  she  had
    one time worked in a paid and lawful capacity as the co-ordinator of  a
    London based Kurdish charity which had come under PKK political control
    subsequently.  She says that the Turkish Interior Ministry entered  her
    name and that of 55 other non-Turkish citizens associated with  Kurdish
    and Turkish refugees and exiles and that their names  were  printed  in
    the Turkish  press  and  entered  into  the  GBTS  computer  system  as
    "undesirables" to be refused entry to Turkey.  It  was  Mr  Himsworth's
    submission  that  this  evidence  demonstrated  that  the   information
    provided by the Turkish authorities on 3 September 2003 to the  Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office in relation to the GBTS system  was  inaccurate
    and that the  GBTS  system  could  include  persons  other  then  those
    specified  as  being  sought  for  arrest.   There  are  in  our   view
    difficulties with this submission.  Ms Laizer refers to something which
    occurred in August 1998 and says that she then made representations  to
    the Turkish Foreign and Interior Ministries which she believed led to a
    resolution of the matter finally in 2000.   Even  assuming,  therefore,
    that Ms Laizer is right in saying that her name was on  the  GBTS  list
    and not on  some  parallel  system  for  identifying  those  considered
    undesirable aliens by the  Turkish  government,  the  matter  had  been
    resolved by 2000 and is therefore no evidence  that  what  the  Turkish
    government said to the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  in  September
    2003 does not represent the current situation and extent  of  the  GBTS
    system.

20.   The second report on which Mr  Himsworth  relied  was  Mr  McDowall's
    "revised" note on the  GBTS  (Turkey's  General  Information  Gathering
    System) which is dated 24 May 2004.

21.   He refers to paragraph 5.56 and 5.57 of the April  2004  CIPU  Report
    which deals with the Swiss  Organisation  for  Refugees  and  reads  as
    follows:

      "The report continues "It should be mentioned that in addition to the
        GTBS Central Information System, the various security  forces  each
        have their own information systems...they include the registers  of
        the police, the anti-terrorist department, the gendarmerie,  Jitem,
        the  military  secret  service  etc.   It  is  therefore  perfectly
        possible for someone not to be listed on the central system but  to
        be sought by the anti-terrorist unit."

At 5.57 it further states that:

      "Neither can the absence of a data entry or current investigation  or
        the lack of a passport ban be taken as evidence that an  individual
        is not in danger.  Despite the absence of entries  in  the  central
        information system, the individual concerned might be listed on one
        of the other information systems.  This must certainly  be  assumed
        in the case of individuals who have already been taken into custody
        by the police, gendarmerie or some other  branch  of  the  security
        forces in the past."

22.   Nevertheless Mr McDowall makes it clear that his views  still  remain
    speculative as to what will be on any such other registers.  He says:

      "My reasons for doubt and the relevant evidence are  to  some  extent
        empirical and seem to be somewhat different from the qualifications
        now set out in [April 2004 CIPU]; they are set out below  in  order
        to indicate that much of one's approach to this issue must be based
        upon commonsense inferences drawn from what we  really  know  about
        how the security forces operate in Turkey."

23.   He then refers to what are said to be two new sources of evidence  as
    to the risks to returned failed asylum seekers.  The first is a  report
    by the Kurdish Human Rights Project, a non-governmental organisation in
    Turkey, to a firm of London solicitors but from what he  quotes  it  is
    quickly apparent that what  is  being  said  there  is  again  in  many
    instances speculative and based on impressions  of  what  is  meant  by
    Amnesty International Reports and what was said by a  former  paralegal
    employee of another London based solicitor's firm which had  previously
    been relied on by Mr McDowall in his earlier report. That is dealt with
    in KK at paragraph 23(i) in relation to the weight which is to be given
    to such a source where it is noted that there is nothing  to  show  the
    expertise of that source, what were his own sources for his comments of
    their  reliability,  and  that  was  there  claimed   contradicted   Mr
    McDowall's previously expressed views in November  2002  that  a  large
    proportion of detentions in police stations go unrecorded in  a  formal
    sense.  In other words, it adds nothing  from  being  quoted  from  yet
    another source as a basis on which that other source  has  worked.   It
    does not seem to us that this further evidence takes matters beyond the
    consideration which has already been  given  by  the  Tribunal  to  the
    contents of the GBTS system but merely suggests that removal  from  the
    system may not be as efficient as is claimed by the Turkish authorities
    in that they occasionally use it as a pretext for detaining people whom
    they have reason to believe are about to commit public order crimes.

24.   The second source on which Mr McDowall now relies is a statement from
    an asylum seeker relating to his experiences during military service in
    Erzerum province in 1990/91.  That report claims that at that time  the
    particular gendarmerie with which he was concerned kept a colour  coded
    filing system which included one relating  to  political  offences  and
    which was sent to a central system in Ankara and in  Erzerum  province.
    Mr McDowall assumes that such records are now computer based  and  that
    jeeps equipped with computers may well be used at checkpoints as is the
    case in the Israeli occupied territories.  That is clearly  speculation
    on  his  part  and  pre-supposes  that  even   if   one   accepts   the
    uncorroborated observations of an unidentified asylum seeker made  many
    years ago, that such a system  continues  in  operation  and  has  been
    brought up to date.  In our view this latest note  is  properly  to  be
    regarded as subject to the strictures accorded to the earlier  note  by
    the Tribunal in KK and we place little weight upon it as  being  highly
    speculative in nature and unsupported by any cogent evidence.

25.   There is nothing in this additional information to persuade  us  that
    it is appropriate to revise the views which the Tribunal has  expressed
    as to the nature of the information recorded on the GBTS system or  the
    position on arrival at Istanbul airport.

26.   It has, of course, always been the case that  where  it  is  accepted
    that there is a long record of ill-treatment of an individual  claimant
    in his home area, then there will be an arguable issue as to whether on
    the specific facts a real risk of a repetition of such  treatment  will
    continue to exist there, although it may well be that in  the  majority
    of cases those who run no real risk on arrival at Istanbul and are able
    to pass safely through into Turkey, will be able safely and  reasonably
    to relocate to another part of that vast country in accordance with the
    ratio  of  the  Tribunal  Determination  in  LT  (internal   flight   -
    registration system) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00175.

27.   Turning to  the  situation  of  this  particular  Appellant,  on  the
    findings of the Adjudicator there have been two minor detentions for  a
    short period which have resulted in release without charge  or  further
    surveillance.  One was a round up arrest including many others and  the
    other was a random car check so that in neither case was the  Appellant
    specifically targeted by the authorities.  Seven years ago he was asked
    to become an informer and then left  the  country  shortly  thereafter.
    His claims of subsequent police interest in him have been  rejected  by
    the Adjudicator.

28.   On that evidence there is no reasonable likelihood that  he  will  be
    detained at Istanbul on return as  he  will  not  appear  on  the  GBTS
    system.  He has lived in Istanbul, which is  a  vast  city,  from  1994
    onwards and there is no arguable basis for saying that the  authorities
    have any current adverse interest  in  him.   There  is  no  persistent
    course of conduct on the part of the authorities to be guarded against.
     He says that his family relationship with cousins who were PKK members
    was well-known in his home village but there is no  suggestion  in  his
    evidence that this relationship resulted in any adverse attention  once
    he had removed to Istanbul.  Even were it the case that  one  of  those
    cousins was a high ranking member of the  PKK,  that  was  a  situation
    which had existed on his claims since May 1996 - the  claimed  date  of
    the PKK congress - without it leading to any adverse  interest  in  him
    prior to his departure in November 1997.  To say that it would now lead
    to such an adverse interest is no more then speculation on his part.

29.   We are therefore satisfied that not only is the Adjudicator's finding
    sustainable but that even if it were not and taking  into  account  the
    additional evidence relating to  the  GBTS  system  to  which  we  have
    referred, there would on the  facts  of  this  case  be  no  reasonable
    likelihood of persecution of the Appellant for a Convention  reason  of
    treatment in breach of his protected Article 3 rights if  he  were  now
    returned to Turkey.

30.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.





                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT




