
H-MH/11-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 23 August 2004          |        |FK (Iraq - medical          |
|                           |        |conditions for children)    |
|                           |        |Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00310  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|25/11/2004                                                        |
|.................................................                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr. D.K. Allen - Vice President                                   |
|Mr. A.R. Mackey - Vice President                                  |
|Mrs. M.E. McGregor                                                |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. L. Elliot, Solicitor,
                    Halliday Reeves Solicitors, Gateshead.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1.    The appellant, a national of Iraq,  appeals  with  permission  against
      the Determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs. Nicola Bircher,  promulgated
      29 December 2003,



 wherein she dismissed an appeal against the decision of the respondent who
    had issued removal directions  and  refused  asylum  and  human  rights
    claims.

2.    Permission was granted on one ground only.  That ground was that  the
    Adjudicator had failed to have regard, when considering  the  issue  of
    returnability, to  the  position  of  the  appellant's  children.   The
    youngest of the appellant's children, two boys, were born in the UK  on
    25 February 2002 (the other child, a girl, was born in Iraq  in  1998).
    The appellant's solicitors provided us  with  a  bundle  consisting  of
    relevant objective information and two medical reports.  Both of  these
    had not been before the Adjudicator for reasons explained.  First was a
    report from Dr. E.G.A.  Thorniley-Walker,  General  Practitioner,  this
    report related to one of the twin boys of the appellant, Muhammed  (M).
    It stated:

      "This 2 year old boy has been registered with our  practice  since  5
         February 2003.  He has recently  been  referred  to  a  consultant
         paediatrician in South Tyneside Hospital regarding possible  fits.
         These may be  simply  associated  with  fevers  but  a  consultant
         opinion is being sought to exclude any other  significant  reasons
         for these episodes.

      He has no other significant past medical history and is not currently
         on any medication."

3.    The second, and clearly more relevant, report is from Dr. Stephen  M.
    Cronin, Consultant  Paediatrician,  South  Tyneside  Health  Care  (NHS
    Trust) and is dated 6 August 2004.  A copy of that report was also made
    available to the respondent.

4.    This report states that the consultant had seen M  on  two  occasions
    (27 July 2004 and 5 August 2004) and had heard his history and that  of
    his parents.  The report relates that on five occasions over  the  last
    six to eight months M had experienced  a  short-lived  seizure.   There
    were no triggering events.  Details of the effects of the  seizure  are
    set out.  The consultant states that in addition to this issue it is of
    serious concern that M is not  linking  words  together.  He  has  used
    fairly simple single words only.  He has only been walking since he was
    18 months old.  Both M and his  brother  have  the  same  developmental
    delay, which the consultant considers is a real concern,  although  the
    brother has  not  exhibited  seizure  episodes.   Descriptions  of  the
    seizure episodes are then described and the consultant states:

      "They sound epileptic, i.e. related to electrical  discharge  in  the
         brain but  could  also  be  Salaam  Attacks,  otherwise  known  as
         Infantile  Spasms,  which  can  have   a   very   poor   prognosis
         particularly in terms of development.  The latter often  occur  in
         the first year or so of life but can occur up to 6  years  of  age
         and  because  of  the  long-term  consequences   require   careful
         investigation and treatment where appropriate."

5.    The  consultant  has  arranged  for  an  electroencephalogram  to  be
    performed.  He also arranged, because of the  history,  to  raise  this
    issue with a Dr. Ramesh a     Consultant  in  Paediatric  Neurology  in
    Newcastle.  Dr. Ramesh, like the consultant, felt that  these  seizures
    were important and he was awaiting the result  of  the  EEG  test.   He
    mentioned an unusual familial condition that can occur in  children  of
    Kurdish origin and feels that further investigation in terms of further
    EEG's and possibly an MRI scan is appropriate.  The consultant  reports
    that  at  this  stage  it  has  not  been  possible  to  set   up   the
    investigations but it will be done over the next few weeks.

6.    The consultant then goes on to set out the implications for  M,  from
    this particular problem, and states that they  may  simply  respond  to
    treatment, in  which  case,  he  needs  appropriate  investigation  and
    initiation  of  the  appropriate  therapy  if  the  episodes  continue.
    Alternatively they may be  the  portend  of  a  worsening  picture  and
    clearly, in this case, different types of assessment  and  intervention
    may become essential.  Finally,  he  noted  that,  these  episodes  may
    actually be a one-off period, which will not continue.   He  considered
    this seemed unlikely at the moment but was possible.  He then noted:

      "Paediatric neurology is a difficult area and  although  considerable
        expertise has evolved, there  nevertheless  are  things  we  aren't
        necessarily able to explain easily."

7.    He goes on to state that he will require early placement in  nursery,
    speech therapy and possibly every  assistance  with  his  hearing.   He
    states that follow-up over the next six  months  to  a  year  may  well
    require life-long interventions of one type or another although at this
    early stage could not be more precise.

Background

8.    The appellant arrived in this  country  in  September  2000  and,  it
    appears, his wife and daughter arrived in 2001.  As stated their  twins
    have been born in this country.  The appellant  fled  to  this  country
    from Iraq because he claimed, after reaching the rank of Captain in the
    former Iraqi army under Saddam Hussein, he had become  involved  in  an
    escape from detention and had  considered  that  he  had  to  flee  the
    country.  The Adjudicator however did not  find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible, apart from accepting he had been a soldier who  had  obtained
    the rank of Captain.  The Adjudicator did not find it credible that the
    appellant was able  to  travel  in  an  army  vehicle  to  the  Kurdish
    Autonomous Zone without any  challenge.   He  also  did  not  find  the
    appellant's wife, who  gave  evidence,  to  be  credible  and  she  had
    provided contradictory evidence  in  some  respects,  to  that  of  her
    husband.  The Adjudicator went  on  then  to  find  that  she  did  not
    consider the appellant to be at risk on  return and that there was  not
    a real risk he would suffer a breach  of  his  protected  rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  She did not specifically consider the risks  to
    the appellant and his wife or to the children, or to  the  consequences
    on the appellant from problems his children  may  incur  on  return  to
    Iraq.  It was  for  this  reason  that  permission  was  granted.   The
    Adjudicator however did go on to note a strong recommendation that "the
    appellant and his family be granted leave to remain in  the  UK".   She
    states:

      "The appellant and his wife are articulate,  intelligent  people  who
         have resided in the UK in excess of three years.  They have a very
         young family and have made efforts to  become  integrated  in  the
         community.  The  appellant  spoke  good  English  and  has  gained
         excellent passes on college courses.  The  appellant  pursued  the
         issue of the 'one off exercise to allow  families  who  have  been
         here for at least three years to  stay'  with  his  own  MP.   The
         appellant and his family would at the very least be  eligible  for
         consideration under this scheme."


9.    The appeal however was dismissed on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

The Appellant's Submissions

10.   Ms. Elliot submitted to us that the  sole  issue  in  this  case  was
    whether there would be a breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR  should  the
    appellant and his children be  returned.   She  informed  us  that  the
    respondent had advised that an application under the "special exercise"
    may be considered by the respondent but no result of  that  was  known.
    She submitted to us that at this time, the report from  the  consultant
    paediatrician showed that a full diagnosis was not  yet  available  and
    that therefore the  specialist  has  not  set  out  what  the  proposed
    treatment should be, or indeed could be, for M.  In this situation  the
    appellant was not just a single man returning to Iraq  and  the  inter-
    related problems for  the  family  had  to  be  considered.   She  then
    referred us to a considerable amount of objective information contained
    in the bundle.  These consisted of:

      An "Integrated Regional Information Network  News"  article  "Iraq  -
    Briefing  Paper  on  Health"  18/05/2004.   This  report  included  the
    following statements:

      "By 2003, almost a third of the children in southern and central Iraq
         were malnourished.  Low birth weight is a  particular  problem  as
         are diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections.  An established  1
         in 8 children dies before his or her 5th  birthday,  according  to
         World Health Organisation (WHO).
      The three  biggest  child  killers  in  Iraq  are  acute  respiratory
         infection, diarrhoeal diseases and measles.  Almost  half  of  the
         country's 24.5 million  people  are  children,  and  their  future
         depends on a massive and rapid improvement in the country's health
         and infrastructure.

      In a recent report by the NGO, Medial Aid for the  Third  World,  the
         medical infrastructure was deemed outdated with patients not  able
         to receive optimal treatment.  'Everything is  lacking,  including
         medicines for acute as  well  as  chronic  ailments',  the  report
         said."

11.   The same report goes on to state:

      "According to the WHO statistics, the infant mortality rate  in  Iraq
         is 108 per thousand live births, the under 5 mortality rate is  28
         per thousand and maternal mortality is 294 per 100,000.  This data
         is very telling when compared to neighbouring  countries  such  as
         Syria."

12.   The next report we were referred to was the UNHCR "Report of the High
    Commissioner: The present Situation of Human Rights  in  Iraq  (Advance
    unedited version)" 04/06/2004.   In  particular  we  were  referred  to
    paragraphs 88,  89,  94,  131,  133-136.   At  paragraph  89  there  is
    reference to UNICEF and international NGOs, since August 2003,  due  to
    the security situation, finding it impossible  to  sustain  appropriate
    monitoring of the rights of the child in Iraq.  At paragraph 90  it  is
    stated that child malnutrition drastically increased in the  early  90s
    mainly due to the imposition of economic sanctions.   In  paragraph  91
    there is reference from UNICEF that, due to violence that affects  many
    parts of the country, school attendance has dropped  to  less  than  50
    percent and access  to  quality  healthcare  and  services  has  become
    increasingly a challenge to many children and their parents.

13.   At paragraph 94 it states:

      "Vulnerable groups of children, including children living in poverty,
         children  living  in  institutions,   street   children,   working
         children, children belonging to minority groups and children  with
         disabilities, are at risk  of  any  form  of  neglect,  abuse  and
         exploitation.  Access to quality education and health services  is
         increasingly under stress due to the poor  functioning  of  public
         services and the security situation.  There has apparently been  a
         dramatic increase in the number  of  street  children  as  parents
         cannot support their children anymore."

14.   At paragraph 131 in the part of the report  relating  to  Health,  it
    states that the health system has deteriorated  dramatically  and  that
    the standard and provision  of  curative  and  preventive  health  care
    remained well below public health norms and  there  was  an  increasing
    risk of disease outbreaks.  Health structures were noted to  have  been
    affected by looting and chaos  which  followed  the  conflict  and  the
    levels of distribution available of human resources for health remained
    inadequate.

15.   Under  the  next  section  "Food,  Water  and  Sanitation"  there  is
    reference to malnutrition and one assessment suggesting that seven  out
    of ten children suffered from various degrees of  diarrhoea,  primarily
    as a result of contaminated drinking water.   Poor  food  hygiene  also
    contributed  to   children's   ill-health   as   power   cut   disabled
    refrigeration and  cooking  gas  became  scarce.   It  was  also  noted
    (paragraph 136)  that  sewage  treatment  facilities  were  often  non-
    operational due  to  the  breakdown  of  fuel  supply  lines,  lack  of
    maintenance and looting and that one serious consequence of poor  water
    and sanitation conditions was an increase in diarrhoeal and  water-born
    diseases.

16.   We were  then  referred  to  the  Joint  British-Danish  Fact-Finding
    Mission to Damascus, Amman and Geneva on conditions in Iraq (1-12  July
    and 23 July 2003).  In particular we were asked  to  note  paragraph  5
    relating to returns to Iraq.  Paragraph  5.1  reports  that  the  UNHCR
    considered there was a volatile and rapidly evolving  situation  (which
    became the subject of the report referred to earlier in this  Decision)
    and for this reason new eligibility guidelines for Iraqi asylum seekers
    were prevented.  This report also  suggested  according  to  the  UNHCR
    returns should not be rushed and  a  humanitarian  approach  should  be
    taken.  Paragraph 5.18 refers to returns to the Baghdad area and  notes
    that refugees face increasing housing problems in the post-Saddam era.

17.   We were next referred  to  an  Immigration  Advisory  Service  report
    "Ministerial response to letter on forced returns to Iraq and  Somalia"
    -   12/07/2004.   This  sets  out  a  letter  from  the   Minister   of
    Immigration, Mr. Des Browne which includes the comment:

      "In respect of Iraq, I agree with you and the  UNHCR  that  voluntary
         returns are preferable to enforced  returns,  but  I  nevertheless
         believe that enforced returns are justifiable to the  more  stable
         areas of the country.  You refer  to  the  FCO  Travel  Advice  on
         travel to Iraq.  This advice is for British nationals.  There is a
         difference between the  risk  a  British  citizen  would  face  in
         travelling to Iraq and those of an Iraqi returning to  their  home
         country.  There is clearly a difficult position in those parts  of
         Iraq most affected by insurgencies; however, I do not accept  that
         this is the case in all areas --- We will  take  forward  enforced
         returns on a case-by-case basis and will only return to particular
         areas assessed as sufficiently stable, where we are satisfied that
         the individual concerned will not be at risk."

18.   Ms. Elliot submitted that the objective country information therefore
    suggested that a system was not in place to assist a  family,  such  as
    this appellant's, and in particular medical and  humanitarian  aid  for
    the children were simply unavailable.  Beyond  this  children  were  at
    risk of malnutrition, disease and diarrhoeal  or  water-born  diseases.
    In this situation this family was very vulnerable and in particular the
    child M, whose condition had not yet been  diagnosed,  would  be  major
    concern to his parents.  In this situation any  return  to  Baghdad  or
    elsewhere in Iraq would constitute a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR in
    that the family would suffer inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  either
    directly or, in  the  case  of  the  parents,  having  to  observe  the
    breakdown in the health of their children.  Accordingly we should allow
    the appeal.

The Respondent's Submissions

19.   Mr. Blundell submitted that the background situation was not disputed
    and the situation in Iraq was certainly not ideal although improvements
    were being made.  Against this  had  to  be  set  his  submission  that
    children of a very young age  were  adjustable  and  given  that  these
    children would be returning with their family their position  would  be
    better than that of street children or  others  in  special  categories
    noted in the objective information.  He submitted that it appeared  the
    appellant and his wife were in good health and able  to  support  their
    family by way of employment and child care.  Beyond this they would  be
    able to access what medical facilities were available.

20.   Having considered the medical report of the consultant  paediatrician
    he considered that it was still necessary for us to find that the  very
    high threshold required to meet Article 3, ECHR would  not  be  met  in
    this case.  He referred us to the leading Determination of the Court of
    Appeal in N [2004] INLR 10.   He  agreed  that,  while  the  very  high
    threshold required for there to be a breach of Article 3  was  variable
    and would be more relaxed in the case of a child, this was a  situation
    where there was no diagnosis before us to show that it would be  unsafe
    for this child to be returned to Iraq at this time.  The medical report
    indeed stated that there may be in fact no problem for this  child  and
    accordingly, following the guidance  given  in  N,  there  was  clearly
    difficulty for us to conclude that  returning  the  appellant  and  his
    family to Iraq at this time would constitute a breach of the Article  3
    obligations of this country.  We must consider the likely impact  of  a
    return.  Given the uncertainty and lack of diagnosis  that  was  simply
    something we could not do to the  level  required  and  accordingly  we
    should dismiss the appeal.

21.   In reply Ms. Elliot submitted  to  us  that  a  suggestion  that  the
    appellants could return to Iraq and pay for  medical  care  was  not  a
    sustainable one given that the objective country  information  did  not
    show that such  care  was  even  available  but,  in  the  alternative,
    appeared to indicate that due to looting and  chaos  medial  facilities
    may simply be unavailable.  She also agreed however  that  due  to  the
    lack of diagnosis it was not possible for us to know at this time  what
    actually was needed for their care.

22.   She submitted that in this situation the need for ongoing checks on M
    such as scans showed that this was not likely to be  received  in  Iraq
    and therefore it was unsafe for M to be returned.

23.   We reserved our Determination.

The Issue

24.   We found the  sole  before  us  to  be  whether  the  return  of  the
    appellant, accompanied by his wife and young family, would constitute a
    breach of Article 3 of the ECHR on the basis of  the  findings  of  the
    Adjudicator, the new medical evidence provided and our  own  assessment
    of the objective information.

Decision

25.   At the outset we note that it is relevant  to  consider  the  general
    situation in Iraq and  we  have  done  this  by  consideration  of  the
    objective information  placed  before  us.   As  was  conceded  by  Mr.
    Blundell the situation is not an ideal  one  from  the  prospective  of
    child health or development.  However we  are  satisfied,  particularly
    noting the guidelines set  out  in  N  that  the  very  high  (extreme)
    threshold set out by Lord Justice Laws will only be reached in specific
    situations and does not apply as a generality.  We have also noted  the
    helpful guidance on Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR assessments  in  Ullah
    [2004] UKHL 26 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

26.   It is thus necessary for us to go  on  and  consider  the  individual
    circumstances of this family and in particular the medical issues for M
    and to a lesser extent his twin brother.  We have carefully noted  also
    the helpful and balanced report of Dr. Cronin and  agree  that  we  are
    placed in a situation where there is a lack of diagnosis at this  time,
    which is understandable due to the age of  the  child  and  short  time
    period over which the fitting episodes have occurred.  It does  however
    place us in the situation where we find we are in  agreement  with  the
    submission of Mr. Blundell that it is possible that M's  situation  may
    be found to be of a serious nature or may not be a problem at all.   We
    must make our decision on the basis of  the  evidence  before  us.   We
    consider  that  noting  the  relevant  jurisprudence,  there  are   not
    substantive reasons for concluding that M, or his parents  or  siblings
    would be at a real risk of suffering inhuman or degrading treatment  as
    the likely impact of their return at  this  time.   For  these  reasons
    therefore the Article 3 ECHR claim cannot succeed and the  appeal  must
    be dismissed.

27.   We do however  find  this  a  very  troubling  case  because  of  the
    undiagnosed situation for M and the uncertainty, particularly  relating
    to future medical treatment for children, in Iraq.  We agree  with  Mr.
    Blundell that at the  moment  there  does  appear  to  be  a  gradually
    improving situation.  Whether that will continue into  the  future,  we
    know not.  We have noted  that  the  Home  Office  have  undertaken  to
    consider a  concession  under  the  "special  exercise".   Clearly  the
    appellant should take all steps to access  that  concession  if  it  is
    available.  Beyond this we take into  account  the  additional  medical
    evidence that we had before us, which was not before  the  Adjudicator.
    We would also add our recommendations to that of the  Adjudicator  that
    this is a case where exceptional consideration could be  given  to  the
    appellant and this family, at least during the time when investigations
    are carried out as to the diagnosis of the child M.

28.   The appeal however is dismissed.




                                                             MR. A.R. MACKEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


