
H-CAF-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |DG (Article 8 - father's    |
|                           |        |access to child) Turkey     |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00160          |
|On 9 June 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|21 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane - Vice President                                      |
|Ms S S Ramsumair JP                                               |
|Mr M J Griffiths                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representations:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Dewison, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M A Siddique, Solicitor, of Howe & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, who is the Secretary of State for the Home Department,
    appeals with permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr
    D A Kinloch, sitting at Taylor House, in which he allowed on Article  8
    grounds the Respondent's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State on 24 December 2002 to give directions  for  the  Respondent's
    removal from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

2.    Both parties to this appeal  were  informed  by  notice  sent  on  25
    November 2003 that permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  had  been
    granted.   By  rule  19(2)  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum   Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2003, the Respondent,  if  he  wished  to  apply  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the   Adjudicator's
    Determination, had ten days within which to do so, following receipt of
    that notice.

3.    In his determination, the Adjudicator had dismissed the  Respondent's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  No Respondent's notice was filed within  the
    prescribed period.

4.    By a letter dated 20 May 2004, Messrs Howe & Co., on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, submitted a Respondent's notice.  As can be seen, this  was
    very substantially out of time.  It should also be  mentioned  that  no
    alternative period for the filing of the Respondent's notice  had  been
    directed by the Tribunal pursuant to rule 19(2)(a).

5.    Notwithstanding this, the effect of rule 19(2)(a) is  to  enable  the
    Tribunal, if it considers the  interests  of  justice  so  require,  to
    accept a late Respondent's notice, even (as in this case) on the day of
    the  appeal  hearing  itself.   Accordingly,   the   Tribunal   invited
    submissions from the parties' representatives as to whether  it  should
    do so in the present case.

6.    Having heard those submissions, the Tribunal decided not to admit the
    Respondent's notice.  Our reasons were as follows.  First,  insofar  as
    the Respondent's notice comprises  a  criticism  of  the  Adjudicator's
    determination on the evidence that was before  him,  the  Tribunal  was
    given no adequate explanation as to why the Appellant saw  fit  to  let
    months go by, before submitting the notice.  At  paragraph  16  of  his
    determination, the Adjudicator makes it plain that he had had regard to
    relevant case law, in particular the Tribunal  Determination  in  ACDOG
    [2003] UKIAT 00034, in assessing  risk  on  return.   The  Respondent's
    involvement with HADEP was, as the Adjudicator noted, at  a  low  level
    and, although he had been relatively briefly detained and, indeed, ill-
    treated whilst in such detention, the Adjudicator did not consider that
    the Respondent's background on return would give rise to a real risk of
    treatment that would "amount to persecution" (paragraph 18).

7.    That conclusion was open to the Adjudicator as a matter  of  law,  on
    the evidence before him.

8.    The Respondent's notice also sought to attack  the  determination  by
    reference to materials contained in the October  2003  and  April  2004
    Home Office CIPU  Reports  on  Turkey,  regarding  the  nature  of  the
    information systems available to the immigration  authorities  in  that
    country..  In summary, Mr Siddique submitted that some brief references
    in the April 2004 Report, emanating from  the  Swiss  Organisation  for
    Refugees, suggested that the GBTS central computer system might not  be
    the only information-gathering system available to those officials.  As
    a result, even though the Respondent had been released without  charge,
    following periods of detention, it was possible that a record of  those
    detentions would be available to the authorities at Istanbul airport.

9.     The  first  point  to  note  with  regard  to  this  aspect  of  the
    Respondent's notice is  that  the  Adjudicator  determined  the  asylum
    appeal prior to the publication in October 2003 of detailed information
    regarding the scope of the GBTS system.  Accordingly, the Adjudicator's
    determination does not turn on what would or would not be available  to
    immigration authorities, by way of records on the Respondent.

10.   In any event, both the quotations from  the  Swiss  Organisation  for
    Refugees (the context of which  is  entirely  unclear)  and  the  other
    materials submitted by Mr  Siddique  failed  to  show  that  an  appeal
    against the Adjudicator's decision  on  asylum  grounds  stood  a  real
    prospect of success.  Not only is there nothing  in  the  materials  to
    show that  a  record  of  the  kind  of  detention  undergone  by  this
    Respondent would be recorded, let alone in  a  form  available  to  the
    immigration authorities, certain of the materials in fact point in  the
    opposition direction.  In particular, we observe  that  a  report  from
    Sedat Gunec in Ankara dated 1 February 2004,  published  by  "Zaman  On
    Line," observes that police and gendarmerie records are in the  process
    of being "destroyed", with the aim of putting  all  "criminal  records"
    including "arrest warrants" on what is  manifestly  the  GBTS  computer
    system, as described in the CIPU Reports.  There  is  no  reference  to
    records of detention going onto the system. The exercise is said to  be
    part of the "reforms to adapt Turkey to European Union (EU) standards".

11.   Mr Siddique submitted that there might  be  other  agencies  such  as
    State security officials, who would still have separate records.   That
    may be so, but it in no sense means that a record on a low-level  HADEP
    sympathiser, such  as  the  Respondent,  would  be  held  by  any  such
    organisation.

12.   Accordingly, the Tribunal found that the issues sought to  be  raised
    in the Respondent's notice, if permitted to form the grounds of  appeal
    against the Adjudicator's asylum decision, disclosed no  real  prospect
    of success.

13.   We turn now to the Article 8 appeal of the Secretary of  State.   The
    factual position in this regard is as follows.  The Respondent met  and
    married in August 2000 a Turkish lady who had been living in the United
    Kingdom for some time and who had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain there.  The parties met whilst  that  lady  was  on  holiday  in
    Turkey.  According to paragraph  20  of  the  determination,  she  then
    returned to the United Kingdom.  At some point, which  must  have  been
    during a subsequent meeting of husband and wife in Turkey  or,  in  any
    event, outside the United Kingdom, a child was conceived.  A baby  girl
    was born to the  mother  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  31  March  2002.
    According to Mr Siddique, the Respondent had at some point applied  for
    leave to enter the United Kingdom, presumably  to  be  with  his  wife.
    That application had, apparently, failed, but Mr Siddique was unable to
    provide any further information in  that  regard.   What  is,  however,
    clear is that the Respondent entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  by
    lorry on 17 October 2002 and decided to claim asylum approximately  one
    week later.   As  we  have  already  noted,  although  the  Adjudicator
    accepted that the Respondent was a HADEP sympathiser who had previously
    been detained, the Respondent's asylum  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
    Adjudicator.

14.   At paragraph 21 of the determination, we observe that the  Respondent
    and his wife "only lived together for about six months,  separating  in
    May or June 2003".  Since that time, the Respondent has been seeing his
    daughter at least once a week.  He told the Adjudicator that "his  wife
    is keen for him to  get  to  know  his  daughter  better".   The  wife,
    however, does not  appear  to  have  given  oral  evidence  before  the
    Adjudicator.

15.   At paragraph 23, the Adjudicator acknowledged that

      "It is against the [Respondent] that at the time he married his  wife
         he must have known that it was unclear if, and when, he  would  be
         allowed to join her in the UK.  It is against him that  with  this
         knowledge the parties proceeded to have a child.  It is, I  think,
         against him that the [Respondent] has now separated from his  wife
         and is living alone, and is being forced to live  apart  from  his
         daughter, which perhaps lessens the strength of his family ties".

16.   Paragraphs 24 and 25 of the determination are worth quoting in full:-

      "24. On the other hand, I think there have to be very strong  reasons
             for separating a father from his child.  I do not think it  is
             realistic to suggest that the [Respondent's] wife could go and
             live with their child in Turkey, especially as they  have  now
             separated.  It is possible that if the  [Respondent]  were  to
             return to Turkey his daughter could go  there  on  holiday  so
             that he could see her.  However, he would  have  no  guarantee
             that this would happen.


      25.  I have come to the conclusion that it would be too severe a step
             to take to separate the [Respondent] from his child  in  order
             to maintain Immigration controls.   I  reach  this  conclusion
             with some hesitation in view of the  various  factors  against
             the [Respondent] as outlined  above,  but  I  think  that  the
             desirability of a parent maintaining contact  with  his  child
             outweighs these factors.  I accordingly think that it would be
             a breach of his right to a family  life  here  to  remove  the
             [Respondent]".


17.   Insofar as the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that the
    Adjudicator was not entitled as a matter of law to find that  a  family
    life subsisted between the Respondent and his daughter,  we  find  that
    those grounds lack merit.  We accept, as the Adjudicator did, that  the
    Respondent sees the daughter regularly, and is keen to continue  to  do
    so.

18.   Where the  Adjudicator  plainly  fell  into  error,  however,  is  at
    paragraph 24 of the determination, where the inexorable  logic  of  his
    conclusion is that failed applicants for asylum who have separated from
    their wives and children, but who are anxious to maintain contact  with
    the latter, are, in the absence of any special circumstances,  entitled
    to rely upon Article 8 of the ECHR in order to nullify any  attempt  to
    remove them  in  pursuance  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  of
    immigration control.

19.   In attempting to support the Adjudicator's conclusions,  Mr  Siddique
    relied upon Blessing Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716.   There  are,  however,
    significant differences with that case, as is apparent from  a  reading
    of paragraph 7 of the judgment of Simon Brown LJ.  The forging  of  the
    family life of Ms Edore had taken place entirely in the United Kingdom,
    where she had resided (albeit for the most part unlawfully) since 1990.
     Two children had been born to her and Mr Okadiegbo.   That  gentleman,
    whilst  not  co-habiting  with  Ms  Edore,  maintained   a   continuing
    relationship with her.  Mr Okadiegbo supported the family of  Ms  Edore
    and her children financially.  Not only Ms  Edore,  but  also  her  two
    children, would have been compelled to leave the  United  Kingdom,  had
    her removal gone ahead.  The children themselves had been found  to  be
    "emotionally dependent"  upon  Mr  Okadiegbo  who  provided  "a  stable
    influence" in their lives.

20.   At paragraph 26 of his  judgment,  Simon  Brown  LJ  categorised  the
    circumstances of the case as "highly unusual".   At  paragraph  27,  he
    considered that "there  may  not  be  many...occasions"  in  which  the
    decision reached by the Secretary of State could be said to be "outside
    the range of permissible responses open to him" but  the  instant  case
    "was one of them".

21.   The  facts  of  the  case  before  us  are  starkly  different.   The
    Respondent saw fit, not only to  embark  upon  marriage,  but  also  to
    father a child, in circumstances where he and his wife were resident in
    different countries and where it was  entirely  uncertain  whether  the
    couple would  ever  be  able  to  co-habit.   When  such  co-habitation
    occurred, following  the  Respondent's  illegal  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom, it lasted a remarkably short time.  There is no suggestion  of
    any continuing  relationship  between  the  Respondent  and  his  wife,
    otherwise than in relation to the daughter, who was barely a  year  old
    when the couple decided to separate.

22.   The Respondent served a witness statement dated 17 May 2004, in which
    he states that his daughter "is very attached to me and cries when  she
    leaves me" and that "she is everything to me and it  would  destroy  my
    life if I were not able to see her whenever I please".

23.   The Tribunal has taken this statement into account, in comparing  the
    facts of the present case with those of Edore.

24.   Paragraphs 4  and  5  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  the
    Adjudicator  has  not  paid  proper  regard  to  the  fact   that   the
    Respondent's wife could bring the daughter to Turkey from time to  time
    in order to see her father.  The statement of May 2004 seeks to counter
    this by stating that "my wife is not working at present  and  would  be
    unable to afford to send my child to Turkey or a third country, even if
    she were willing to do so".  No  proper  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    wife's position has, however, been submitted.

25.   In any event, as Mr Dewison submitted by reference to paragraph 5  of
    the grounds, the Adjudicator entirely failed to have regard to the fact
    that it is open to the Respondent to seek to visit his daughter in  the
    United Kingdom.  There are two ways in which this could occur.   First,
    it would be open to the Respondent to make an application for a  family
    visit to the United Kingdom, for the purposes of visiting his daughter.
      Secondly,  and  in  the  Tribunal's  view  even  more  significantly,
    paragraphs 246 to 248F of the Immigration  Rules  (HC  395)  provide  a
    mechanism whereby a person can be  given  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and, thereafter, to remain and obtain indefinite leave, for the
    purpose of exercising access rights to a child resident in  the  United
    Kingdom.

26.   As regards visits, the Respondent in his statement contends that  "it
    is unlikely that I would ever be able to  return  to  this  country  to
    visit".  That is, however, speculation.  Were the Respondent  to  apply
    to the Entry Clearance Officer for leave to enter as a visitor for  the
    purpose of seeing his daughter,  that  application  would  have  to  be
    considered in the light of the relevant Immigration Rules and the Human
    Rights Act 1998.  Mr Siddique also submitted that, on the findings made
    by the Adjudicator, it was likely that the Respondent would  on  return
    be compelled to undertake military service in the Turkish armed forces.
     Many families, however, have to endure separation whilst adult members
    are serving in the  armed  forces,  whether  or  not  as  a  result  of
    conscription.  No evidence has, in any event, been  submitted  to  show
    that the Turkish authorities would prohibit the Respondent from  making
    a visit to his daughter during any period of military leave.

27.   Paragraph 246 of the Immigration Rules lays down certain requirements
    to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  in
    order to exercise access rights to a child.   These  include  producing
    evidence that the applicant has a  Residence  Order  or  Contact  Order
    granted by a Court in the United Kingdom or a certificate issued  by  a
    district judge confirming the applicant's intention to maintain contact
    with the child.  The applicant must also show an intention to  continue
    to take an active role in the child's  upbringing  and  there  must  be
    adequate accommodation  and  maintenance  for  the  applicant  and  any
    dependants, without recourse to public funds.

28.   Insofar as the Respondent asserts that he may be unable to meet these
    requirements in practice, what Phillips MR has to say at  paragraph  65
    of the judgments in Mahmood [2000]  EWCA  Civ  315  is  relevant:   the
    possibility that his application may not succeed is not  a  reason  for
    excusing him from the requirement to make an application  from  outside
    the United Kingdom.  We would further add that, in the context  of  any
    such application, the Entry Clearance Officer, just as with  a  visitor
    application, will have a duty to reach a decision  which  is  compliant
    with the Human Rights Act 1998.

29.   Mr Siddique submitted that it was not reasonable to have expected the
    Adjudicator, of his own motion, to have been aware of paragraphs 246 et
    seq of the Immigration Rules, particularly since the Secretary of State
    had chosen not to be represented before the Adjudicator.   We  rejected
    that submission.  Those provisions are part of the statutory  framework
    of immigration law.  It cannot possibly be right for  the  Tribunal  to
    allow the Adjudicator's determination to stand on that basis. In  fact,
    the paragraph 246 issue has already been the subject of a reported case-
     Talha Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 01757.

30.   In any event, even on the basis upon which he approached the  matter,
    the Adjudicator, as is plain from paragraph 25  of  his  determination,
    has asked himself the wrong question.  Instead of  considering  whether
    the Secretary of State's decision to remove the Respondent  was  within
    the range of permissible responses  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    (whether or not the Adjudicator would himself have so  responded),  the
    Adjudicator appears from paragraph 25 to have himself carried  out  the
    "balancing" exercise inherent in Article 8(2), and  to  have  concluded
    "with  some  hesitation"  that  the  balance  fell  in  favour  of  the
    Respondent.

31.   As the Tribunal has explained  in  DM  (HDZ)  Croatia*  [2004]  UKIAT
    00024:-

      "The starting point should  be  that  if  in  the  circumstances  the
         removal could reasonably be regarded as proportionate, whether  or
         not the Secretary of State has actually said  so  or  applied  his
         mind to the issue, it is lawful.  The  Tribunal  and  Adjudicators
         should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali   as   providing   clear
         exemplification of the limits of what is lawful and proportionate.
          They should normally hold that a decision to remove  is  unlawful
         only when  the  disproportion  is  so  great  that  no  reasonable
         Secretary of State could remove in those circumstances.   However,
         where the Secretary of State, e.g. through a consistent  decision-
         making pattern or through decisions in relation to members of  the
         same  family,  has  clearly  shown  where  within  the  range   of
         reasonable responses his own assessment would  lie,  it  would  be
         inappropriate to assess proportionality by reference  to  a  wider
         range of possible responses  than  he  in  fact  uses.   It  would
         otherwise have to be a  truly  exceptional  case,  identified  and
         reasoned, which would justify  the  conclusion  that  the  removal
         decision was unlawful by reference to an assessment  that  removal
         was within the range of reasonable assessments of proportionality.
          We cannot think of one at present; it is simply  that  we  cannot
         rule it out".  (Paragraph 28).

32.   The facts of this case are far from making it  a  "truly  exceptional
    case", of the kind described in DM.

33.   This appeal is allowed.







                                                                    P R LANE
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT





