

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On: 23 June 2004           |        |IO ("Points in Issue")      |
|                           |        |Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00179  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|6 July 2004                                                       |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                  |
|Miss C St.Clair                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER LAGOS                                     |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

(                               ) was not represented before us and, as was
to   be   expected,   did   not   appear.    However,   his    sister,    (
                 ), attended before us and answered  some  questions.   The
respondent was represented by Mr A Hatton, a Senior Home Office  Presenting
Officer.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was born on 12 March 1986 and so
is now seventeen years old.  He appeals the decision of an Adjudicator,  Mr
K.S. Nevin, who in a determination promulgated on 29 May 2003 dismissed his
appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer that he was  not
entitled to visit his sister in the United Kingdom.

The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application  on  3  February  2003.
The reasons given in the form GV51 Family Visitors are quite inadequate and
it is disappointing to see that decisions of this quality are  still  being
prepared.  The Entry Clearance Officer had to make  a  decision  about  the
appellant's ability to satisfy the rules relating to  visitor  visas.   The
refusal of an entry clearance shows no analysis whatsoever of the  relevant
rules.  It does not even refer to them.

The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  the  United
Kingdom as a visitor are set out in paragraph 41  of  HC  395.   There  are
seven clauses to Rule 41.  The Entry Clearance Officer  does  not  actually
refer to any of them.  The Entry Clearance Officer noted that the appellant
had no previous experience of travel to the United Kingdom, that he  was  a
sixteen year old unmarried man, that he wished to visit his sister who  had
been in the United Kingdom for the past  sixteen  years  whom  he  had  not
sought to see previously, and that he was a student, financially  dependent
on his parents who had no income or assets of  his  own  and  that  he  had
produced no evidence of sponsorship for his visit to  the  United  Kingdom.
These things may well each be true.  They are not of themselves reasons  to
refuse the application although it is possible that they could have led the
Entry Clearance Officer to find that some particular  requirements  of  the
rules were not satisfied.

These factors seemed to lead the Entry Clearance Officer to the  conclusion
that he was 'not satisfied that only a short visit is intended'.  It is not
a requirement of the rules that only a short  visit  is  intended  although
41(i) requires that a person 'is genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a
limited period as stated by him,  not  exceeding  six  months;  and  41(ii)
continues 'intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period  of
the visit as stated by him.'

Entry clearance officers considering applications from  potential  visitors
who are doing their work properly will have the requirements of rule 41  of
HC 395 in the forefront of their minds, if not  literally  in  text  before
them.  If the Entry Clearance Officer had intended to  say  something  like
"In the light of these facts I am not satisfied that you will maintain  and
accommodate yourself adequately out of resources available to  you  without
recourse to public funds, or taking employment; or will be  maintained  and
accommodated adequately by relatives or friends" as required by rule 41(vi)
of HC 395 he could have done so easily.  Significantly the Entry  Clearance
Officer did not say this.  The best that we can do is to  assume  that  the
Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant  met  the
requirements of paragraph 41(i) and 41(ii).

The Entry Clearance Officer continued: 'In view of  the  above,  I  am  not
satisfied that you are settled and well  established  in  your  country  of
origin.'

As the Adjudicator rightly appreciated,  the  Adjudicator  was  obliged  to
decide the case for himself but it is  a  long  established  convention  in
immigration cases (which includes visitor applications) that unless a point
had been put in issue by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  an  appellant  is
entitled to assume that the adjudicator would not  decide  it  against  him
without putting him on notice of that possibility.

This convention was particularly important in this case  as  the  appellant
had not been interviewed by the Entry Clearance  Officer  and  (as  he  was
entitled to do) asked for a "paper appeal".  It is very  difficult  to  see
how  the  Adjudicator  could  have  given  the  appellant  notice   without
adjourning the case out of the list but appeals against applications for  a
visitor's visa have to be heard promptly.  It is inherently likely that  it
will be more just to assume that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  good
reasons for not raising a point than it will be to adjourn the appeal.

It follows that the only points that should have been in issue  before  the
Adjudicator were the appellant's intention to leave the United  Kingdom  at
the end of the visit as stated by him and the genuineness  of  his  seeking
entry for a limited period not exceeding six months.  The Adjudicator found
very clearly at paragraph 8 of his determination that the appellant has  an
incentive to return to his home in Nigeria at the end of his holiday in the
United Kingdom.  Regrettably the adjudicator did  not  follow  through  his
reasoning and make  a  clear  finding  about  the  appellant's  intentions.
Having considered the determination as  a  whole  we  find  that  the  only
reasonable inference is that the adjudicator found that  the  claimant  did
intend to leave the United Kingdom to  return  to  Nigeria  after  a  short
holiday with his sister.

Given that other aspects of the rule had not been put in issue by the Entry
Clearance Officer the Adjudicator should have allowed the appeal.

In the circumstances we allow this appeal and we direct that suitable entry
clearance be endorsed on the appellant's  passport  as  soon  as  that  can
reasonably be arranged.

The Tribunal is well aware the entry clearance officers  often  work  under
great pressure.  Nevertheless  each  applicant  is  entitled  to  a  proper
decision.  We set out below a summary of the approach that we say should be
taken when considering visitor applications and appeals:

      a)    If entry clearance officers are not satisfied that an applicant
           has met the requirements of a particular clause of rule 41  they
           must  say  so  clearly  and  identify  the  rule  unequivocally,
           preferably both by its number and a direct quotation from it.

      b)    Applicants are entitled to assume that their ability to satisfy
           the particular requirements of the rules is not in issue  unless
           the Entry Clearance Officers unequivocally puts it in issue.

      c)     Adjudicators  hearing  appeals  must  decide  the   case   for
           themselves on the totality of the evidence but must  not  decide
           that a requirement of the rules  is  not  satisfied  unless  the
           Entry Clearance Officer clearly said that it was  not  satisfied
           OR the Adjudicator has given the appellant express  notice  that
           the Adjudicator is not satisfied that an appellant  can  satisfy
           the particular requirements of a clause of rule 41.

      d)    The injustice to the appellant inherent in any delay caused  by
           an adjudicator putting  in  issue  the  appellant's  ability  to
           satisfy the requirements of part of  the  rule  that  the  entry
           clearance officer did not put in issue will usually  be  greater
           than the injustice caused by the Adjudicator assuming  that  the
           entry clearance officer had good reason for not expressly saying
           that the requirements of a particular clause were not met.

As indicated above, we allow this appeal.





                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
                                                                25 June 2004
