
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |NA (Kurd - internal flight  |
|                           |        |to south) Iraq [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00249                       |
|On:  17 May 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           18.05.2004                                      |
|Issued:            27.05.2004                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Freeman (vice-president)                                     |
|Mrs L R Schmitt                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Lawther
For the respondent:    Miss E Norman, counsel instructed by Richards Heynes
                   & Coopers, Coventry

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      This is a Home Office appeal in the case of a Kurdish citizen of Iraq
   whose appeal was allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds  by  an
   adjudicator, Miss L Astle, sitting at Birmingham on 5 August  2003.  The
   claimant's history is that his father had worked for the government at a
   checkpoint  between  government-controlled  territory  and  the  Kurdish
   Autonomous Area.  His activities led to resentment as a result of  which
   he was eventually murdered by Kurdish forces.  The claimant himself  had
   been working at Ba'ath Party offices but following his  father's  murder
   he was required to carry out similar activities  which  he  took  to  be
   equivalent to spying.  He refused to do so and  was  detained  and  ill-
   treated by government forces until he agreed then he  was  released  and
   fled through Turkey to this country where he arrived in August 2002  and
   claimed asylum  on  the  basis  of  risk  from  the  then  Ba'ath  Party
   Government.

2. By the time of the hearing before the adjudicator things had  of  course
   changed, and the adjudicator  gives  his  current  case  as  follows  at
   paragraph 13:

   When he left he feared the Ba'ath party but now he says  that  he  fears
   the Iraqi people and the Kurds.  He said at the hearing  that  the  fact
   that he had signed up was now known and he will be at  risk  as  someone
   who signed up to help the Ba'ath party.  He will  also  be  at  risk  on
   account of his father's activities.  He is the only male member  of  his
   family and as such revenge will be taken upon him.  In his statement  he
   says that since he left he has  spoken  to  his  mother  and  the  Iraqi
   opposition have raided his house and are looking for family  members  to
   kill. Their house has been confiscated and his mother is scared.  At the
   hearing he said that his mother is now moving from one house to another.


3. The adjudicator dealt with his case as follows:

   27. The account of his ill treatment fits well into the context  of  the
   background material and I consider that his claim to have been  forcibly
   recruited and ill treated is reasonably  likely  to  be  true.   However
   although I note that some of the papers of  the  old  regime  have  been
   found and the appellant claims that his name will be of  these,  I  also
   note that the appellant left immediately and did not  serve  the  Ba'ath
   party.  In fact they  tried  to  take  action  against  him.  He  was  a
   shopkeeper right up until he left.  In  the  light  of  this  I  do  not
   consider that the appellant is likely to  be  at  risk  upon  return  on
   account of this.


   28. However, the appellant's father was prominent in the party  and  was
   involved in the arrest and detention of many  Kurds  and  others  and  I
   accept that appellant's account of this.  Again this has been consistent
   and when called upon to do so he has been able to give further  details.
   His father only died in 1999.  Memories run long in  this  part  of  the
   world.  It is likely that there are many people around who will remember
   him and consider that revenge should be taken.   The  appellant  is  the
   only son.  I note that the appellant's mother has lost her house.   This
   also fits in with the background material. I find that if the  appellant
   is returned he is likely to face persecution on account of his father.


   29. The appellant is an ethnic Kurd and Sunni Muslim.  In view of what I
   have said above I do not consider that he can be safely returned to  any
   Kurdish area.  In view of his ethnicity I  consider  that  it  would  be
   unduly harsh to return him to an Arab area.


4. The Home Office challenge that decision on two bases.  The first  relies
   on evidence suggesting  that  family  members  of  former  Ba'ath  Party
   officials are not at risk, contained in the  report  of  a  British  and
   Danish Fact-finding Mission of July 2003 at paragraph 4.8:

   A Middle Eastern  official  source  informed  the  delegation  that  the
   families of Ba'ath Party officials or people associated with the  former
   regime would not be targeted in revenge for crimes committed during  the
   Saddam regime.  The delegation was  told  that  Muslims  do  not  attack
   family members and that such reprisals would not occur in Iraq.  It  was
   added that families were likely to have escaped or changed  address  any
   way.


5. We do not regard that as an impressive piece of evidence:  there  is  no
   detail about the source which suggests any particular knowledge of Iraq,
   and the view  expressed  sounds  all  too  much  like  what  the  person
   concerned thought ought to happen, rather than what actually did happen.



6. Miss Norman suggests that the adjudicator was entitled to find for  this
   appellant on his personal history, on the basis of the events related by
   his mother.  While we think that she  might  well  have  subjected  that
   account to more critical evaluation, we accept that she was  just  about
   entitled to make the finding of fact she did on this point.

7. The Home Office's second ground is one of a different  kind.   They  say
   there was no evidence to support the adjudicator's finding at  paragraph
   29, "In view of his ethnicity I consider that it would be  unduly  harsh
   to return him to an Arab area".  The  reference  is  of  course  to  the
   southern two-thirds of Iraq, the central part which is a Sunni  majority
   area, and the southern part which is Shi'a.

8. The Tribunal said some time ago in case [2003]  UKIAT   00022  A  (Iraq)
   that there was no current evidence to show the general unsafety  of  the
   southern two-thirds of the country for Kurds.   However,  the  situation
   might well have changed since then; so we invited Ms Norman to refer  to
   any other evidence that may now exist about the situation faced by Kurds
   in Arab areas. There is of course more than enough  evidence  about  the
   general security of Iraq, or lack of it.

9. The Home Office position is that no returns  are  currently  being  made
   pending further arrangements, which will depend on that general security
   situation. UNHCR, speaking of course from a  different  point  of  view,
   advise generally against returns of anyone to Iraq.  There is an analogy
   in our view with the situation in Zimbabwe, where  there  have  been  no
   returns for some considerable time, no doubt for good reason.   However,
   the consistent position of the courts and of the Tribunal has been  that
   each individual case must be looked at on its  merits;  and  we  see  no
   reason why any different approach should be taken with Iraq.

10. Miss Norman spoke in general terms of the history of animosity  between
   Arabs and Kurds.  She referred us to a number  of  pieces  of  evidence,
   contained in the bundle prepared by her solicitors.  The photocopying of
   this  bundle  is  unusually  abominable,  and  numerous  parts  of   the
   pagination are replicated which  has  led  to  further  difficulty.   We
   understand that the claimant  is  receiving  legal  assistance,  and  we
   should like to draw the attention of the Legal  Services  Commission  to
   what we have said about the bundle, when it comes to claiming any  costs
   of preparing it.

11. The first item we were referred to is  an  International  Crisis  Group
   Report of 19 March 2003.  The passage there refers to the  attitude  to
   Kurds of the Ba'ath Party, and not that of the general population.  Then
   there is an Associated Press release of 22 April 2003, which  refers  to
   events at around Erbil which, as the map contained in the bundle  shows,
   is in the far north of the country.  A Washington  Post  article  of  11
   April 2003 shows friction in and around Kirkuk, also in the north, as  a
   result of past transfers of Arabs to that area by the former government.

12. All these pieces of evidence refer to northern areas,  where  there  is
   obvious cause for friction in the struggle, past and present, for  power
   and territory between Arabs and Kurds.  There  is  no  evidence  at  all
   relating to the situation faced by Kurds in the southern  two-thirds  of
   the country, where there is no local population of  them  for  any  such
   struggle to exist; except for a passage noted by one of us in an Amnesty
   International Report of 18 March 2004.  Referring to  such  improvements
   as there were in the general law and order situation, Amnesty say:

   Some progress in this direction has been made since the early months  of
   the occupation particularly in the south of Iraq.  Iraqis interviewed by
   AI delegates in February and March 2004 in  Basra  and  Amara,  the  two
   Governorates under the control  of  British  troops,  said  the  general
   situation had improved although lack  of  security  was  still  a  major
   concern.   Members  of  religious  minorities  such  as  Sunni  Muslims,
   Christians and Sabean/Mandeans felt they were being targeted for attacks
   and other abuses.


13. This claimant is, like most Iraqi Kurds, a Sunni.   However,  there  is
   nothing to show that he would be identifiable as such on the street,  or
   that the problems noted by Amnesty International  refer  to  anyone  but
   Sunni communities local to the  Basra  and  Asmara  Governorates,  whose
   members would be no doubt be identifiable as such by  their  neighbours.
   In any case, as Mr Lawther has pointed out,  the  middle  third  of  the
   country is Sunni.  Although the general security situation may be at its
   worst there, there is nothing  whatever  to  support  the  adjudicator's
   finding that this claimant would be at risk there as a Kurd, still  less
   as a Sunni.

14. It follows that there is no  evidence  on  which  the  adjudicator  was
   entitled to find that it would be unduly harsh to expect  this  claimant
   to return to an Arab area, still less that  it  would  be  a  breach  of
   article 3 of the Human Rights Convention to do so.   For  those  reasons
   the Home Office appeal is allowed.
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
