

                  GY (Eritrea-Failed asylum seeker) Eritrea [2004] UKIAT
                                                     00327               | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  24 November 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            30 December 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)
                                Mr I Dove QC

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Gunasekara, instructed by Athuraliyage
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss L Dawes, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R  N
     Barton, promulgated on 16th June 2004.  It concerns an Eritrean in his
     middle to late forties from Asmara in Eritrea originally, but who  has
     lived at some time also in Addis Ababa.  He  made  an  initial  asylum
     claim shortly after his arrival in the United Kingdom in 1999 but  his
     application was refused and in November 2001 the Adjudicator dismissed
     his appeal.  He then lodged a second asylum claim reversing his  first
     and second names and giving  a  different  date  of  birth.   He  also
     changed many aspects of what he said had  happened  to  him.   He  was
     granted four years Exceptional Leave to Remain.  This was  revoked  by
     letter dated 1st October 2003 after a fingerprint check  revealed  him
     to be a multiple applicant who had given  false  details.   Hence  the
     appeal  was  against  the  decision  that  he  be  removed  after  the
     revocation of exceptional leave to remain and the refusal of asylum.

  2. The Adjudicator set out the  first  and  second  asylum  claims.   The
     Adjudicator was told that the first account was the true  account  and
     the Appellant  wished  to  revert  to  that.   The  Adjudicator  said,
     unsurprisingly, that he found the Appellant's account to be completely
     unreliable.  He pointed to the deceitful second application and to the
     significant changes in his account of what he said.  The basis of  his
     first account was that  before  he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
     September 1999 he had been living in Addis Ababa  with  his  wife  and
     five children as a market trader.  He had now been told that his  wife
     and children were in Asmara.  He maintained that he was involved as  a
     branch treasurer in Addis Ababa with the ELF, that he was  opposed  to
     the current regime in Eritrea, was well known to  them  and  would  be
     killed by them should he return.  His  first  asylum  claim  contended
     that he was born in January 1957 and had left Asmara in 1989.

  3. The Adjudicator said:

           "32.  Considering the accounts of past events in the context  of
                 the country situation, and  bearing  in  mind  all  of  the
                 foregoing, I cannot find the crux of Appellant's story (his
                 claimed political involvement) to have been established  to
                 any acceptable standard.  He has shown quite  clearly  that
                 he is a person with a great  facility  to  invent  detailed
                 stories and then to maintain them through thick  and  thin.
                 That the second application was fraudulent and based on  an
                 entirely untruthful account of events, was  only  uncovered
                 as a result of the fingerprint evidence.  Faced  with  that
                 irrefutable evidence, the Appellant had little  choice  but
                 to admit the story had been fabricated.


           33.   His credibility has been completely undermined.  There  is
                 no  independent  evidence  before  me  to  corroborate  the
                 truthfulness of the  Appellant's  earlier  account.   I  am
                 prepared to accept that the Appellant lived and worked as a
                 businessman in Addis Ababa for several years just prior  to
                 coming to the UK.  I am prepared to accept (on the basis of
                 objective material concerning  the  Ethiopian  authorities'
                 policy of repatriation of ethnic Eritreans  in  1999)  that
                 the Appellant's family was deported and that he  fled  here
                 fearing that he too may be deported.  I do not find  it  to
                 have been established that the Appellant  held  any  office
                 for ELF or was anything more than an ordinary supporter who
                 would be of no interest currently  to  the  authorities  in
                 Eritrea.


           34.   I reach the above conclusion after anxious scrutiny of the
                 objective material, most importantly the  up-to-date  UNHCR
                 Position on Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers  to  Eritrea,
                 of January 2004 and the IAT decisions in Eritrea CG  [2002]
                 UKIAT 05039 and in MA  (Female  draft  evader)  Eritrea  CG
                 [2004] UKIAT 00098.  There is an  uncertain  position  that
                 faces  many  returnees  to  Eritrea  currently,   but   the
                 Appellant is not a draft-evader (indeed he  is  well  above
                 the age for military service) and has not established  that
                 he has any political connection of any significance."

  4. The Adjudicator concluded  that  there  had  been  no  past  political
     involvement of  any  significance.   The  fact  that  his  mother  was
     Ethiopian by birth, or that he failed to contribute to Eritrean  funds
     when he was living in Ethiopia was not likely to cause him  to  be  of
     adverse interest and for the reasons which  he  had  given,  dismissed
     both the asylum and human rights appeals.

  5. The grounds of appeal take issue only with the position of risk  which
     a failed  asylum  seeker  would  have  on  return  to  Eritrea.   They
     contended that the Appellant was a  plain  and  simple  failed  asylum
     seeker who would be in a vulnerable position on return.  The UNHCR had
     said in its January 2004 position paper that rejected  asylum  seekers
     were entitled to some form of complementary protection, which position
     had been ignored by the Adjudicator.  This was said to be the error of
     law.

  6. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  because  the  Tribunal  decision
     referred to in paragraph 34 of  the  Adjudicator's  determination  was
     thought arguably to go further than dealing with the position of those
     who would be perceived as female draft evaders on return.

  7. Before us, Mr Gunasekara for the Appellant has  added  little  to  the
     grounds of appeal.  He has referred us to some passages in  the  April
     2004 CIPU Report for Eritrea.  He referred to the January  2004  UNHCR
     position paper saying that it was a strong  statement  which  remained
     effective today.  Miss Dawes for the Secretary of  State  referred  to
     the determination of the Tribunal  SE  (Deportation-Malta-2002-General
     Risk) Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00295,  which  considered  the  Tribunal
     Determination in MA and  concluded  that  it  did  not  apply  to  the
     position of the ordinary failed asylum seeker and  that  the  ordinary
     failed asylum seeker was not at risk of treatment in breach of Article
     3.  Both the Determinations in MA and SE  had considered  the  January
     2004 UNHCR paper.  It was only in SE that the April 2004  CIPU  Report
     was considered.

  8. Insofar as the grounds of appeal contend  that  the  UNHCR  paper  was
     ignored, that is obviously wrong in the light of  paragraph  34.   The
     point focused on by the Vice President granting leave was rather  that
     either the position paper or the effect of the Tribunal decision in MA
     might have been misunderstood by the Adjudicator in the light  of  his
     conclusions.  The Tribunal in MA was concerned with the position of  a
     young woman who had left Eritrea at the point when she was required to
     report for compulsory military  training.   The  Adjudicator  had  not
     examined properly what would happen were she to be  seen  as  a  draft
     evader.  The Tribunal considered the position of female draft evaders.
      A piece of evidence which it had to consider in addition to the UNHCR
     recommendation concerned the forced return of 220  Eritreans  deported
     from  Malta  in  late  2002.   The  Tribunal  considered   the   UNHCR
     recommendation but was most troubled  by  the  various  reports  which
     dealt with those returnees who, according to the US  State  Department
     Report, were believed to have fled Eritrea to escape or avoid national
     service.  The UNHCR position paper had pointed  out  that  those  over
     forty or with children  had  been  released  quite  quickly  and  some
     deported were not asylum seekers at  all.   The  Tribunal  in  MA  was
     concerned with those who were of draft age who would be  perceived  as
     having evaded the draft in their departure.

  9. The Tribunal in SE, with the April 2004 CIPU  Report  and  an  Amnesty
     International Report of  May  2004,  considered  the  position  again.
     Those materials were not before the Tribunal in MA.   It  pointed  out
     that MA was not, and was never  intended  to  be,  authority  for  the
     proposition that returnees generally were at risk.  It referred to two
     paragraphs in that determination which made clear that it was  looking
     at a female identified as a draft evader.  The Tribunal concluded that
     with all the materials before it  there  was  no  risk  for  returnees
     generally. It said:


           "22.  ... In the first  place,  the  problems  relating  to  the
                 Maltese returnees were  clearly  linked  closely  with  the
                 perception by the Eritrean authorities that they were draft
                 evaders or omit deserters.  The May 2004 AI  Report  refers
                 to  the  Malta  deportees  as  'mostly  army  deserters  or
                 conscription evaders' (see p.23).



           23.   Secondly, even within the group of Maltese returnees,  the
                 authorities plainly differentiated on the basis of both sex
                 and age: the May 2004 AI Report notes that women,  children
                 and those over the conscription age limit  of  forty  years
                 were released after some weeks in Adi Abeto prison.


           24.   Thirdly, whatever may have  been  the  degree  of  adverse
                 treatment meted out to the Maltese returnees in 2002  there
                 have  been  no  similar  large   scale   incidents   since.
                 Particularly  given  that  the  UNHCR  has   clearly   been
                 monitoring the situation very  closely,  we  consider  this
                 lack of repetition very significant.  It is true there have
                 been incidents involving returnees since,  but  these  have
                 been very few and in each case they have  only  involved  a
                 very small number of individuals.  Furthermore,  they  have
                 largely   been   confined   to   returnees   with   foreign
                 citizenships.  Thus at p.22 of the May 2004 AI Report there
                 are  references  to  five  cases  of  difficulties   facing
                 Eritreans with foreign citizenships.


           25.   Fourthly, we find it important  to  take  account  of  the
                 precise wording of the UNHCR 'Position  on  the  Return  of
                 Rejected Asylum Seekers to Eritrea' dated 20 January  2004.
                 This letter does state that, in the light of  the  problems
                 faced by the Maltese returnees 'it cannot be excluded  that
                 future deportees would face a similar risk'; and it goes on
                  to recommend that 'states refrain from all forced  returns
                 of rejected  asylum  seekers  to  Eritrea  and  grant  them
                 complementary forms of  protection  instead'.   However  it
                 falls short of stating that  all  returnees  face  a  well-
                 founded fear of  persecution;  it  leaves  that  issue  for
                 assessment based on the individual needs of asylum  seekers
                 for international protection.  Furthermore 'protection'  is
                 itself clearly viewed by UNHCR as a broader  category  than
                 protection under the 1951 Convention or under Article 3  of
                 the ECHR.  In addition, the language of this position paper
                 is that of mere possibility ('...  it  cannot  be  excluded
                 that ...').  It is not that of  real  possibility  or  real
                 risk.


           26.   For reasons  already  given  we  do  not  think  that  the
                 contents of the May 2004 AI  Report  justify  a  conclusion
                 that returnees  generally  are  at  risk.   We  would  note
                 further that even in this report the  position  of  Amnesty
                 International is not unequivocally that all  returnees  are
                 at risk.  It does appear at pp.25-26 to suggest that anyone
                 the authorities learnt was a failed asylum seeker would  be
                 at risk, but the formulation of the list of  categories  to
                 be at risk is otherwise more limited."


 10. We consider that SE has correctly identified the limit of the scope of
     the Tribunal decision in MA.  We have not had  the  May  2004  Amnesty
     International Report cited to us other than what is to be found in SE.
       We  accept  the  analysis  of  the  background  material  in  SE  as
     satisfactorily demonstrating that there is no real risk on  return  to
     the ordinary failed asylum seeker.  They are not generally at risk.

 11. Mr Gunasekara submitted that the distinction drawn in paragraph 25  of
     SE between the existence of a real risk of a breach of Article  3  and
     the UNHCR comment that in the light  of  the  problems  faced  by  the
     Maltese returnees, "It cannot be excluded that future deportees  would
     face a similar risk", was a matter of semantics and  that  the  courts
     should reject such a limited interpretation of  the  UNHCR  paper  and
     accept instead what it said.  We do not think that the Tribunal or the
     Adjudicator in this case misunderstood the scope  and  intent  of  the
     UNHCR position paper.  That position  paper  focused  on  humanitarian
     considerations that go wider than  the  Refugee  Convention  and  also
     wider than the considerations within Article 3.  The  language  as  to
     the degree of risk is also not that which is required for the purposes
     of Article 3.  The UNHCR position paper is weighty insofar as  it  can
     be related to the issues which we  consider,  but  the  width  of  the
     humanitarian considerations with which it deals means that  the  UNHCR
     paper cannot simply be read  as  a  statement  that  returning  failed
     asylum seekers would breach either the Refugee Convention or the ECHR,
     as Mr Gunasekara was suggesting.  The UNHCR often speaks of those  who
     are not refugees under the Convention, and of those whose treatment on
     return would not  breach  Article  3.   It  does  so  out  of  broader
     humanitarian concerns.

 12. The later determination in SE demonstrates that there was no error  of
     law or even of appraisal by this Adjudicator in his application to the
     facts, as  he  found  them,  of  the  Tribunal  decision  in  MA.   Mr
     Gunasekara referred us to a number of passages in the April 2004  CIPU
     Report but that report was considered in SE and no passages  to  which
     we were referred supported any suggestion that the decision in SE  did
     not remain sound for the generality of failed asylum  seekers.   Those
     passages cannot show that the Adjudicator made an error of law in  his
     determination with paragraphs  6.3,  6.12,  6.132  are  not  relevant;
     paragraph 6.150 is not now  relevant.   Paragraphs  6.217  and  6.220,
     which deal with torture faced by particular groups and  the  treatment
     faced by prisoners and army deserters, are not germane in the light of
     the Adjudicator's conclusions and the  age  of  the  Appellant  as  he
     asserts it to be.  Paragraphs 6.66 and 6.83 which deal with the ELF do
     not arise having regard to the grounds of appeal and in the  light  of
     the findings of the Adjudicator  in  paragraph  34.   Paragraph  6.237
     which deals with failed asylum seekers has already been dealt with  in
     our consideration of SE and its impact on MA.

 13. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we say
     about SE and MA.








                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


