


                                        AD(Leave to remain - Article 8)
Guinea [2004] UKIAT 00301 | |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:   6 September  2004                               |
|Date Signed:          200                                          |
|Date Determination Notified:  11 November 2004                     |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr A G Jeevanjee                                                   |
|Mr C Thursby                                                       |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |

For the Appellant:           Miss S Farazi, Immigration Appeal Service
For the Respondent:    Mr D W Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer

The appellant is a citizen of Guinea.  She was born on 22 October 1959.

2.    With permission, she  appeals  the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator
(Miss J Plumptre) which was promulgated  on  20  October  2003.     In  that
determination  the  Adjudicator  dismissed  the   appellant's   appeal,   on
immigration grounds, against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  vary
her leave to remain.  She wished to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
wife of Mr Aldulpha ("the sponsor").

3.    The sponsor claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom, from  Sierra
Leone, in 1963.  He is said to have married the appellant by proxy in  1999.
  Thereafter the appellant came to the United Kingdom, arriving  on  28  May
1999.  They met then for the first time.  The sponsor told  the  Adjudicator
they subsequently married, at a Registry Office,  and  have  lived  together
since.

4.    When the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, she  obtained  entry
as a visitor.  She does not  appear  to  have  mentioned  her  intention  to
marry.    Before her 6 months leave as a visitor  expired,  she  applied  to
vary the leave to enable her to be here as a spouse.   The  application  was
dated 8 November 1999.  On 17 January  2001  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
appellant requesting documents.  He required:

           "Evidence of Mr Aldulpha's  immigration  status  in  the  United
           Kingdom".

5.    Neither the appellant, nor the sponsor replied to that letter.  On  22
March 2001 the application was refused on non compliance grounds, under  the
provisions of paragraph 322(9)  of  HC  395.   That  paragraph  governs  the
grounds on which an application to vary leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
United Kingdom should normally be refused.   The sub-paragraph reads:

           "(9)  Failure by an applicant to produce in  a  reasonable  time
               documents or other evidence required  by  the  Secretary  of
               State to establish his claim to remain under these rules."

6.    The appellant submitted an in time notice of appeal.    Attached,  was
a statement of additional grounds, which said:

           "The appellant also appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  of  her
           family in the UK."


7.    The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal on  immigration  grounds.     The
appellant herself did not give evidence, apparently because her  English  is
not very good.   The sponsor did.   He told the Adjudicator he  had  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 26 July 1963 as a student  and  has  not  left  the
United Kingdom since.  He accepted he had  received  the  letter  requesting
further information.  He said he did  not  understand  what  documents  were
required and that he had  contacted  three  firms  of  solicitors  who  were
unable to help.     He then contacted the IAS who were also unsure  what  to
do.  He claims that his original passport was sent back to Sierra Leone  for
renewal in 1999 but unexpectedly, was not returned to him with the new  one.
 It is clear from the current passport that  he  did  have  an  earlier  one
which had been issued in Freetown on  25  October  1962.    The  Adjudicator
questioned why there was a  receipt  dated  in  2002  for  a  1999  passport
renewal.  She was told that the document had  been  renewed  again  in  2002
following a drive by the Sierra Leone government  to  renew  all  passports.
He also told the Adjudicator that he is self-employed, pays council tax  and
national insurance contributions, is both partially  sighted  and  diabetic.
He produced a letter from the  Contributions  Agency  stating  that  he  was
previously known as Rigsby Adolphus  Tom  Davies,  and  a  letter  from  the
National Insurance Contributions Office giving a national  insurance  number
and a date of entry into the United Kingdom in his current name.

8.    The  Adjudicator  said  that  her  task  was  to  decide  whether  the
respondent's decision was correct.    She  could  not  have  dealt  with  an
appeal on the merits against a refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.
First, the respondent had not made  such  a  decision,  his  decision  being
based only non compliance.  Second, even if she had been entitled to  do  so
she did not have evidence before her going to the requirements of  Rule  281
of HC 395, such as whether a marriage was subsisting.

9.    Although the Adjudicator was told a little  about  why  the  appellant
had not co-operated, by replying to the respondent's letter,  there  was  no
evidence to suggest that the respondent was wrong.   The  sponsor  confirmed
neither he nor the appellant he had complied within a reasonable time.   The
Adjudicator properly concluded that the respondent was entitled to make  the
decision that he did.

10.   Before us there was argument as to whether the sponsor was settled  in
the United Kingdom.   In particular, whether by  virtue  of  having  arrived
before the  Commonwealth  Immigrants  Act  1962  came  into  force,  he  was
entitled  to  enter  without  being  subjected   to   Immigration   Control.
Although  it  seems  he  entered  after  the   Act   was   passed,   neither
representative was able to tell us whether it had come into force  by  then.
 Mr Saville argued that if it had come into effect the  sponsor  would  have
been subject to immigration control  and,  never  having  become  a  British
citizen, he would remain subject to immigration control.   In our view  that
is irrelevant. The  appellant, by virtue of her non co-operation has  failed
to establish anything. The respondent was unable to even  start  considering
paragraph 281,  including the question of whether the sponsor is settled  in
the United Kingdom and on what basis.

11.   The  Adjudicator  did  not  err  in  law  in  her  decision  that  the
respondent's decision to refuse the application was correct.

12.   The Adjudicator did err by not dealing with the  human  rights  aspect
of the appeal.    Even if she had thought that it was wholly without  merit,
she should have said so.   The issue was raised in  the  notice  of  appeal,
and referred to in the skeleton argument.  There was evidence which went  to
it.  For example, the Adjudicator asked the  sponsor  whether  he  would  go
back to Guinea with his wife if the application were  refused.     That  was
not relevant to the immigration decision, and could only have been asked  in
relation to Article 8 issues.

13.   Miss Farazi argued that we should remit the  human  rights  aspect  of
the appeal back to an Adjudicator.    The basis of her argument was that  we
were unable to deal  with  it  ourselves  because  that  would  deprive  the
appellant of a first instance decision.   Also we could  not  say  that  the
aspect had no merit because we do not know what evidence was  given  to  the
Adjudicator.  Mr Saville argued that we should only remit an appeal  if,  it
has some chance of success.   He argued that this one does not.

14.   It is clear from S S Malaysia (2004) UKIAT 00091*  that  the  code  of
Immigration Rules to be found in HC 395 is not incompatible with  Article  8
ECHR.    In  this  case  the  appellant  has  the  right  to  make  a  fresh
application, she is in  country,  and  has  been  since  before  her  formal
marriage to the sponsor.   The reason her application  was  refused  is  not
that it was outside the rules but, because she did not co-operate  with  the
respondent.  She has not begun to establish that she  can  comply  with  the
requirements for leave to enter or remain as a spouse.   It is not even  the
case that she has attempted to co-operate but  failed.     It  is  wrong  in
principle that having failed to co-operate with the  respondent  she  should
then be able to succeed using a right of appeal relying on Article  8  ECHR.
   Article  8,  in  this  context,  may  produce  a   remedy   where,   very
exceptionally, an application to enter or remain falls outside the scope  of
the immigration rules.   There is  no  prospect  of  an  appeal  limited  to
Article 8 grounds succeeding in these circumstances.

15.    Having  said  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  make  a   fresh
application, we are prepared to go as far as to say that,  if  all  that  we
have heard about the sponsor and the appellant is correct,  there  seems  to
be  no  reason  why,  if  the  appropriate  evidence  is  submitted  to  the
respondent, that application should not succeed.      The  appellant  should
have co-operated by replying to the respondent's letter in the first  place,
or made a fresh application, rather than appealing to  the  Adjudicator  and
then to the Tribunal.

15.   The appeal is dismissed.

                                                                  C P Mather
                                                              Vice President


Approved for electronic distribution.














