
               BD (Application of SK and DK) Croatia CG* [2004] UKIAT 00032
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 1st December 2003
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                            26 February 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                               Mr H J E Latter
                        His Honour Judge G Risius CB

Between:
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


For the Appellant:           Mr M Malik of Sutovic and Hartigan
For the Respondent:          Ms J Bracken, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of an
     Adjudicator, Mr  A  A  Wilson,  prepared  on  3rd  December  2002  and
     promulgated on 7th January 2003, following a hearing on 26th  November
     2002.  The Appellants were four Croatian Serbs.  The first  and  third
     Appellants were the  father  and  mother  of  the  second  and  fourth
     Appellants, their daughter and son.  Both were adults.  The father and
     son appealed on asylum grounds.  There was no appeal by the  wife  and
     daughter on asylum grounds, although the Adjudicator said  that  their
     status fell to be determined in line with that of the first Appellant,
     the father.  The son appealed on both asylum and human rights grounds.
      The father's appeal was allowed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds.  The second and third Appellants' only appeals were dismissed
     on human rights grounds.  The fourth Appellant's appeal was  dismissed
     on asylum grounds, but allowed on human rights  grounds.   In  effect,
     all the issues turned upon whether the return of the father, the first
     Appellant, to Croatia, would be a breach of the Refugee Convention and
     of his human rights.

  2. Of some significance in this appeal is the fact that at the time  when
     the Adjudicator heard the matter, the case of S & others [2002]  UKIAT
     05613 Starred, as the Adjudicator referred to it  (strictly  SK),  was
     still pending in the Tribunal.  This case was known to the Appellants'
     solicitors since they were Sutovic and Hartigan.  The Adjudicator knew
     that the case had been heard by the Tribunal and that it was  intended
     that judgment be delivered during  December  2002.   In  fact  it  was
     notified on  3rd  December  2002  to  the  same  solicitors  who  were
     appearing both in SK and in these Appellants' appeals.

  3. The Appellants pressed for an  adjournment  in  view  of  the  pending
     decision in SK, but this was rejected by the Adjudicator.  He referred
     to the unfortunate history of hearings and  adjournments  which  these
     appeals had suffered.  Two adjournments had been granted pending first
     the decision of the Court of Appeal in S and  others  and  second  the
     Tribunal's determination of the case.  Although, he said, guidance  of
     the sort envisaged to be provided by SK  would  be  very  welcome,  he
     concluded that in its absence, matters fell to be  determined  in  the
     light of the evidence available.  Because  the  same  solicitors  were
     involved, he thought there was no reason why matters placed before the
     Tribunal could not  be  properly  placed  before  him.   He  therefore
     refused the adjournment "having regard to the overwhelming and primary
     purpose of determining a prompt, efficient and just  disposal  of  the
     hearing".

  4. We should add that the Adjudicator did not  have  the  benefit  of  an
     appearance on behalf the Secretary of State and as he indicates  in  a
     number of places  in  his  determination,  he  would  have  found  the
     Secretary of State's appearance of some assistance to him.

  5. We turn to the basis of the asylum claim of the  father.   The  family
     left Croatia in March 1998 for Norway where  their  asylum  claim  was
     refused three times, whereupon they left for the  United  Kingdom  and
     made a further asylum claim.  The Adjudicator summarised the basis for
     the appeals as being that "all the Appellants suffered to some  extent
     discrimination and violence in Croatia at the end of  the  civil  war,
     but left due to the particular risk it was stated the first  Appellant
     was under of  being  prosecuted  by  the  Croatian  authorities  as  a
     putative war criminal".   He  had  come  from  a  Serb  enclave  in  a
     predominantly Croatian area.

  6. The Appellant had been mobilised and on active duties  for  some  nine
     months at the end of 1991 through to 1992, working on the  front  line
     and then as a military policeman.  He had  been  discharged  following
     the creation of the Republic of Serb Krajina  and  placed  on  reserve
     duty, during which again he had worked as a military  policeman.   One
     of his duties had been to act as a guard for a  group  of  Croats  and
     Hungarians for about three months.  The warden of that camp was,  said
     the first Appellant, certainly wanted by the Croatian authorities  for
     war crimes.  The first Appellant maintained that  he  had  never  been
     involved in any war crimes.  At the end of 1997, he  had  been  sacked
     from his job, as  the  eastern  sector  of  Croatia  was  handed  over
     following the withdrawal of UN Forces.  A  pattern  of  discrimination
     and violence then emerged.  He was verbally abused and received  death
     threats.  His wife was refused  entitlement  to  social  security  and
     other benefits.  His daughter was threatened at school  and  was  once
     attacked by a Croatian policeman.   He  himself  had  been  physically
     assaulted by two Croats who had  recognised  him  as  a  Serb  by  his
     dialect and, in March 1998, three masked Croats smashed the windows of
     his house.  As a result of this, they all decided to leave.

  7. The Appellant said that he knew he was on a list of persons wanted for
     war crimes because when he had been in Norway he had been shown a list
     of people, although he had never seen it again.  He said he was on the
     list of persons who had received an eight year jail sentence.   A  lot
     of policemen were on the list, as were his brother-in-law and  nephew.
     He was unable to give much more information  about  it,  and  had  not
     mentioned it at his interview.  He also said there had been  telephone
     threats as a result of his guarding the camp.

  8. The fourth Appellant, the  son,  also  gave  evidence  describing  how
     matters had deteriorated in East Croatia following  the  departure  of
     the UN Forces at the beginning of 1998.  A friend  had  been  attacked
     and stabbed, but the police had been of  no  assistance,  denying  the
     incident.  He had been attacked at school  by  fifteen  Croatians  who
     noted that he had been a Serb and so attacked him.  He had been unable
     to obtain medical attention because of the difficulties  of  obtaining
     Croatian medical documents.  Although he had said that he  had  become
     depressed, there was no medical evidence to support  that.   His  main
     fear was that he would be forced into military  service  when  he  was
     eighteen, fearing that there would be a repetition and worse  of  what
     had happened to him at school.  He was also concerned that his  father
     had been accused of war crimes.

  9. The Adjudicator considered the objective material before him, together
     with a report of Dr Milivojevic.   This  material  included  the  CIPU
     Report of 2002, the OSCE Report of May 2002  and  an  OECD  Report  of
     2002.  He drew conclusions from that general background evidence.   He
     concluded that "any real involvement in the civil war as  a  Serb  can
     lead to prosecution as a war criminal" and that  this  could  lead  to
     "very probable excessive delays in the judicial system".  He also said
     that  it  was  clear  "that  there  is  substantial  local  prejudice,
     particularly in Eastern Croatia relating to persons who supported  the
     previous Serbian-controlled Government" and whatever the  declarations
     and indications of good intent made by Central Government,  they  were
     frequently not reflected in matters on the ground.  It was clear  that
     the son would now be liable for military service, but it  is  possible
     that he would not be prosecuted.   However,  "the  actual  information
     relating  to  the  service  of  Serbs  within  the  military   service
     effectively was non-existent".  This  might  well  have  been  because
     there  were  very  few  young  male  Serbs  left  in  Croatia  to   be
     conscripted.

 10. It is clear that the  Adjudicator  had  real  reservations  about  the
     credibility of the evidence of father and son, but they had  not  been
     questioned because the Home  Office  had  not  been  represented.   He
     accepted their evidence in the absence of a direct challenge to  their
     credibility in the Home Office refusal letter.  He was  understandably
     critical of the failure  of  either  party  to  contact  Norway  where
     apparently three times the Appellants' asylum claim had been rejected.
      He pointed out the limited information which had been supplied by the
     second and fourth Appellants  in  relation  to  medical  matters.   He
     pointed out that all he had in relation to  the  daughter,  the  third
     Appellant, was that she was now married to a Serb whose status had yet
     to be established in the  United  Kingdom.   She  had  a  child.   The
     Adjudicator concluded in paragraph 48:

           "The first  Appellant  has  lodged  however  some  documents  in
           support of his claim.  Clearly his war record indicates that  he
           was involved in military service and I note also that he  has  a
           general record of employment.  Having regard to the totality  of
           the  evidence,  and  noting  that   the   Respondent   had   not
           specifically  attacked  the  Appellant's  credibility  in  their
           refusal letter, and noting that the provision of  conviction  of
           persons for war crimes in absentia was and is a real problem  in
           eastern Croatia, I  accept  the  first  Appellant's  history  as
           recounted  by  him  and  it  forms  the  factual  basis  of   my
           determination.  That is in relation to the first Appellant."


      Of the wife's medical condition, that is acute stress and anxiety, the
      Adjudicator said that it appeared that those  mental  health  problems
      had been well and successfully managed and were not a matter that  had
      to be particularly addressed.  He said of the son that  he  found  the
      history given by the son credible, noting the severe  physical  attack
      by Serbs on him when he was at school.   This  would  affect  his  own
      subjective fear of return to Croatia.


 11. In paragraph 52 the Adjudicator said:


           "In relation to the Appellant's fear of serving in the  military
           service that  to  a  large  extent  is  based  upon  firstly  an
           assessment that the civilian option would not  be  available  to
           him, on a balance I do accept the factual assertion contained in
           Dr Milivojevic's report, and secondly  his  subjective  fear  of
           service based on the fact that he considers his father  will  be
           regarded as a war criminal."


      The factual assertion referred to is that the option  of  civilian  or
      community service would not be available to the fourth Appellant.   He
      recognised that he had no clear cogent evidence on  the  treatment  of
      Serbs in the Croatian Army, but envisaged that the impact  within  the
      individual barracks at the level of NCO and fellow recruits might well
      be different from the position envisaged by  orders  given  by  senior
      officers.  He would be very much in the ethnic minority as a recruit.


 12. The Adjudicator referred to the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  Eric
     [2002] UKIAT 00441 which he found of  assistance  in  considering  the
     objective material in relation to somebody who had been  a  Serb  with
     military service and the likelihood of  war  crimes  proceedings.   He
     concluded, in paragraph 55:

           "Having made the assessment that the first Appellant is credible
           it would appear from the OECD Report that there is a  real  risk
           that he would indeed be persecuted for war crimes the result  of
           which it would appear from other evidence both to be  uncertain,
           subject to delays and certainly  targeted  upon  Serbians.   For
           that reason it is clear that the first  Appellant  has  a  well-
           founded fear and it would appear that this is still  current  in
           relation to information placed before me."


 13. He  also  concluded  that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the  first
     Appellant's Article 3 and Article 2  ECHR  rights  would  be  breached
     through being targeted as a Serb "particularly under persecution under
     the  war  crime  (sic)  and  the  objective  evidence  indicated  that
     effectively Article 6 would be breached and was the effective 'engine'
     whereby Articles 2 and 3 would be at a real risk of  being  breached".
     He rejected the wife's claim under the ECHR as no factual basis for it
     had been indicated.  He concluded that the daughter had  no  right  to
     family life within the United Kingdom and no real indication of why on
     her own her removal would cause a breach of Article 8.  He said of the
     son, in paragraph 59:

           "The real fear of being involved in military life in a  barracks
           is one that the Appellant only  faces  because  he  entered  the
           United Kingdom after his eighteenth birthday  and  would  appear
           therefore not to be able to claim the civilian service.   It  is
           therefore a problem of the  fourth  Appellant's  own  making  by
           seeking protection.  In those circumstances I find the Appellant
           cannot rely upon that fear of military service.  There  was  and
           is an apparent adequate exemption that he presumably could  have
           availed himself of.   The  Appellant  has  stated  that  he  has
           suffered psychological difficulties.  That was not  apparent  in
           evidence, no medical confirmation of that was  given  and  again
           the Appellant apparently is in full-time  employment.   On  that
           basis I find that the fourth Appellant  has  not  made  out  his
           claim for political asylum.  There are none of the complications
           relating  to  war  crimes  that  affect  the  first  Appellant's
           determination.   Given  these  conclusions  I  find  the  fourth
           Appellant has not discharged the burden of  proof  of  having  a
           well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention  reason.   I
           have come to the conclusion that the Appellant's  removal  would
           not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of its  obligations
           under the Refugee Convention."

 14. However, in relation to the son's human rights claim, he concluded, in
     paragraph 63:

           "In relation to the fourth Appellant his case  clearly  warrants
           and has had a more substantial consideration.   I  approach  the
           analysis of it on the basis that having granted his father,  and
           through him his mother and sister rights or protection under the
           Refugee Convention that his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
           would effectively breach his family life.  The fourth  Appellant
           effectively claims that he is an isolated  individual  at  risk.
           Whatever the merits of that it is clear that he has formed  part
           of the Appellant's family at all times in Croatia, in Norway and
           on arrival in the United Kingdom."


      He considered whether the removal of the son from the  United  Kingdom
      would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of ensuring a proper  and
      safe system of immigration control, and concluded:


           "Having regard to  the  sequence  of  events,  the  age  of  the
           Appellant when he first left  Croatia,  the  clear  and  obvious
           close family ties and his record within  the  United  Kingdom  I
           find  that  it  would  not  be  a  proportionate   exercise   of
           immigration control for him to be required to leave  the  United
           Kingdom."


 15. Accordingly, it can be seen, as we have said,  that  the  decision  in
     relation to all four Appellants before the Adjudicator  depended  upon
     the  view  that  was  taken  of  the  father's  claim  under  the  two
     Conventions.  Also, his claim was critically dependant upon  the  view
     formed of the risk he would face of persecution as a result of alleged
     war crimes.

 16. The Secretary of State sought leave to appeal on five  grounds.   Four
     of those grounds related to the effect of the Tribunal's  decision  in
     SK on the Adjudicator's decision.  In effect,  and  in  a  variety  of
     ways,  it  was  said  that  the  decision  of  the   Adjudicator   was
     inconsistent with the determination of  SK  and  the  Adjudicator  had
     given no adequate reasons for differing from SK. Ground three  of  the
     five related to the assertion that the appeal had been allowed because
     the first Appellant "would be convicted for war  crimes  in  absentia.
     No evidence was presented before the Adjudicator (par 47) of such  war
     crime list/s and the Adjudicator has erred  to  concluded  from  this.
     (sic)"  The Home Office promised to  attend  any  hearing.   Leave  to
     appeal was granted with the comment that all the grounds were properly
     arguable.

 17. It is important that two conclusions of the Tribunal  in  relation  to
     this appeal be clearly established.  First  of  all,  although  it  is
     possible to make some criticisms of the Adjudicator's reasoning or the
     expression of his reasoning in places,  these  are  not  to  our  mind
     significant criticisms in relation  to  the  evidence  and  background
     material which he had before him as summarised by him.  He  considered
     the evidence carefully.  He has expressed  his  reservations  and  his
     conclusions upon it.  He considered the background evidence  which  he
     had before him and has expressed his conclusions upon that, as well as
     applying it rationally to the individual circumstances before him.  He
     saw his decision as being in line with the Tribunal decision  in  Eric
     and so took the view that he was reaching a conclusion consistent with
     the Tribunal's guidance.

 18. The ground of appeal in relation  to  war  crimes  proceeds  from  the
     premise that the Appellant had not been  convicted  in  absentia,  but
     would be somewhat curiously at risk of  such  conviction  were  he  to
     return.

 19. The Adjudicator accepted that the  first  Appellant  was  at  risk  of
     prosecution and thereby of  persecution  on  account  of  alleged  war
     crimes;  he had not been convicted of them in absentia.  We  say  that
     not just because that is how we understood Mr Malik to  be  presenting
     the case before us, but because that is also how it seems to have been
     presented to the Adjudicator.  Paragraph 19 summarises  the  claim  as
     "the risk of prosecution" as a putative war  criminal;   paragraph  33
     refers to the grounds of appeal to the Adjudicator as saying that  the
     list was of persons wanted.  The objective  evidence  is  particularly
     related to the way in which war crimes allegations  are  made  against
     Serbs.  The risk, in paragraph 55, is of persecution for  war  crimes,
     the result of which is uncertain, delayed and targeted against  Serbs.
     The Adjudicator found the evidence about the list, which was  said  to
     be of persons sentenced for war crimes, difficult to accept (paragraph
     55),  but  in  the  light  of  other  evidence,  accepted  the   first
     Appellant's description of  his  history,  and  therefore  a  risk  of
     persecution through prosecution and other ethnic  discrimination.   He
     appears  to  have  accepted  that  some  list  containing  the   first
     Appellant's name existed;  he does not conclude that the list, even if
     referring to convictions, proved the fact  of  a  conviction  for  war
     crimes.  Mr Malik did not suggest  otherwise  to  us.  After  all,  an
     actual conviction in absentia should have been readily proven  and  it
     would have been very  surprising  if  the  first  Appellant  had  been
     untroubled on account of  war  crimes  before  he  left  (he  saw  his
     troubles as arising from his ethnicity alone) and yet  shortly  after,
     when he was in Norway, he had already been  convicted  and  put  on  a
     list.

 20. The  Adjudicator  was  essentially  accepting  the  first  Appellant's
     evidence as to his military activities and the  threats  and  assaults
     made, in  reaching  his  view  as  to  the  risk  of  persecution  and
     prosecution in the context  of  the  way  some  Croats  took  measures
     designed  to  intimidate  Serbs  and  deter  their  return;   that  is
     consistent with background material.  The Adjudicator was entitled  to
     conclude in all the circumstances presented to him that  there  was  a
     risk of persecution.   We  do  not  consider  that  the  Adjudicator's
     approach  on  the  material  before  him  can  seriously  be  faulted.
     Accordingly, we reject the Respondent's sole ground of challenge which
     does not relate to the effect of the Tribunal decision in SK.  If  the
     Secretary of State had been  represented  before  the  Adjudicator  in
     relation to that issue, the position might have  been  different.  But
     that is the fault of the Home Office alone.

 21. We also reject the criticism made of the timing of  his  determination
     in relation to the production of the Tribunal decision in SK.  It  was
     in fact the Appellants before him who sought the adjournment, not  the
     Respondent, which the Adjudicator rejected in view of the  history  of
     their appeals.  In our judgment, he was fully entitled to reject  that
     application.  Had the Secretary  of  State  wished  to  apply  for  an
     adjournment or to support the Appellants  in  their  application,  the
     easiest way of doing so would have been to turn up or alternatively to
     make  representations  that  the  Adjudicator  should   postpone   his
     determination until after the decision of the Tribunal was  available.
     So, we reject the criticism that the Adjudicator  should  have  waited
     until the Tribunal decision had been reached, in the  absence  of  any
     application from the Secretary of State that he should do  so  and  in
     the  light  of  his  proper  rejection  of  the  application  for   an
     adjournment.  He was also entitled to assume that he had been provided
     with the material which had been provided to the Tribunal itself in SK
     because the solicitors were representing both sets of Appellants.   We
     were told, however, by Mr Malik  that  that  assumption  was  in  fact
     incorrect, but he could not say what it was that had been provided  to
     the Tribunal but not to the Adjudicator.

 22. It was said, next, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  that  as  the
     decision  in  SK  was  notified  on  3rd  December  2002  before   the
     Adjudicator's own decision had been promulgated, the Adjudicator ought
     to have considered his decision in  the  light  of  it,  if  necessary
     giving parties the opportunity to make further representations.  If he
     had become aware of the decision in SK (and  there  is  no  suggestion
     that Sutovic and Hartigan provided him with a copy  for  him  to  take
     into account, notwithstanding their desire for an adjournment so  that
     he could), it would have been open to the  Adjudicator  to  reconsider
     the  matter  having  given  the  parties  the  opportunity   to   make
     representations on it.

 23. It is important to understand that  Adjudicators  do  not  necessarily
     discover Tribunal  decisions  upon  the  instant  at  which  they  are
     notified to the parties.  Moreover, Adjudicators work  under  a  heavy
     load and it is unrealistic to suppose that once a  decision  has  been
     written, they know whether it has been  promulgated  or  are  able  to
     recollect all the decisions which they have reached, but which may not
     have been promulgated, in the light of  whatever  may  be  the  latest
     decision from the Tribunal.  Accordingly, we take the  view  that  the
     Adjudicator  did  nothing   procedurally   wrong   in   reaching   his
     determination  without  waiting  for  or  considering  the  Tribunal's
     decision in SK.  It is a commonplace feature of this jurisdiction that
     a relevant case giving guidance on country conditions may  be  in  the
     offing without  it  being  appropriate  for  Adjudicators  to  adjourn
     appeals pending before them so that the decision can be taken  in  the
     light of the latest Tribunal  decision  which  may  or  may  not  bear
     precisely on the facts which they find.  Indeed, the structure of  the
     Rules in relation  to  Adjudicators  is  hostile  to  adjournments  in
     general.

 24. Accordingly, save to the extent  that  this  Tribunal  is  allowed  to
     consider  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellants  as  found  by   the
     Adjudicator against the current guidance as to the country  conditions
     for  Serbs  returning  to  Croatia,  this  appeal  would  have  to  be
     dismissed.

 25. The second point of importance to be established is the impact on this
     case of the consideration of the return of Serbs to Croatia in SK  and
     subsequently in a determination of 20th November 2003  in  DK  v  SSHD
     [2003] UKIAT 00153(K) Croatia.  Although Mr Malik  did  not  expressly
     concede that the position of someone like the Appellant would be  very
     difficult to sustain in the light of those  decisions  and  the  later
     country guidance, he was in considerable  difficulty  in  pointing  to
     anything which offered support to the assessment  that  the  Appellant
     would now be at risk of persecution or breach of his human rights were
     he to be returned.  Mr Malik did not refer  to  any  material  in  the
     background evidence to suggest  that  the  conclusions  to  which  the
     Tribunal had come in SK and more recently in DK were  inapplicable  to
     someone in the first Appellant's  position  or  that  there  were  new
     circumstances, changes of position or even something wrong with  those
     two decisions.

 26. Mr Malik said that there was no  reason  still  to  suppose  that  the
     Appellants did not have a subjective fear;  the first Appellant was at
     risk because he was on a list;  he had left after troubles in 1998 and
     he might be vulnerable at the hands of those he guarded.  Although the
     father's evidence did not relate any of the incidents  from  which  he
     suffered to his service in the military or as a camp  guard,  his  son
     had given evidence at interview that the threats were made against his
     father because his father had been in the military police  and  a  POW
     guard.  There is also some , but not wholly persuasive, evidence  that
     lists of the sort to which reference has been made,  are  produced  in
     order to intimidate and deter  Serbs  from  returning.   There  is  no
     evidence that this or any other such list represents any list of those
     wanted by Croatian prosecutors, or by local police or by nationalists.
      There is simply no objective or reliable evidence as to its or  their
     origin, or as to the information upon which they are based  or  as  to
     any use to which anyone puts them inside Croatia.   We  approach  this
     matter, as we consider the Adjudicator  did  on  the  basis  that  the
     Appellant, however, was somebody who was at risk of  being  prosecuted
     for war crimes and not just on the basis that he was a Serb.

 27. The position in relation to prosecution for war crimes was dealt  with
     in SK  at paragraphs 38 and 39.  Indeed, MM was someone who  had  been
     sentenced in absentia to four years imprisonment but for crimes  which
     could not be regarded as a war crime.  In  summary,  those  paragraphs
     said that  the  UNHCR  monitored  the  position  if  a  returnee  were
     arrested, but had found the  trials  to  be  fair  and  correct;   the
     numbers  did  not   suggest   widespread   prosecutions,   let   alone
     implementation of the lists;  there  had  been  a  positive  trend  in
     prosecutors' decisions in rejecting war crimes which had no evidential
     basis, and a retrial took  place  of  anyone  convicted  in  absentia.
     There would be a remand in custody, perhaps, but release  would  often
     be quickly effected if the case  were  weak.   War  crimes  were  also
     considered in DK at paragraphs 81, 82 and 85.  In  paragraph  81,  the
     Tribunal said:

           "The position over war  crimes  prosecutions  has  not  markedly
           changed;  there are still trials in absentia, but that does  not
           prevent a fresh trial upon arrest.  Serbs face discrimination in
           the frequency of arrest and prosecution;  some  may  be  trivial
           harassing arrests from which the Croats do not suffer.  They may
           be intended to discourage returns.   However,  the  increase  in
           arrests in 2003 still  only  affects  a  very  small  number  of
           people;  there is a trial process which is not said to be unfair
           and there is an appeal system which has led to some  convictions
           being overturned.  Some Croats are prosecuted;  it is  necessary
           to  judge  that  figure  in  the  light  of  the  difficulty  of
           persuading Serb victims to give evidence."


 28. In paragraph 82, the Tribunal said:

           "Much of what [Dr Blitz] he  has  to  say  about  war-crimes  is
           historic in nature and he goes on to say that since 2002, a  new
           Prosecutor has reviewed pending war crimes  cases  and  has  not
           admitted  any  new  in  absentia  prosecutions.   There  is  HRW
           material which shows  that  that  stance  has  not  always  been
           followed.  A substantial number of Serbs had been released after
           a short period.  There continued to  be  discrimination  in  the
           prosecution of war crimes.  He appears to accept that there have
           been few cases of Serbs actually being sentenced for war  crimes
           and instead referred to the atmosphere of hostility  surrounding
           trials and the  intimidatory  tactic  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
           detention of Serbs  so  as  to  reinforce  the  impression  that
           whatever the Government may say, they are not welcome back.   It
           is to give the wrong impression for Mr Mullins to say that group
           indictments have been used in a  number  of  cases  since  2000;
           there is no example of their use anew since  the  end  of  2001.
           True it is that the new prosecutor activated some  of  the  2000
           dormant indictments in 2000, but the  number  activated  was  in
           fact quite small, and the numbers arrested fell in 2002  to  34.
           The arrests came because prosecutors had been  asked  to  review
           outstanding war crimes cases.  There  had  been  an  upsurge  of
           arrests in 2003;  in the first half of the year 27  people  were
           arrested, 21 of them were Serbs.  Trials of Croats have produced
           mixed results, partly because of the fear associated with giving
           evidence in Croatia against Croats.  Again it is right  that  as
           at July 2003, there were 1,467 war  crimes  cases  of  which  99
           percent involved non-Croat suspects but the actual experience of
           arrests is quite different in numbers."


 29. The Tribunal also concluded that the sort of list which  was  involved
     in DK, which appears to be  very  much  the  sort  of  list  that  was
     involved in this case, plays no part in the prosecution of war  crimes
     nor are they used as the basis for the selection of Serbs  in  Croatia
     for harassment.

 30. As Mr Malik reminded  us,  the  guidance  of  the  Tribunal  does  not
     preclude individual  decisions  in  individual  cases,  yet  from  his
     submissions  it  is  quite  plain  that  there  is  nothing   in   the
     circumstances of the first Appellant as found by the Adjudicator which
     would warrant differentiating him from the general position as set out
     in those two cases.  Applying that guidance would lead to this  appeal
     being allowed.  Accordingly, the second point is that it  is  only  if
     the Secretary of State is entitled in this appeal  to  rely  upon  the
     later cases and their appraisal of later material,  that  this  appeal
     succeeds on the other SK-related grounds.

 31. We do not know the fullness of the background material  placed  before
     the Adjudicator and although Ms Bracken for  the  Secretary  of  State
     sought to suggest that upon the material  before  him  the  conclusion
     which the Adjudicator reached in relation to risk on  return  for  the
     first Appellant was not justified, we do not accept that she has  made
     out that case.  The principal focus of her attack in relation  to  the
     assessment of the background material related  to  the  way  in  which
     matters had been assessed by the Tribunal in SK and again  in  DK,  in
     which it concluded that matters had not changed significantly from the
     SK position.

 32. This brings us to the main argument which Mr Malik raised  by  way  of
     response to the appeal.  He submitted that it was wrong  in  principle
     for the Tribunal to allow an appeal on such  a  basis.   He  submitted
     that where an Adjudicator had reached a decision  which  the  Tribunal
     concluded was a sound one or a reasonable one on the  material  placed
     before him, the Tribunal should not intervene.  It ought not  to  rely
     on new material to overturn such a decision.  It could only do so when
     satisfied that the Adjudicator's decision was plainly wrong.  He cited
     the decision of the Court of Appeal in Oleed v SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
     1906 2003 INLR 179.  Mr Malik was initially inclined to say  that  the
     Tribunal ought not to hear the appeal at all because  of  the  grounds
     upon which permission to appeal had been granted.  He  said  that,  in
     effect, all the grounds other than the one in relation to  war  crimes
     were a  challenge  based  upon  material  which  was  not  before  the
     Adjudicator and at least in part arose after  his  decision.   It  was
     implicit in Mr Malik's argument that  the  Tribunal  should  not  have
     granted leave and that we should decline  to  hear  the  appeal.   The
     grounds did not come within the restrictions identified.

 33. There is an important point at issue here as to the powers  which  the
     Tribunal has and the approach which it ought to  adopt  when  granting
     leave to appeal and on hearing the  substantive  appeal.   There  were
     restrictions on the grant of leave to appeal in Rule 18(4)(c) of   the
     relevant Rules, the Immigration and Asylum Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules
     2000, which provided that the form must identify the errors of fact or
     law which would  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the  outcome
     together with all the grounds relied on.   Rule  18(7)  provided  that
     "leave to appeal shall be granted only where -  (a)  the  Tribunal  is
     satisfied that the appeal would have a real prospect of success; ...".
      The 2000 Rules, but not the 2003 Rules, had a power, in Rule  18(11),
     enabling the  Tribunal,  when  considering  a  leave  application,  to
     consider evidence which was not before the Adjudicator.

 34. There was, however, no power in the 2000 Rules to set aside the  grant
     of leave to appeal.  There was a power to set  aside  the  refusal  of
     leave in Rule 19, on the  grounds  of  accidental  omission,  clerical
     error or where the interests  of  justice  required;   but  that  only
     serves to underline the absence of any such power  in  relation  to  a
     grant.  The reason is presumably that if it is thought that  there  is
     an arguable  point,  the  issue  should  then  be  argued.   Mr  Malik
     eventually accepted that and accepted that his point did not go to our
     jurisdiction to hear the appeal;  it went to how we should approach  a
     determination in these circumstances.  This is only sensible.   It  is
     the grant of leave which provides the Tribunal  with  its  powers  and
     without  it,  it  has  no  jurisdiction.   Thereafter  it  does   have
     jurisdiction  in  relation  to  the  appeal.   It   would   be   quite
     inappropriate for the Tribunal, before hearing an appeal, to  consider
     whether leave should have been granted rather than what the outcome of
     the appeal should be.  The grant of leave imposes on the Tribunal  the
     duty to determine the appeal and not to question the jurisdiction thus
     conferred.  We recognise that there may be cases in which the terms of
     grant could show quite plainly that leave should not have been granted
     on that basis.  But the Tribunal will  still  have  to  determine  the
     appeal before it, on its merits or lack of them.

 35. In fact the Tribunal's powers at the hearing were governed not by  the
     now revoked 2000 Rules but by  the  2003  Rules.   However,  the  same
     obligation to determine the appeal applies to a grant of permission to
     appeal under the 2003 Rules where the grounds are limited to an  error
     of law.  There is no equivalent provision for the setting aside of the
     refusal of permission, and although setting aside a decision   is  not
     in fact wholly excluded, the remaining  power  to  correct  accidental
     omissions or procedural errors would not be relevant here.

 36. The powers of the  Tribunal  hearing  this  appeal  are  derived  from
     paragraph 22 of Schedule 4 to the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
     This provides in (2) that "the Tribunal may affirm  the  determination
     or make any other  determination  which  the  adjudicator  could  have
     made".  Sections 65(4) and (5) confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal  to
     decide whether a decision relating to entitlement to remain in the  UK
     breached an Appellant's human rights. Section  69(1)  and  (5)  confer
     jurisdiction in relation to whether a  removal  in  consequence  of  a
     refusal of leave to enter or pursuant to removal directions  would  be
     contrary to the Refugee Convention.  It is looking to a future effect,
     rather more clearly so than section 65.

 37. The 1999 Act also provides for the one stop  procedure  requiring  all
     additional grounds to be brought forward in the one appeal.

 38. Section 77(3) and (4) deal with evidence.  They provide:

           "77 (3)     In considering -
                  a) any ground mentioned in section 69, or
                  b) any question relating to the appellant's rights  under
                     Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention,
           the appellate authority may take into account any evidence which
           it considers to be relevant to the  appeal  (including  evidence
           about matters arising after  the  date  on  which  the  decision
           appealed against was taken).


              4) In considering any other ground,  the  appellate  authority
                 may take into account only evidence -
                    a) which was available to the Secretary of State at  the
                       time when the decision appealed  against  was  taken;
                       or
                    b) which relates to relevant facts as at that date."

 39. The equivalent provision in the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
     Act 2002, section  85(4)  is  wider  and  amongst  other  matters  the
     apparent limit on consideration of current material  in  human  rights
     matters to Article 3, has been removed.   (But  see  the  analysis  of
     section 77 in SK for which it was starred.)

 40. Both sets  of  rules  contain  provisions  enabling  the  Tribunal  to
     consider evidence which was not before the Adjudicator;  Rules 22  and
     21 respectively of the 2000 and  2003  Rules.   There  are  procedural
     requirements to be satisfied before new evidence is admitted.

 41. The Court  of  Appeal  in  Ravichandran  v  SSHD  [1996]  Imm  AR  97,
     considered the different provisions  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
     Appeals Act 1993 which had no such express provisions dealing with the
     time at which matters had to be considered.  However, in  relation  to
     asylum appeals, where the issue is whether removal  would  breach  the
     Refugee Convention and having regard to the obvious  policy  sense  in
     enabling the appellate bodies to consider what may be post-Adjudicator
     circumstances changing more or less favourably to any party, the Court
     concluded that asylum matters had to be considered as at the  date  of
     the hearing.

 42. It has been the general practice of the Tribunal  over  the  years  to
     consider evidence and to reach conclusions in asylum and human  rights
     cases in the light of  the  material  before  it  as  to  the  current
     circumstances, whether of a personal nature or relating to the way  in
     which country circumstances bear upon the appeal.  This  is  different
     from but related to its power to consider evidence  which  could  have
     been but was not put before the  Adjudicator.   It  includes  material
     which by its nature  could  not  have  been  before  the  Adjudicator.
     Commonly it will include the latest country  information  but  it  can
     also include evidence of individual changes in  circumstance,  whether
     of marriage or children or medical condition.   It  can  also  include
     evidence which could and should have been before the Adjudicator.

 43. Sometimes this evidence will reinforce a ground of appeal;   at  other
     times it will support opposition to it.  Sometimes a ground of  appeal
     may be good in itself, but will have become insufficient  to  lead  to
     the appeal being allowed, because the error now has no significance in
     the  light  of  new  circumstances,  and  a   remittal   for   further
     consideration  would  inevitably  lead  to  the  same  result.    This
     jurisdiction is not  usually  controversial.   Conversely,  where  the
     appeal grounds are insufficient themselves to lead to the allowing  of
     an appeal, but where circumstances have changed such that the original
     decision of the Adjudicator cannot now stand, the  Tribunal's  general
     practice has been to allow the appeal.   It  can  work  both  ways  as
     between the Secretary of State and  a  claimant.   Mr  Malik  did  not
     suggest that we had no power to allow an appeal on that basis.

 44. This makes sense of the jurisdiction to decide whether  removal  would
     be a breach of the Refugee Convention and, although the  human  rights
     grounds in the 1999 Act (by contrast with section 84(1)(g) of the 2002
     Act), focus on the decision of the Secretary of State rather  than  on
     the fact of removal as being the cause of a breach of the ECHR,  it is
     plain that the Tribunal  has  to  look  to  the  consequences  of  the
     implementation of the decision anyway.   Under  each  Convention,  the
     question of a breach or entitlement is not based on past events but on
     an assessment of current risk upon the assumed  removal.   Indeed  the
     suspension of removals pending determination of  appeals  enables  and
     its purpose in part is to enable the determination of risk on  removal
     to be judged against the most up-to-date material.  That also  has  to
     operate even-handedly as between the Claimant  and  the  Secretary  of
     State;  it could not be right for decisions on the Conventions  to  be
     made on the latest material only where that assists the claim.

 45. This approach  reduces  but  cannot  eliminate  the  need  for  repeat
     applications by claimants as their  circumstances  change;  it  avoids
     status and rights being determined on a false basis, although they can
     be re-examined by the Secretary of State.  Simon Brown LJ referred, in
     Ravichandran, to the Tribunal as (the judicial) part of the  decision-
     making process rather than simply as the means of review of  decisions
     already made.  It contrasts with the position in the  general  run  of
     immigration cases.  (In SK, paragraph 20, the Tribunal emphasised that
     it is not a part of an administrative process but was  an  independent
     judicial body hearing appeals, but which  had  to  test  the  decision
     under appeal against facts found by it as at the date of the  hearing.
     It is in that sense a part of the decision-making process.)

 46. We consider therefore  that  the  key  to  whether  the  Tribunal  can
     consider the later material at the appeal and consider the  Tribunal's
     earlier assessment of it, is the simple fact that it  has  the  appeal
     before it, rather than whether or  not  an  Appellant  succeeds  on  a
     ground of appeal, a ground which may be wholly unrelated  to  the  new
     material.  The  alternative  approach  would  introduce  a  degree  of
     arbitrariness into the decision making process at the appellate stage,
     with the ability to hear the new material depending on whether or  not
     it was thought, for example that the reasoning of an  Adjudicator  had
     been adequately expressed on what might be a wholly  unrelated  point.
     Once permission is granted, the appeal is before  the  Tribunal;   the
     grounds have to be considered along with any other material   relevant
     to a decision on the appeal.  The appeal has to be dealt with  in  the
     light of the current material, including for example, factual material
     about the claimant.  As we have set out above, the question of  breach
     of either Convention, risk  on  removal  and  entitlement  to  refugee
     status are looking to the future;  it would  scarcely  be  a  rational
     system if such a decision in the Tribunal, for or against  a  claimant
     or Secretary of State, turned on the existence of an unrelated  error,
     say, in adequacy of reasoning by the Adjudicator.

 47. The recent decision in E and R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
     Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49, confirms this approach in paragraph 19.
      It is also consistent with the thinking behind the Court of  Appeal's
     conclusion as to the Tribunal's power under the 2003 Rules to direct a
     re-hearing rather than give leave to appeal;  paragraphs  35  and  94.
     Paragraph 35 also makes it clear that the nature of the appeal  before
     the Tribunal and the application of the Ravichandran approach does not
     mean that evidence  which  could  and  should  have  been  before  the
     Adjudicator   is   necessarily   admissible   before   the   Tribunal.
     Ravichandran is concerned with making decisions on up-to-date personal
     and country evidence, not  with  permitting  evidence  to  be  adduced
     regardless of its earlier availability, or its relevance in showing an
     error of law by way of unfairness arising from an error of fact.   Nor
     are those paragraphs concerned with the  way  in  which  the  Tribunal
     should grant leave to appeal to it on the grounds of an  Adjudicator's
     error of law.

 48. Applying that approach to the position  here,  the  Tribunal  has  the
     appeal before it and it has to determine it.  It must  do  so  in  the
     light  of  the  currently  available  country  material  and  its  own
     guidance.  That material as assessed by the  Tribunal  in  SK  and  DK
     shows that the decision cannot stand as  an  expression  of  what  now
     would be the  consequences  for  his  Convention  obligations  of  the
     Secretary of State returning the first Appellant and hence the  fourth
     Appellant with the other members of their family to Croatia.  It  does
     not matter that the Secretary of State  has  not  been  successful  in
     showing that the  decision  was  wrong  on  the  material  before  the
     Adjudicator, a lack of success due in part to uncertainty as  to  what
     he had.  It cannot stand because the guidance  as  to  the  background
     material given in SK and confirmed in DK shows  that  someone  in  the
     position of these Appellants can be returned without breach  of  their
     Convention rights.

 49. The Tribunal is not required to find, in order  to  allow  an  appeal,
     that the Adjudicator was plainly and obviously wrong in the  appraisal
     of background material, though it is otherwise when it  comes  to  the
     appraisal of a claimant's testimony.  Such a test seems inapt for  the
     consideration of background material precisely because of the need for
     consistency in an area where there may  be  scope  for  two  differing
     views without it necessarily being said that one view is  plainly  and
     obviously wrong.  Here, however, viewed against the later material and
     decisions, it is clear that the decision now is wrong and  should  not
     stand.  It would be inconsistent with the guidance and  assessment  of
     the Tribunal for the decision to stand.

 50. We did not regard those propositions as controversial.  However, it is
     clear that some doubts were raised as to the correct approach for  the
     Tribunal by the comments of the Court of Appeal in Oleed v SSHD [2002]
     EWCA Civ 1906,  19th  December  2002.   The  Court  of  Appeal,  by  a
     majority, took the view that the Tribunal  erred  in  overturning  the
     Adjudicator's findings of fact in relation to the claimant's  history,
     the credibility findings.  Those findings were not so obviously  wrong
     as to permit the Tribunal to intervene.  It rejected, by  a  majority,
     an argument on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  whose  successful
     appeal to the Tribunal had  just  been  overturned,  that  the  matter
     should be remitted to the Tribunal for it to reconsider matters in the
     light of the new circumstances in Sri Lanka.

 51. Schiemann LJ said at paragraphs 32 and 33 as follows:

           "32.  ... I accept that the Tribunal examines the  situation  in
                 the country from which the refugee is  fleeing  as  at  the
                 date of its determination.  However, in the present case in
                 my judgment there was nothing wrong with the  Adjudicator's
                 determination, there was therefore no reason to  appeal  it
                 and it would be wrong for the Home Secretary, on  the  back
                 of an appeal which has  been  dismissed,  to  seek  to  re-
                 examine the threat to the refugee with reference to a  date
                 later than the Adjudicator's determination.  To permit this
                 would merely encourage appeals by a party who has no ground
                 for appeal  but  hopes  that  the  situation  would  change
                 sufficiently to enable him to advance  different  arguments
                 on different facts on appeal.  Such procedures would not be
                 in anyone's interest.


           33.   I  note  in  conclusion  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
                 Convention which obliges this country to shelter  a  person
                 once he is no longer a refugee as therein  defined  because
                 the situation has changed in his home  country:   paragraph
                 18 of the judgment of this  court  in  Saad  and  Others  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWCA  Civ
                 2008;  [2002] INLR 34.  I accept of course that  there  may
                 well be humanitarian arguments which lead to  a  policy  of
                 not displacing erstwhile refugees  from  their  country  of
                 refuge even if the situation in their home country changes.
                  These matters do not fall to be examined by this court  in
                 the  present  case  and  have  not  been  the  subject   of
                 submissions.  But I  do  not  consider  that  a  misuse  of
                 appellate procedures is the appropriate way of dealing with
                 changes in the home country."


     The Court therefore exercised its powers to determine the  appeal  for
     itself rather than to remit.  (It is unclear what the reference  to  a
     dismissed appeal in paragraph 32 is since the appeals were allowed  at
     each stage.)

 52. It has been argued in consequence before the Tribunal on a  number  of
     occasions that this decision  meant  that  its  own  jurisdiction  and
     approach, once an appeal was before it, should not be as we  have  set
     it out, but should be confined to examining changes  in  circumstances
     only once an error had been shown on some other basis and indeed  once
     it had been shown that the decision was plainly and obviously wrong.

 53. We do not consider  that  that  is  what  Oleed  holds  at  all.   The
     reference to the need to show that a decision is plainly and obviously
     wrong is a reference to the degree of error necessary for interference
     with findings of fact, in  the  absence  of  further  evidence,  which
     relate peculiarly to the credibility and personal circumstances  of  a
     Claimant.  It  does  not  concern  itself  at  all  with  findings  or
     conclusions in relation to the assessment of  country  conditions  and
     risk on return  where  consistency  and  the  Tribunal's  guidance  is
     important.

 54. Further, the decision in Oleed does  not  purport  to  deal  with  the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction at all  in  relation  to  the  instant  issue.
     Indeed it could not do so without consideration  of  Ravichandran  and
     the statutory provisions to which we have  referred.   It  dealt  only
     with the way in which in that case the Court of Appeal felt  it  right
     to choose, in the exercise of  its  discretion,  between  the  various
     courses open to it.

 55. This view of that decision has recently been reinforced by  the  Court
     of Appeal, in Meledge v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1665.  Although the Court
     expressed no concluded view that the Tribunal had erred, Dyson LJ said
     at paragraph 14:

           "It seems to me that it is highly arguable that the Tribunal  in
           the present case misunderstood what Schiemann LJ was  saying  in
           Oleed.  The question in Oleed  was  whether  this  court  should
           remit the case for a rehearing to the Tribunal.  The question in
           the present case was whether,  in  hearing  the  appeal  from  a
           decision of the Adjudicator, the Tribunal should have regard  to
           evidence as to the current situation in the Ivory Coast.  On the
           face of it, that evidence was  relevant  and  should  have  been
           taken into account:  see section 77(3) of  the  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 1999."

 56. As we  have  said,  it  is  perfectly  possible  for  differing  views
     reasonably to be held about the same country conditions but  it  would
     be wholly undesirable whether at Adjudicator  or  Tribunal  level  for
     there to be a  divergence  of  practice  in  relation  to  essentially
     similar cases.  The decision of the Court of Appeal in Shirazi v  SSHD
     [2003] EWCA Civ 1562 pointedly reminded us of that.  It held that  the
     Tribunal had erred in failing to consider and deal with  a  number  of
     its apparently inconsistent earlier decisions on  conditions  in  Iran
     for Christian converts from Islam.  It  did  so  notwithstanding  that
     those earlier decisions were not binding  and  regardless  of  whether
     they had or had not been cited to the Tribunal.  Inconsistency of that
     nature is an error of law.  The question was not  simply  whether  the
     Adjudicator or Tribunal had reached in turn  reasonable  decisions  on
     the factual material presented to it.

 57. This position reflects what the Court of Appeal said in Manzeke v SSHD
     [1997] Imm AR 524.  Lord Woolf MR,  dealing  with  the  power  of  the
     Tribunal to determine an appeal instead of remitting it, said:


           "This last provision is of significance,  not  only  because  it
           gives  a  clear  steer  to  Tribunals  that  they  should  avoid
           remitting cases to special adjudicators, no doubt  because  such
           remission will involve delay, but also because it indicates that
           the Tribunal has, where possible, to conduct  any  determination
           which will enable it finally to dispose of an appeal itself.


           Particularly  when  determining  appeals  brought  where  it  is
           necessary to give consideration  to  the  general  situation  in
           particular parts of the world, it is  important  for  Tribunals,
           when appropriate, to give their views as to that  situation,  so
           far as relevant, to claims for asylum in that part of the world.


           In administering the asylum jurisdiction, the Tribunal  (whether
           it be a special  adjudicator  or  an  Appeal  Tribunal)  has  to
           consider not only whether the individual asylum seeker  has  the
           necessary subjective fear to  be  regarded  as  someone  who  is
           entitled to asylum, but in addition it has to be satisfied  that
           that fear is well-founded.  Whether or not that  fear  is  well-
           founded involves applying  an  objective  standard,  a  standard
           which will depend upon the state of affairs in  that  particular
           country as well as the circumstances of  the  individual  asylum
           seeker.


           It will be beneficial to the general  administration  of  asylum
           appeals for special adjudicators to  have  the  benefit  of  the
           views of a Tribunal in other cases on the general situation in a
           particular part of the world, as long as that situation has  not
           changed in the meantime.  Consistency in the treatment of asylum
           seekers is important insofar as  objective  considerations,  not
           directly affected by the circumstances of the individual  asylum
           seeker, are involved."

 58. SK was intended to and did  give  authoritative  guidance  as  to  the
     approach to be adopted towards the position of ethnic Serbs  returning
     to Croatia.   Giving  such  guidance  is  an  important  part  of  the
     Tribunal's function, enabling the parties to know where they stand and
     assisting the achievement of consistent decision-making throughout the
     asylum and immigration process.  Although SK is a starred decision, it
     was not starred because of its guidance over Croatia, but  because  of
     an issue of statutory interpretation which arose in it.  The system of
     starring decisions relates only to points of law and in that way marks
     them as binding authority for  the  Tribunal  and  Adjudicators.   The
     value of the starring process and the giving of authoritative guidance
     was recognised by the Court of Appeal in both S and Others [2002] INLR
     416, and again by Laws LJ when  refusing  a  renewed  application  for
     permission to appeal in SK on 25th May 2003, [2003] EWCA Civ 841.

 59. Although guidance cases are not as such factually  binding  precedent,
     in contrast to starred cases which are legally binding, they have  the
     same force as guideline sentencing  cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeal,
     Criminal Division.  This Tribunal function was  recently  affirmed  in
     Indrakumar v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1677.

 60. We wish to emphasise that the breadth of power which the Tribunal  has
     on appeal to it, which includes the power by virtue of paragraph 22 of
     Schedule 4 to the  1999  Act  to  make  any  determination  which  the
     Adjudicator could have made, does not mean that every issue is  to  be
     approached in the same way.  This  has  been  recently  and  helpfully
     restated by the Court of Appeal in Indrakumar, distinguishing and  not
     following dicta in Koci v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  1507,  which  somewhat
     extended decision  in  Oleed  from  credibility  findings  to  country
     conditions.  This  recent  clarification  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
     rulings means that neither Koci nor Oleed should be  regarded  now  as
     relevant to the Tribunal's approach to country conditions.

 61. It is useful here to set out paragraph 13 of the judgment of Hale LJ:

           "13.  There is, therefore, room for some debate about nuances of
                 meaning between terms such  as  "wrong",  "plainly  wrong",
                 "clearly wrong", or "unsustainable".  But consideration  of
                 all of those cases and  the  principles  which  they  adopt
                 leads me to the following propositions:
                 (1)   The Immigration Appeal Tribunal is not different from
                       this court or any other court  with  jurisdiction  to
                       hear appeals on fact as well as law.  (Of course that
                       position  is  to  change  and  it   will   lose   its
                       jurisdiction on points of fact.)
                 (2)   The Immigration Appeal Tribunal, like this  court  or
                       any other court, can only interfere if there has been
                       an  error:   that  is,  if   ,   on   analysis,   the
                       adjudicator's decision was wrong.  There is a  useful
                       analogy here with the  Civil  Procedure  Rules,  Rule
                       52.11(3) which says the same thing.  It is not enough
                       that the Tribunal  might  have  reached  a  different
                       conclusion itself.
                 (3)   I, for my part, do not find adverbs such as "plainly"
                       or "clearly" wrong helpful in the context of a  fact-
                       finding exercise.  They have sometimes proved  useful
                       for appellate courts when reviewing the exercise of a
                       discretion.
                 (4)   The test is the same,  whatever  the  nature  of  the
                       error alleged, but its application will often  depend
                       on the type of evidence on which the finding of  fact
                       is  based.   One  can  distinguish  at   least   four
                       different types:
                       (i)   There  are  findings  of  fact  based  on  oral
                            evidence and  the  assessment  of  credibility.
                            These can only very rarely be overturned by  an
                            appellate Tribunal.
                       (ii)   There  are  findings  based   on   documentary
                            evidence  specific  to  the  individual   case.
                            These can more readily  be  overturned  because
                            the appellate tribunal is in  just  as  good  a
                            position to assess it.  But even  there,  there
                            may be an important  relationship  between  the
                            assessment  of  the  person  involved  and  the
                            assessment of those documents.   If  so,  great
                            caution once again will be required.
                       (iii) There are findings as to the general conditions
                            or the backdrop in the country concerned  which
                            will  be  based  on   the   objective   country
                            evidence.  The Immigration Appeal Tribunal will
                            be at least as well placed to assess this as is
                            the  adjudicator.   Although  in  our  law  the
                            notion of a factual precedent is,  as  Laws  LJ
                            termed it in S and Others v Secretary of  State
                            for the Home  Department  [2002]  INLR  416  at
                            paragraph 28,  "exotic",  in  this  context  he
                            considered it to  be  "benign  and  practical".
                            There  will  be  no  public  interest  and   no
                            legitimate  individual  interest  in   multiple
                            examinations of the state of this  backdrop  at
                            any  particular  time  once   that   had   been
                            considered in detail and guidance is  given  by
                            the Tribunal.
                       (iv)  There are findings as  to  the  application  of
                            those general country conditions to  the  facts
                            of the  particular  case.   These  will  be  an
                            inference to be drawn to  the  adjudicator  and
                            then, if appropriate,  by  the  Tribunal.   The
                            Tribunal will  be  entitled  to  draw  its  own
                            inferences, just  as  is  the  appellate  court
                            under the CPR, once it has detected an error in
                            the adjudicator's approach."

 62. We add three comments.  First, in  relation  to  documentary  evidence
     which as the  Court  of  Appeal  points  out  is  closely  related  to
     credibility, the Tribunal has given a starred decision, Tanveer  Ahmed
     [2002] UKIAT 00439, [2002] Imm AR 318, which shows Adjudicators how to
     approach the reliability of documents.  It would be an  error  of  law
     for that decision not to be followed;  it needs to  be  considered  in
     all those very many cases,  indeed  the  very  considerable  majority,
     where the issue is not whether the document in question is  forged  or
     authentic, but whether it is reliable or  not.   This  distinction  is
     vital.  Documents produced may be on the right paper,  even  with  the
     right stamps or signature but may be unreliable because of the way  in
     which they are procured.

 63. Second, the Court of Appeal in paragraph 16 of Indrakumar says:

           "To my mind that is the error found by the Tribunal, and  having
           found such an error the Tribunal were entitled to  look  at  the
           case again in the round."


      We do not consider that by that, the Court meant that as a  matter  of
      jurisdiction, such a finding was necessary before  fresh  evidence  or
      fresh  guidance  as  to  country  conditions  or   changing   personal
      circumstances  could  be  adduced.   We  have  already  set  out   our
      reasoning.


 64. Third, the ability to examine further evidence  on  an  appeal  on  an
     error of law should follow the E and R decision.  It is,  broadly  but
     not precisely, an error of law  for  unfairness  to  be  caused  by  a
     material error as to an existing uncontentious or verifiable fact, not
     caused by the Appellant or his advisers;  see paragraph 66.   Evidence
     to prove that error is admissible subject generally to the  principles
     in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR  1489;   see  paragraphs  82  and  83.
     Where the later, new evidence relates  eg  to  country  conditions  or
     personal circumstances as they were before the Adjudicator, but it  is
     sought to be argued that those conclusions were wrong by reference  to
     that later evidence, the principles in E and  R  clearly  apply;   see
     paragraph 90.

 65. As we have said, however, the principles in Ravichandran  continue  to
     apply to evidence of changed personal or country  circumstances  after
     the date of the Adjudicator's determination, once the appeal is before
     the Tribunal.

 66. When the Tribunal is considering whether to grant permission to appeal
     to it from an Adjudicator and fresh evidence is sought to be  adduced,
     the approach in E and R at paragraphs 66, 82 and 83 are to be  applied
     to that evidence.  There is no scope at that stage for the application
     of the principles in Ravichandran, which may arise once  the  Tribunal
     has the substantive appeal before  it.   The  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
     requires an arguable error of law to be  found  before  permission  to
     appeal to it is granted;  there is no reason why it  should  adopt  at
     that stage a different approach to new evidence from that  adopted  by
     the Court of Appeal.  There is generally likely only  to  be  a  short
     time, between  Adjudicator  determination  and  consideration  of  the
     application for permission to appeal,  in  which  circumstances  could
     change unforeseeably.  If they do, the Secretary of State will have to
     consider them as part of a fresh claim.

 67. On the full appeal, however, the  adduction  of  evidence  of  changed
     circumstances and conditions since the Adjudicator's decision  follows
     a different approach in human rights and asylum appeals because of the
     statutory provisions  and  the  nature  of  the  claims,  before  this
     particular Tribunal.

 68. It is appropriate  then  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  grant  of
     permission to appeal in this case  in  the  light  of  the  brief  and
     irrelevant contention that it should not have been granted at all.  If
     the Tribunal had issued authoritative guidance on a particular matter,
     of which country conditions are an obvious example,  an  Adjudicator's
     decision would be erroneous in law, if it was incompatible  with  that
     guidance, even if the reason were that it had not been  drawn  to  his
     attention.

 69. Likewise, where as here the specific SK guidance dealt with  the  very
     conditions with  which  this  Adjudicator  was  concerned  before  his
     decision was promulgated, it is an error of law on his part to reach a
     conclusion as to risk on  return  which  was  inconsistent  with  that
     guidance, even though it was not made available to him.  The  decision
     of any Court may be overturned by reference  to  subsequent  authority
     which shows it to have been reached in error.

 70. This approach to the grant of permission  to  appeal  flows  from  the
     Court of Appeal's recognition  of  the  Tribunal's  guidance  role  in
     Indrakumar and other cases and its error in  Shirazi.   This  reflects
     the pragmatic thinking behind  Ravichandran.   It  also  reduces,  but
     cannot  eliminate,  the  problem  of   inconsistent   conclusions   by
     Adjudicators, whether on similar or partially differing evidence as to
     background  conditions.   It  discourages  adjournments  whilst   such
     guidance is awaited.

 71. So we would not accept the suggestion that permission should not  have
     been granted on the SK grounds upon which it was granted.

 72. This decision is starred because of what it says about the approach to
     new country material and to the  Tribunal's  guidance  in  respect  of
     country material, new or pre-existing, at a  substantive  appeal,  and
     whether or not a ground of appeal has to succeed before that  material
     and guidance can be considered.  It deals with the relevance of Oleed,
     Indrakumar, and E and R.

 73. Accordingly, for the reasons which we have given, we look at  the  new
     material in relation to the appeal before us and in the  light  of  it
     conclude that the decision cannot stand.

 74. This appeal is allowed.



                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
