



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


    AA (Somalia] [Expert evidence, assessment) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00221


|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination notified  |
|On: 2 August 2004                                  |                        |
|Prepared: 4 August 2004                            |........12th Aug        |
|                                                   |2004........            |

                                   Before:

                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                              Mr J R W D Jones
                               Mrs R M Bray JP

Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:           Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Davies of Mangala & Co, solicitors


1.    The appellant ("the  Secretary  of  State")  appeals  with  permission
    against the determination of an adjudicator (Mr I J French), sitting in
    Birmingham, in which he allowed on asylum and human rights grounds  the
    appeal of the  respondent  ("the  claimant"),  a  citizen  of  Somalia,
    against the Secretary of State's decision to give  directions  for  his
    removal from United Kingdom after refusing an  application  for  asylum
    made by him.

2.    The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in May  2003.   He  applied
    for asylum on the following day.  The grounds on which he did  so  were
    that he was a member of the minority Bajuni clan from Koyama, an island
    adjacent to the southern coast of Somalia.  As  such,  he  claimed,  he
    would be at risk of persecution if he were to be returned to Somalia.

3.    The Secretary of State did not dispute the claimant's  assertion  that
    he was of Somalia nationality.  However, he rejected the claim that  he
    was a member of the  Bajuni  clan.   The  principal  issue  before  the
    adjudicator was therefore whether the claimant was in reality a  member
    of the Bajuni  clan.   The  adjudicator  concluded  that  he  was.   He
    therefore allowed the appeal on both asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    for that reason.  The issue before us is whether he was right to do so.

4.    In his submissions, Mr Morris,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, argued that in accepting the claimant's assertion that he was  a
    member of the Bajuni clan, the adjudicator had attached undue weight to
    the statement of Mr Brian Allen referred to at paragraphs 18 and 20  of
    his determination.  This is the statement  dated  "August  2003"  which
    appears at  pages  22  and  23  of  the  claimant's  bundle.   In  that
    statement, Mr Allen had expressed his views  regarding  the  Report  on
    minority groups in Somalia produced by the joint  British,  Danish  and
    Dutch fact-finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya which took  place  between
    17 and 24 September 2000.

5.    However, Mr Morris submitted, there was nothing in  the  statement  to
    show that Mr Allen was qualified to express an expert  opinion  on  the
    question of minority groups in Somalia.  In particular, he had included
    no biographical details in his statement.  At the start of the  hearing
    before us, Miss Davies, on behalf of  the  claimant,  sought  leave  to
    adduce a copy  of  Mr  Allen's  curriculum  vitae.   Mr  Morris  waived
    objection to the late  service  of  that  evidence.   Nevertheless,  he
    submitted that there was nothing in the CV to show that  Mr  Allen  had
    any particular knowledge regarding the position of minority  groups  in
    Somalia.  He had never spent any time in Somalia, and had had no direct
    experience of the Bajuni people in Somalia itself.  For these  reasons,
    he argued, the adjudicator had attached  undue  weight  to  Mr  Allen's
    statement.

6.    We then heard submissions from Miss Davies on behalf of the  claimant.
     She argued that if Mr Allen's CV had been  included  in  the  evidence
    placed before the  adjudicator,  we  would  not  be  here  today.   She
    referred us to the Secretary of State's own Operational  Guidance  Note
    relating to Somalia (Version 6) issued in  May  2004  which  states  at
    paragraph 5.4.1:

         "There are a number  of  Somalia  experts  who  submit  reports  in
         support of applications (most commonly at the appeal stage).  There
         is (sic) no specific criteria by which an  individual  may  declare
         themselves (sic) to be a Somalia expert; while some experts clearly
         do have  considerable  knowledge  regarding  many  aspects  of  the
         country the expertise of others relates to specific issues".

7.    She submitted that there were  no  precise  criteria  for  determining
    whether or not a particular individual could properly be regarded as an
    expert.  Mr Allen's CV disclosed that he had spent a total of 21  years
    in East Africa.  In addition, he had displayed a detailed knowledge  in
    his statement.  It  would  be  unfair,  she  argued,  to  penalise  the
    claimant because of his solicitors' failure to put a copy of Mr Allen's
    CV before the adjudicator.

8.    With respect to the adjudicator, we are bound to say  that  Mr  Morris
    was right in his submission that the adjudicator attached undue  weight
    to Mr Allen's statement.  An  adjudicator  should  not  accept  without
    question the opinions expressed by  an  individual  merely  because  he
    himself claims to be an expert on a  particular  subject.   It  is  not
    sufficient for an individual simply to assert that he is an expert,  or
    to  express  opinions  unsupported  by  proper  sources  and   reasons.
    Instead, an individual  purporting  to  give  an  expert  opinion  must
    demonstrate that he is in  reality  an  expert  in  relation  to  those
    matters on which he is expressing his opinion, and that he has  current
    and reliable knowledge as to those matters, e.g. if  he  is  expressing
    opinion regarding the country conditions in a particular country.

9.    In addition, he must identify with sufficient particularity to  enable
    their weight to be assessed properly by an adjudicator the  sources  of
    his information, and must also give proper, intelligible  and  adequate
    reasons for arriving at the conclusions expressed by him.  Adjudicators
    should exercise particular care in assessing what weight  may  properly
    be attached to the views expressed by an individual whose opinions  are
    adduced on  a  regular  basis,  whether  before  adjudicators  or  this
    Tribunal, so as to ensure that he has  not  allowed  his  views  to  be
    influenced, even unconsciously, by the hope or  prospect  of  receiving
    further instructions of a similar kind in the future.

10. Turning to the question of Mr Allen himself, there was nothing  in  his
    statement to show that he was qualified to express  an  expert  opinion
    regarding the situation of the Bajuni people in Somalia, apart  from  a
    bare reference in the third paragraph of his statement to "Following my
    work researching and working with the Bajuni peoples",  and  a  further
    reference at paragraph 5 of his statement  to  "My  research  into  the
    Bajuni".  He provided no further information in his statement as to the
    nature of that "research".

11. The claimant's solicitors have now produced a copy  of  Mr  Allen's  CV
    which discloses that between 1968  and  1979,  he  was  employed  as  a
    teacher and researcher into African music in Kenya,  and  that  between
    1990 and 2000, he was engaged in AIDS education and leadership training
    in Tanzania.  He has never lived in or, it would appear,  even  visited
    Somalia.  He now lives in Leeds, where for the last two  years  he  has
    been working as a community education lecturer in music for people with
    learning difficulties, although he does state that he has also acted as
    a Swahili interpreter for asylum seekers and refugees.

12.   In light of those facts, we are far from persuaded that Mr  Allen  was
    properly qualified to express an expert opinion regarding the situation
    of the Bajuni people in Somalia.   Possibly,  that  may  be  the  case.
    However, it does not appear to be so  from  the  details  contained  in
    either his  original  statement  or  in  his  subsequent  CV.   In  the
    circumstances, we are  satisfied  that  Mr  Morris  was  right  in  his
    submission that the adjudicator erred in attaching undue weight  to  Mr
    Allen's statement.

13.   Unfortunately, that is not a  matter  which  we  ourselves  are  in  a
    position to rectify as we have  not  heard  the  claimant  giving  oral
    evidence, and are therefore in no  position  to  assess  the  truth  or
    otherwise of his evidence in light of  the  opinions  expressed  by  Mr
    Allen.  As a consequence, we are left with no alternative save to remit
    this appeal for a fresh hearing before another  adjudicator  so  as  to
    enable a proper assessment to be carried out, both in relation  to  the
    claimant's own evidence and the opinions expressed by Mr Allen.

14.   This appeal is therefore allowed to the  limited  extent  that  it  is
    remitted for a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than  Mr  I  J
    French.

Signed                            Dated

L V Waumsley

Vice President


Approved for electronic distribution

