
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |RM ( Sierra Leone - Female  |
|                           |        |Genital Mutilation -        |
|                           |        |membership of a particular  |
|                           |        |Social Group) Sierra Leone  |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00108          |
|On:  5 April 2004          |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|17 May 2004                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Chairman)                                           |
|Mr P S Aujla                                                      |
|Mrs L R Schmitt                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr K Kuranchie of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the respondent:     Mr D Saville, Home  Office  Presenting  Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leone, appeals with leave  of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr C  A  Vaudin
      d'Imecourt)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 14 January 2003 to refuse to  vary  her  leave  to
      enter or remain and grant her asylum in the United Kingdom.

2.    The appellant claimed  to  have  a  well-founded  of  persecution  if
      returned to Sierra Leone as a result of membership  of  a  particular
      social group, that is a female who  is  expected  to  undergo  female
      genital mutilation (FGM).

3.    The Adjudicator dismissed both the asylum and Article 3  claims.   Mr
      Saville informed the Tribunal that  he  was  granting  the  appellant
      three years humanitarian protection leave and was therefore conceding
      that there would not be a sufficiency of protection for the appellant
      were she to be removed to Sierra Leone.

4.    Mr Saville was, however, contesting the argument in  the  grounds  of
      appeal that the appellant's claim engages the Convention  by  way  of
      her membership of a  particular  social  group.   He  relied  on  the
      Tribunal decision in M (Kenya).

5.    The appellant's account was that she comes from a  lineage  of  women
      who generally hold the rank of persons responsible for  the  carrying
      out of female genital mutilation.  Her grandmother who was  the  head
      circumciser in her village died without a female descendant save  for
      her.  The appellant said that she was selected by a group of  females
      in her village to replace her grandmother.  They were going to  force
      her into having female circumcision which she objected to and one  of
      her relatives paid for her to flee her village and the country.

6.    The Adjudicator having considered the principles established in  Shah
      and Islam did not find that this particular  appellant  falls  within
      the categories of persons that can  be  described  as  persons  of  a
      particular social group, since  it  was  clear  from  the  principles
      enunciated in Shah and  Islam  that  "the  social  group  must  exist
      independently of, and not be identified by,  the  persecution".    He
      found that in the particular circumstances of this case the group  to
      which  the  appellant  claims   membership   of   would   not   exist
      independently of and not been identified by the persecution.

7.    Mr Kuranchie argued that the appellant is a member  of  a  particular
      social  group  of  women  of  the  Mendi  tribe.    Their   immutable
      characteristics are that they are young and female,  with  an  intact
      body, which has not been interfered with by way of FGM, regardless of
      the fact that some of the women from that tribe do  not  oppose  FGM.
      The desire to preserve their body is so fundamental that they  should
      not be required to change it.  If those characteristics are  accepted
      as defining the group, then he would argue that the Adjudicator erred
      in finding that there is no Convention reason.

8.    Mr Kuranchie then went  on  to  argue  that  there  would  not  be  a
      sufficiency of protection for the appellant in Sierra Leone  but,  as
      already stated above, Mr Saville did accept that there would  not  be
      and that was why he had conceded the Article 3 claim.

9.    Mr Saville argued that there was nothing in the  objective  evidence,
      which says that people of the Mendi tribe suffer more than any  other
      women from any other part of Sierra Leone.  The  objective  evidence,
      as contained at paragraph 6.40 of the October 2003 CIPU Report,  says
      that female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely  practised  among  all
      levels of society.  Some estimates of the  percentage  of  women  and
      girls who undergo the practice range as high as eight to  ninety  per
      cent.  Female Genital Mutilation is practised by almost all of Sierra
      Leone's ethnic groups therefore there is no identifiable group  which
      exists independently of the persecution.  Relying  on  the  objective
      evidence contained in the appellant's bundle, Mr Saville argued  that
      the appellant is not a member of  Bundo  because  she  has  not  been
      initiated into that society because she has not  undergone  FGM.   He
      argued that the appellant left Sierra Leone because  of  pressure  to
      have FGM.  Because of the widespread  nature  of  FGM  the  appellant
      cannot bring herself within the Convention reason of membership of  a
      particular social group.  The appellant is a long way away  from  the
      situation of women in Pakistan who, in Shah and Islam, were found  to
      be fundamentally discriminated against.

10.   Mr Saville further argued that the appellant's situation is closer to
      the case of M (Kenya).  At paragraph 13 the Tribunal noted  that  the
      Adjudicator was not referred to the Tribunal's decision in  Adhiambo,
      which was an appeal by a member of the Kikuyu tribe against a  threat
      of FGM because of membership of the Mungiki  cult.   After  reviewing
      the objective evidence that was before them, the Tribunal in Adhiambo
      held that the evidence did not  support  a  particular  social  group
      defined as either "Kikuyu women"  or  "women  who  face  FGM".    The
      Tribunal said that there was no evidence to show  that  Kikuyu  women
      were discriminated against or at  any  greater  risk  than  women  in
      general.  The Tribunal found that the appellant did not belong  to  a
      particular  social  group  and  therefore  had  not   established   a
      Convention reason.  The Tribunal in M (Kenya) were not satisfied that
      the social group identified by  the  Adjudicator  could  properly  be
      regarded as a particular social  group  within  the  meaning  of  the
      Convention.  They preferred the reasoning in Adhiambo.

11.   Mr Saville argued that Mr Kuranchie had failed to identify any social
      group that exists independently of the persecution that the appellant
      fears.

12.   In reply, Mr Kuranchie argued that because the appellant comes from a
      lineage of women in a tribe who were responsible for  performing  FGM
      and was next in line to be the head of this group, she had made out a
      case of being a member of a particular social group.

13.   We do not accept Mr Kuranchie's line of  argument.   The  appellant's
      fear of persecution as set out in paragraph 29 of  her  statement  is
      that if she is returned to Sierra Leone she  will  be  forced  to  go
      through the initiation ceremony and be circumcised.  She  would  then
      have  to  take  her  grandmother's  title  and  become  part  of  the
      initiation committee.  She did not wish  to  take  her  grandmother's
      title and be involved with the initiation committee.

14.   It seems from the appellant's own evidence that in order to  take  up
      her grandmother's title and become part of the initiation  committee,
      i.e. the Bundo, she would have to be circumcised.   It  is  therefore
      our opinion that as she  is  not  circumcised  she  cannot  take  her
      grandmother's title, let alone become involved  with  the  initiation
      committee.  In the circumstances, we agree with Mr Saville  that  the
      appellant is not a member of the  Bundo  because  she  has  not  been
      initiated into that society because she has not undergone FGM.

15.   The grounds of appeal correctly recognised that the House of Lords in
      Shah and Islam established the principle that there  can  only  be  a
      particular social group if this group  exists  independently  of  the
      persecution and that members of the group should share  an  immutable
      characteristic.  In our opinion Mr Kuranchie has failed  to  identify
      any  social  group,  the  members  of  which   share   an   immutable
      characteristic, which identifies that group.  Being young and  female
      would apply to all the young females in Sierra Leone.   According  to
      the objective evidence FGM is so widely  practised  in  Sierra  Leone
      that the percentage of women and girls who undergo the practice is as
      high as eighty to ninety per cent.  The  logical  consequence  of  Mr
      Kuranchie's argument is that the  small  minority  of  maybe  ten  to
      twenty per cent of young females who have not undergone FGM  make  up
      to a particular social group.  However, we  are  not  satisfied  that
      this social group can properly be regarded  as  a  particular  social
      group within the meaning of the Convention.  Since FGM is widespread,
      there is always that lingering fear.  It is  precisely  because  that
      fear became a reality for the appellant that she  fled  the  country.
      In the circumstances we agree with Mr Saville that Mr  Kuranchie  has
      failed  to  identify  a   particular   social   group   that   exists
      independently of the fear.

16.   Accordingly, we are not  satisfied  that  there  is  an  identifiable
      social group to which it can be properly said that the appellant is a
      member of so as to bring her within the Convention.

17.   Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.




                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
