

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

              RV (Hindu - Kabul - Ecre guidelines) Afghanistan [2004]  UKIAT
00286

                                             Date of Hearing: 4 October 2004

                                                Date Signed  5 October  2004
                                                Date Determination Notified:
                                                            12 October  2004



                                   Before:





                       Mr J G Freeman (Vice-President)

                    Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice-President)

                              Prof  R H Taylor


Between





                                                        Appellant

                                     and



                        SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT










                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:               Miss A Porter of Counsel
                                                 Instructed  by   G   Singh,
                    solicitors

For the  Respondent:                           Mr  C  Buckley,  Home  Office
                    Presenting Officer



1.                   The  appellant,  an  Afghan  national,   appeals   with
permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr N M  K  Lawrence,
who dismissed his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to
recognise him as a refugee or grant humanitarian protection,  on  the  basis
that there was no risk on return to him as a Hindu in Kabul.

2.                  The manuscript Grounds of Appeal contain three  issues:
the Adjudicator's treatment of the Guidelines for the  Treatment  of  Afghan
Asylum  Seekers  and  Refugees  in  Europe  (ECRE,  April  2003)  especially
paragraph 15 of that document;   Article  8  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950; and the  new  'earned  regularisation'
concession for employees working in the United Kingdom. Only one  of  these,
the ECRE point, was pursued at the hearing.  Neither of  the  two  remaining
grounds had been argued below and Miss Porter did not seek  to  pursue  them
further.

3.                  Unfortunately, the ECRE document had not  been  re-filed
for the hearing, and in addition the solicitors had not served their bundle
for the hearing on the Home Office. A skeleton argument  prepared  by  Miss
Porter for the hearing was produced on the day with only one copy  for  the
Tribunal. There was a quite  unnecessary  delay  in  beginning  the  hearing
whilst the Tribunal ensured that all participants had  copies  of  the  same
documents.

4.                  The relevant passage from the ECRE document says this -

      "15.      European States should give all Afghan asylum claimants  the
      opportunity to lodge an application and have it processed with minimum
      delay.  ECRE considers that certain categories of individuals  amongst
      the afghan population may have ongoing protection  needs  that  remain
      unchanged despite recent political developments in Afghanistan.  These
      groups include...

        .         Religious minorities are at risk of persecution including
           Hindus, Sikhs, Shiites, Sunnis and Ismailis 15[14]...

      17.                ECRE  urges  European  States  to  give   immediate
           consideration to the  asylum  applications  of  persons  falling
           within the aforementioned categories, and to consider all asylum
           applications from Afghans on an individual  basis  in  order  to
           identify and recognise their status as early as possible.   This
           should include either refugee status in accordance with the 1951
           Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees  or  complementary
           protection status  for  those  who  fear  persecution  but  fall
           outside a full and inclusive interpretation of the terms of  the
           1951 Convention.  We would recommend against a presumption  that
           applications are deemed to be manifestly unfounded on the  basis
           of the establishment of the Afghanistan Transitional Admin."
                                             Bold emphasis added by Tribunal
5.                  The footnote, 15[14], reads thus -

      "At the end of last year, 170 Ismailis were jailed for several  weeks,
      when they tried to travel to Kabul to welcome home their  leader  (who
      fled to Uzbekistan, when the Taliban took over)..."

6. That is not evidence of risk to all Hindus.  It is not clear what is the
source of ECRE's  conclusions  as  to  risk  to  that  particular  religious
minority, given that the supporting evidence  in  the  footnote  relates  to
Ismailis.  Ms Porter accepted  that  there  was  little  specific  evidence,
arguing that the reason was the very small number of Hindus in  Afghanistan,
and that accordingly the Tribunal should be prepared to grant the  appellant
some latitude as to his argument and evidence. A reference to  paragraph  18
of  the  ECRE  document  in  the  appellant's  closing  submissions  to  the
Adjudicator seems to have been otiose as it deals with internal  relocation,
and this appellant's claimed  difficulties  were  in  Kabul,  where  he  was
living before coming to the United Kingdom.   Kabul  is  the  only  part  of
Afghanistan to which at present it is  generally  considered  that  internal
relocation is an option from other parts of the  country;  therefore,  those
already in Kabul do not have an internal relocation option.

7.                  The Adjudicator  did  consider  the  ECRE  document.  At
paragraph 5.6 of his determination, he said this -

      "There are also references in  "APP  1"  at  page  45  that  religious
      minorities, such as Sikhs, Hindus, Shiites, Sunnis and Ismailis are at
      risk of persecution.  However, as I have found elsewhere, the  Interim
      Administration has set [up] a  human  rights  commission  which  could
      investigate."

8.                   That  is  a  reference  to   paragraph   5.2   of   the
determination,  in  which  the  Adjudicator  considered  the  human   rights
commission  and  concluded  that  he  was  'satisfied  the  authorities   in
Afghanistan have  in  place  a  system  to  protect  any  violation  of  the
appellant's human rights'.

9.                  The relevant Ground of Appeal says this -

      "1.         The  Adjudicator  appears  not  to  have  considered   the
      Guidelines for the treatment of Afghan asylum seekers and refugees  in
      Europe April 2003 compiled by the European  Council  on  Refugees  and
      Exiles [ECRE].  A copy of the report is enclosed  and  the  reader  is
      referred to paragraph 15 and the paragraph marked "*"  which  confirms
      that Hindus may require ongoing protection needs despite the political
      developments  in  Afghanistan  (the  report  was  contained   in   the
      appellant's bundle).  In conjunction to the above, it  is  noted  that
      the Adjudicator has stated in his determination at paragraph 5.1  that
      "I have considered the objective evidence provided on  behalf  of  the
      appellant. Both CIPU and objective evidence  do  register  a  note  of
      caution".  Given the Adjudicator's finding, in addition to the  above-
      mentioned report, the decision of the Adjudicator  is  irrational  and
      perverse."

10.              The skeleton argument makes no reference to  paragraph  5.6
and it does appear that  in  preparing  for  this  appeal,  the  appellant's
solicitors and Counsel may have overlooked the  Adjudicator's  consideration
of the ECRE document set out in that paragraph.  In oral  argument,  Counsel
sought  to  persuade  us  that  'may  have  ongoing  protection  needs'  was
disjunctive from the bullet point stating that religious minorities were  at
risk of persecution (paragraph 15).  Further, she referred us  to  a  letter
written by UNHCR on the appeal of a  different  appellant,  to  a  different
firm on solicitors, on 18 July 2003, which said that -

      "UNHCR's opinion is that Sikhs and Hindus from present day Afghanistan
      are  among  those  who  may   qualify   for   protection   under   the
      1951Conveniton.  Their applications should be assessed in a  full  and
      fair procedure, taking into account  the  personal  circumstances  and
      background of the Applicant, an analysis of the  prevailing  situation
      in the Applicant's area of origin, and an assessment of  the  efficacy
      of law and order mechanisms in that particular area."

11.              It is not clear  whether  Mr  Kingsley-Nyinah,  the  Deputy
Representative who wrote in these terms to Bhogal  Lal  in  July  2003,  was
aware that the letter would  be  used  fifteen  months  later  by  G  Singh,
solicitors.  The letter is  consistent  with  the  full  text  of  the  ECRE
document, albeit more crisply expressed.  However,  Counsel  argued  that  a
narrower meaning of the ECRE document could be sustained; that all Sikhs  in
Afghanistan were at risk today and  entitled  to  asylum.   That  takes  the
observations out  of  their  proper  context.   She  also  argued  that  the
Adjudicator's conclusion was not 'reasonable' and should not be upheld,  but
that  is  not  the  test;  the  question  is   whether   the   Adjudicator's
determination contains an error of law, which may include an error  of  fact
if the determination is so  inadequate  as  to  be  perverse  or  Wednesbury
unreasonable.

12.               The  Tribunal  reminded  Ms  Porter  that  following   the
decision of the Court of Appeal in CA [2004] EWCA 1165  (see  judgment  of
Laws LJ at paragraphs 14-15 and 18-22) and pursuant to Section  101  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ,  the  appellate  function  of
the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  is  now  limited  to  situations  where  an
adjudicator  had  perpetrated  a  material  error   of   law,   not   simply
reconsideration of the facts, from which under s 101  it  is  now  debarred.
The bar on reconsideration of facts includes reconsideration of the  country
situation, except where the Adjudicator's findings of fact are  perverse  or
Wednesbury unreasonable so as to amount to an error of law.  If there is  an
error of law in the determination, the Tribunal may  deal  with  it  on  the
facts at the date of hearing before the Tribunal, but not otherwise.

13.              We asked Ms Porter to identify  the  mistake  of  law  upon
which she relied.  She replied that the Adjudicator's consideration  of  the
ECRE document in his determination was unreasonably brief, but  did  not  go
so far as to suggest that it was perverse or Wednesbury  unreasonable.   She
sought to widen the Grounds of Appeal to include  the  appellant's  personal
circumstances (which were not argued below, nor included  in  the  Statement
of Additional Grounds  which  accompanied  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
Adjudicator).  No application for permission to amend had  been  made.   The
Tribunal reserved its determination for postal delivery, which we now give.

14.              We remind ourselves  of  the  obligation  on  an  appellant
under rules 17 and 20 of the Procedure Rules 2003:

      "Form and contents of application notice
           17.  - (1) An application notice for permission to appeal must be
      in the appropriate prescribed form and must ...

          (2) ... state all the grounds of appeal and give reasons in
      support of those grounds.

          (3) The grounds of appeal must -

           (a) identify the alleged errors of law in the adjudicator's
           determination; and
           (b) explain why such errors made a material difference to the
           decision...

       Variation of grounds of appeal
           20.  - (1) A party may vary his grounds of appeal only with the
      permission of the Tribunal.

          (2) Where the Tribunal has refused permission to appeal on any
      ground, it must not grant permission to vary the grounds of appeal to
      include that ground unless it is satisfied that, because of special
      circumstances, it would be unjust not to allow the variation."

15.              The  Grounds  of  Appeal  at  Ground   1   are   patently
misconceived.  The Adjudicator did consider  the  ECRE  document  (paragraph
5.6) and explained, with reference to paragraph 5.2, why he considered  that
sufficient protection would be available to the claimant on  return.  There
was no challenge in the grounds to that finding; nor did  they  contain  any
argument as to what in the appellant's personal  circumstances  should  have
led to the opposite conclusion.  Neither was there any application,  either
in advance or before us, to vary the grounds on which  permission  had  been
given; still less any draft  of  grounds  which  might  have  suggested  any
specific error of law on the part  of  the  Adjudicator. Without  any  such
error being shown, it was not open to  the  appellant, in  the  light cast
by CA on the meaning of section 101, to seek to challenge the Adjudicator's
assessment in paragraph 5.2 that the remaining  background  evidence  as  to
the situation in Kabul did  not  lead  to  the  potential  risk  to  Hindus
identified by ECRE amounting to a real one  in  this  case,  merely  on  the
basis  that  the weight  he  had  given  to  ECRE's  views  was   (on   no
grounds either pleaded or specified) unreasonable.

16.              The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.




Date:    4 October 2004                                               J A  J
C Gleeson

        Vice-President


