
      AK (Admission of Evidence - Time limits) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00103


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


Heard at Field House   Determination notified
On: 16 April 2004
Prepared: 16 April 2004      14/05/2004


                                   Before

                        Mr D K Allen (Vice President)
                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                               Mr A E Armitage


Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of counsel, instructed by Paragon Law,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bracken, Home Office Presenting Officer


     1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals with  permission  against
        the determination of an adjudicator (Mr R  J  Pooler),  sitting  at
        Nottingham Magistrates Court, in which he dismissed the appellant's
        appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the
        respondent's decision to refuse his application for asylum  and  to
        give directions for his removal from United Kingdom as  an  illegal
        entrant.

     2. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  May  2000.   He
        applied for asylum some two weeks later.  The grounds on  which  he
        did so were that he claimed that he would be at risk if he were  to
        be returned to Iran, both at the hands of the Iranian  authorities,
        because he had expressed opinions which were not acceptable to  the
        authorities during his student days and  had  begun  to  doubt  his
        Muslim faith, and also  at  the  hands  of  members  of  Hezbollah,
        because of his involvement in an unsuccessful attempt to organise a
        lottery to raise money for charitable purposes.

     3. In his determination, the adjudicator rejected the appeal  on  both
        asylum and human rights grounds.  Although he accepted  some  parts
        of the appellant's evidence, he rejected the appellant's claim that
        he had been detained on two occasions, once by officials acting  on
        the instructions of the Speaker of the Iranian National Parliament,
        and once by members of Hezbollah.  He also rejected the appellant's
        evidence that his late father and his brother had  been  questioned
        about him by the Iranian authorities following his  departure  from
        Iran.  He concluded that the claimant would not be of  any  adverse
        interest to the Iranian authorities if he were to be returned.   It
        was on the basis of those findings that the  adjudicator  dismissed
        the appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.

     4. The appellant sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to this
        Tribunal on a number of grounds.   The  main  ground  on  which  he
        relies is that the adjudicator erred in refusing to admit  evidence
        which the appellant sought to adduce at the hearing and  which  was
        alleged to be relevant to both  his  asylum  claim  and  his  human
        rights claim.  The evidence in question  is  referred  to  in  some
        detail at paragraph 9 of the adjudicator's determination.

     5. The adjudicator's reasons for refusing to admit  that  evidence
        are set out in the same paragraph of his  determination.   They
        may  be  summarised  as  follows.   The  hearing   before   the
        adjudicator took place on 29 September  2003.   Directions  had
        been given in standard  terms  as  long  ago  as  4  June  2003
        requiring both parties to  file  the  documentary  evidence  on
        which they intended to rely no later than seven days before the
        date of the hearing.  It is not in dispute that  the  appellant
        failed to  comply  with  that  direction  in  relation  to  the
        additional documentary evidence referred to at paragraph  9  of
        the adjudicator's determination.  The documents in question had
        not been sent to the respondent until 24 September 2003,  which
        was less than seven days before the date of the hearing.

     6. The adjudicator concluded in his  determination  that  he  was  not
        satisfied that there was a good reason why the  documents  had  not
        been served previously on the respondent.  In particular,  he  took
        into account the fact that the same documents had not  been  served
        in advance of a previous hearing on 18 August 2003, which  had  had
        to be adjourned, and that the respondent was not represented before
        him.  It was for  those  reasons  that  he  refused  to  allow  the
        documents to be adduced in evidence before him.

     7. Rule 48(5) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules
        2003 provides as follows:

             "An adjudicator or the Tribunal must not consider any  evidence
             which is not filed or served in accordance with time limits set
             out in these Rules or directions given under  rule  38,  unless
             satisfied that there are good reasons to do so".

     8. It is common ground  between  the  parties  that  the  evidence  in
        question had not been filed in accordance with the time  limit  set
        out in the standard-form directions sent to both parties on 4  June
        2003.  The adjudicator therefore clearly had the power  to  exclude
        that evidence under rule 48(5).  The issue before us is whether  he
        was right to do so.

     9. In this  regard,  it is settled law that asylum appeals require the
        "most anxious scrutiny" -- see the decision of the House  of  Lords
        in Bugdaycay v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1987] AC
        514, [1987] All ER 940, [1987] 2 WLR 606, [1987] Imm AR  250.   The
        same requirement also applies to appeals on human rights grounds.

    10. Furthermore, the 2003 Procedure Rules stipulate at rule 4:

             "The overriding objective of these Rules is to secure the just,
             timely and effective disposal of appeals  and  applications  in
             the interests of the parties to  the  proceedings  and  in  the
             wider public interest" (emphasis added).

    11. The provisions of rule 48(5) are mandatory in  their  terms.   They
        provide expressly that  an  adjudicator  or  (if  applicable)  this
        Tribunal must not consider any evidence which is  filed  or  served
        late, unless he or it is satisfied that there are good  reasons  to
        do so.  The qualification contained in those closing words  relates
        to good reasons for considering the evidence, not good  reasons  as
        to why the evidence was not filed or served in time.   There  is  a
        clear public interest in ensuring that it should  not  be  open  to
        parties  to  disregard  with  impunity  directions  given  by   the
        Immigration Appellate Authority, whether by an adjudicator or  this
        Tribunal.  The  same  public  interest  applies  in  ensuring  that
        parties should not be entitled to disregard with  similar  impunity
        the requirements of the Procedure Rules.

    12. However, the understandable desire on the part of adjudicators  and
        this Tribunal to enforce due compliance with  such  directions  and
        provisions must be balanced against the  competing  requirement  to
        ensure that justice is done in  a  jurisdiction  in  which  appeals
        routinely require the "most anxious scrutiny",  and  in  which  the
        issues at stake  frequently  involve  matters  of  life,  limb  and
        liberty.  There is an inevitable tension between those  conflicting
        interests.

    13. Whilst there may be individual cases in which it would be right for
        an  adjudicator  to  exclude  material,  or  potentially  material,
        evidence on which party (normally the appellant) wishes to rely  by
        reason of the failure by that party to file or serve  the  evidence
        in time, nevertheless as a general principle,  the  requirement  to
        ensure that justice is done in appeals requiring the  most  anxious
        scrutiny will in most cases outweigh the understandable  desire  on
        the part of the Immigration Appellate Authority to ensure that  its
        directions and the  provisions  of  the  Procedure  Rules  are  not
        flouted with impunity.

    14. In the present instance, we are satisfied that  the  late  evidence
        which the appellant sought to adduce before  the  adjudicator,  and
        which the adjudicator refused to consider because it had  not  been
        filed in time, was prima facie material evidence which, if  it  had
        been considered by him, might (we put it no higher than that)  have
        resulted in the adjudicator arriving at a different  conclusion  in
        relation to the credibility of the appellant's  evidence.   In  the
        circumstances,  his  decision  to  exclude   that   evidence   from
        consideration was one which he ought not to have taken.  It  was  a
        decision which he was empowered t take under rule 48(5).   However,
        we are satisfied that it was not one  which  he  was  justified  in
        taking in the circumstances before him.  In so  doing,  he  allowed
        himself to fall into error.

    15. In consequence, we see no alternative save to remit this appeal for
        a fresh hearing before another adjudicator so as to enable  him  or
        her to consider the evidence as a whole, including that  which  the
        original adjudicator refused to accept,  and  to  arrive  at  fresh
        findings of fact on the material issues.

    16. This appeal is therefore allowed to the limited extent that  it  is
        remitted for a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than Mr  R
        J Pooler



Signed                                       Dated 20th April 2004



L V Waumsley

Vice President






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
2 December 2003
