
                        FA (Procedure - Fairness) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00065


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Heard at: Field House                              |Determination notified  |
|On: 30 March 2004                                  |                        |
|Prepared: 30 March 2004                            |06 April 2004           |

                                   Before:

                      Mr L V Waumsley (Vice President)
                               Mr R Baines JP

Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.    The appellant, who claims to be a citizen  of  Somalia,  appeals  with
    permission against the determination  of  an  adjudicator  (Mr  D  R  M
    Harmston), sitting at Cardiff Magistrates Court, in which he  dismissed
    her appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse her leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
    after refusing an application for asylum made by her.


    Adjournment application


2.    The appellant did not appear at  the  hearing  before  us,  either  in
    person or by her representative.   Shortly  before  the  start  of  the
    hearing, a fax  message  dated  13  March  2004  from  the  appellant's
    representatives, South West Law (Legal Services in the Community)  Ltd,
    was placed before us.  The material  part  of  that  message  reads  as
    follows:

         "It has just come to our attention that counsel for the  appellant,
         Miss Rosalyn Choudhury is not available to represent our client  at
         today's hearing.  The misunderstanding arose as we failed to notify
         Miss Choudhury's clerk of the date and time of the  hearing  as  we
         assumed the  Tribunal  had  informed  her  of  the  date  and  time
         following  the  Directions  hearing  where  she   represented   the
         appellant on Monday, 16/02/04 at Field house.


         In light of this misunderstanding could we respectfully request  an
         adjournment of the hearing listed for today".

3.    With respect to the  appellant's  representatives,  that  fax  message
    discloses a regrettable degree of carelessness on their  part.   It  is
    clear from the fax that they had received the notice of  hearing  which
    had been sent to them a little over a month ago on  25  February  2003.
    They state that they had "assumed" that the Tribunal had also  informed
    the counsel instructed by them on their client's behalf of the date and
    time of the hearing.  There was no justification for  that  assumption.
    Rule 39(1) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003
    provides as follows:

         "When the appellate authority fixes a hearing it must serve  notice
         of the date, time and place of the hearing on:
         (a) every party; and
         (b) any representative acting for a party".

4.    Rule 46(4) of the same Rules provides as follows:

         "Where a  representative  begins  to  act  for  a  party,  he  must
         immediately notify the appellate authority of that fact".

5.    There is no indication on the  appeal  file  that  Miss  Choudhury  of
    counsel had notified this Tribunal  in  those  terms.   Indeed,  it  is
    difficult to see how a member of the Bar practising as such, as opposed
    to a solicitor or representative authorised under  section  84  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, could properly act as  an  appellant's
    representative for this purpose in light of the  professional  code  of
    conduct governing members  of  the  Bar.   In  the  circumstances,  the
    assumption  made  by  the  appellant's   representatives   was   wholly
    unjustified.  It was their responsibility to ensure  that  counsel  was
    briefed by them in good time of the hearing of their  client's  appeal.
    They have no excuse for their failure to do so.

6.     Despite  this  clear  failure  on  the  part   of   the   appellant's
    representatives, we might nevertheless have been minded  to  accede  to
    the adjournment application in light of the  fact  that  the  appellant
    herself was clearly not personally to blame for the absence of  counsel
    at the hearing before us.  However, in  light  of  our  decision  which
    follows, we concluded that there would  be  no  useful  purpose  to  be
    served by adjourning  the  hearing.   The  application  to  do  so  was
    therefore refused.


      Background


7.    Turning now to the substance of the appeal, the appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in November 2002.  She applied  for  asylum  shortly
    after her arrival.  The grounds on which  she  did  so  may  be  stated
    shortly.  She claimed that she was of Somali nationality, and a  member
    of the Reer Hamar clan, which is one of the minority clans in  Somalia.
    As a consequence, she had been subjected to persecution  in  the  past,
    and feared that she would be subjected to similar  persecution  in  the
    future if she were to be returned to Somalia.

8.     In  his  determination,  the  adjudicator  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence in its entirety.  He concluded that, not only was  she  not  a
    member of the Reer Hamar clan, but in reality she was not even a Somali
    national.  It was on the basis of those findings that he dismissed  her
    appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.


      Grounds of appeal


9.    The appellant seeks to challenge the adjudicator's  conclusions  on  a
    number of grounds as set out in the grounds of appeal  incorporated  in
    her application for permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.   Those
    grounds may be summarised as follows:

      1. The adjudicator erred in failing to indicate to the  appellant  and
         her counsel that he considered her claimed Somali nationality to be
         in issue until the closing submissions made by her counsel;
      2. He failed to give effect to a concession  made  by  the  respondent
         regarding the appellant's claimed nationality;
      3. He failed to put matters to the appellant for her response;
      4. He erred in the refusing her application to adjourn the hearing;
      5. He erred in refusing to allow her witness to give oral evidence  on
         her behalf.

    We will deal with each of those grounds in turn.


    Failure to indicate that nationality was in issue


10.   It is alleged in the grounds of appeal  that  the  adjudicator  stated
    for the first time that he considered the appellant's nationality to be
    in issue during the course of  the  closing  submissions  made  on  her
    behalf by her counsel.  At that stage, the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    had already been given, and it was therefore too late for her  to  deal
    with this issue as part of her evidence.

11.   The assertion  made  in  this  ground  appears  to  be  well  founded.
    Indeed,  the  adjudicator  has  indicated  at  paragraph  15   of   his
    determination that it was only during the  course  of  the  submissions
    made by the appellant's counsel that he indicated for  the  first  time
    that the appellant's nationality was in issue.  That was not  a  matter
    which had been raised by the respondent,  either  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter or elsewhere.  The respondent was  not  represented  the
    hearing before the adjudicator.  It is therefore clear that a challenge
    to the appellant's nationality cannot have been raised on behalf of the
    respondent during the course of the hearing itself.  It was  clearly  a
    matter which was raised by the adjudicator himself  after  hearing  the
    appellant's evidence.

12.   It was of course properly open to the adjudicator to  take  the  point
    that he was not satisfied that the appellant  was  in  truth  a  Somali
    national as she had claimed.  The fact  that  the  respondent  had  not
    raised  the  point,  either  during  the  course  of  the  hearing   or
    previously, was no reason why the adjudicator himself should not do so.
     It was clearly a material point on which  the  appeal  was  likely  to
    founder if the appellant was unable to persuade him  to  the  requisite
    standard that she was a Somali national as claimed.  The appellant  has
    no legitimate cause for complaint  that  the  adjudicator  raised  this
    highly material issue of his own motion.

13.   However, having done so, it  was  necessary  for  the  adjudicator  to
    allow the appellant a proper opportunity to meet the point, if she  was
    able to do so and wished to do so.  It may  well  have  been  that  the
    appellant  would  have   been   unable   to   satisfy   his   concerns.
    Nevertheless, as a matter of natural justice and  procedural  fairness,
    she was entitled to have a proper opportunity to attempt to do so.   It
    was therefore incumbent upon the adjudicator, if so requested, to allow
    the appellant to be recalled to  give  further  oral  evidence  on  the
    point.  Indeed, if the appellant could show that she had been taken  by
    surprise by a point which had not previously been raised and which  she
    was therefore unprepared to deal with, it would have been open  to  her
    to seek an adjournment so as to enable her to do so, e.g.  by  adducing
    further documentary or oral evidence relevant to the issue.

14.   The fact that the adjudicator did not indicate  his  doubts  regarding
    the appellant's claimed nationality until her counsel came to make  his
    closing submissions is not of itself a matter of  which  the  appellant
    may legitimately complain.  It may very well be that it was  not  until
    the  appellant  had  completed  giving  her  oral  evidence  that   the
    adjudicator realised that the appellant's true nationality was an issue
    on which he remained unsatisfied.  Clearly, he cannot be criticised for
    keeping an open mind on the point until  the  oral  evidence  had  been
    completed.  Indeed, it would be a matter of legitimate criticism if  it
    could be shown that he had come to a premature  conclusion  before  the
    appellant had completed giving her evidence.  Nevertheless, having come
    to the conclusion that the nationality was  a  relevant  issue,  albeit
    that it had not been raised by the respondent, it  was  important  that
    the adjudicator should give the appellant a fair  opportunity  to  deal
    with it.

15.   In this regard, there is no indication, either  in  the  adjudicator's
    determination itself or in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal
    lodged on the appellant's behalf,  that  her  counsel  applied  to  the
    adjudicator to be allowed to  recall  the  appellant  to  give  further
    evidence.  Likewise, there is no indication  that  he  applied  for  an
    adjournment so as to enable the appellant to adduce further evidence of
    some other kind, e.g. documentary evidence  or  oral  evidence  from  a
    third party, to meet the point.

16.   The onus to do so was on the appellant's  counsel,  if  he  considered
    that course of action to be appropriate, not on  the  adjudicator.   He
    elected not to do so.  In the circumstances,  we  see  no  evidence  to
    suggest that there was in reality any procedural unfairness  or  breach
    of the principles of natural justice on the part of the adjudicator  in
    this regard.  This ground provides no arguable  basis  for  interfering
    with the adjudicator's conclusions.


    Failure to give effect to a concession


17.   It is alleged in the grounds  of  appeal  lodged  on  the  appellant's
    behalf that the adjudicator erred  in  failing  to  give  effect  to  a
    concession by the respondent regarding the appellant's claim to  be  of
    Somali  nationality.   In  that  regard,  reliance  is  placed  by  the
    appellant on the determination of this Tribunal in Carcabuk and another
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (00/TH/01426) in which  it
    was held  that  adjudicator  must  accept  a  concession  made  by  the
    respondent,  unless  it  has  been  withdrawn  by  him.  Although  that
    determination was not starred,  it  nevertheless  stipulated  that  the
    guidance contained in it was to be followed both by adjudicators and by
    this Tribunal.

18.   The alleged concession on which the appellant seeks to  rely  is  that
    contained in the respondent's reasons for refusal letter in  which  the
    appellant's nationality was referred to as "Somali".  With  respect  to
    the appellant's counsel who  settled  the  grounds  of  appeal  on  her
    behalf, the assertion that the references in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter to the appellant's nationality as  being  Somali  constituted  a
    concession on the respondent's behalf is manifestly unsustainable.

19.   On the contrary, the reasons for refusal  letter  discloses  that  the
    appellant's  asylum  claim  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  non-
    compliance grounds under paragraph 336 of the Statement of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules (HC 395) after she had failed to attend an  interview
    in connection with her asylum claim.  Whilst there is  a  reference  in
    the reasons for refusal letter at paragraph 2 to the appellant's  claim
    that she was a member of "the Rer Hamaar (sic) clan in  Somalia",  that
    was no more than a recital  of  the  appellant's  own  claim.   It  was
    manifestly not a concession on the respondent's part that the claim was
    true.  The assertion that it was is plainly wrong.


    Refusal of adjournment application


20.   As recorded by the adjudicator at paragraph 2  of  his  determination,
    an application was made to him for an adjournment on two grounds.   The
    first was that the appellant had located a witness who would be able to
    give evidence regarding her clan membership.  The second was  that  the
    appellant's counsel thought that it  would  be  appropriate  to  obtain
    psychiatric evidence as  to  her  mental  state  at  the  time  of  her
    interview some seven months previously in November 2002.

21.   As regards the first of those reasons, the  adjudicator  has  recorded
    at paragraph 2  of  his  determination  that  it  transpired  that  the
    appellant had known of the presence of  the  proposed  witness  in  the
    United Kingdom for some time.  When she was  asked  by  her  solicitors
    some two months previously in April 2003 whether she had any  witnesses
    who could be called to give evidence on her behalf, she had  told  them
    that she did not because the  presence  of  this  particular  potential
    witness did not spring to her mind.  As regards the second  reason,  it
    is asserted in the grounds of appeal settled by the appellant's counsel
    at paragraph 3.5 that the necessity to obtain a psychiatric report  had
    arisen only on the day of the hearing when the counsel in question  had
    taken instructions from the appellant.

22.   Clearly, the presence of the potential witness had been known  to  the
    appellant for some time prior  to  the  hearing.   She  had  had  ample
    opportunity to mention the point to her solicitors so as to enable them
    to take a statement from the potential witness and  decide  whether  or
    not to call him to give evidence on the appellant's behalf.  She has no
    one else but herself to blame for her failure to do so.

23.   If it was indeed the case that  it  would  have  been  appropriate  to
    adduce psychiatric evidence on the  appellant's  behalf  regarding  her
    mental state some seven months previously  in  November  2002,  clearly
    that mental state was a condition which had subsisted  for  some  time,
    certainly long enough to enable her solicitors to realise that it was a
    matter on which psychiatric  evidence  was  required.   Her  solicitors
    plainly took the view that such evidence was not required.  The counsel
    briefed on her behalf took  the  contrary  view,  albeit  only  shortly
    before the hearing before the adjudicator started at 11:30 am.

24.   That was far too late to seek to raise the point for the  first  time.
    The hearing before the  adjudicator  took  place  in  June  2003.   The
    appellant's notice of appeal to the adjudicator was  completed  by  her
    solicitors (who are still the same solicitors representing her now)  in
    January 2003.  They had therefore had at least five months in which  to
    arrange for psychiatric evidence to be adduced, if thought appropriate.
     They did not do so.

25.   In light of the fact that  the  appellant's  solicitors  had  filed  a
    certificate of readiness on 7 May 2003 in  which  they  certified  that
    they were "in all respects  ready  to  proceed",  the  adjudicator  was
    plainly entitled to reject the adjournment application in light of  the
    presumption against adjournments contained in paragraph  40(2)  of  the
    2003 Procedure Rules in the following terms:

         "An adjudicator or the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing  on  the
         application of  a  party,  unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal  or
         application cannot otherwise be justly determined".

26.   This ground provides  no  arguable  basis  for  interfering  with  the
    adjudicator's determination.  His decision to  refuse  the  adjournment
    application was one which was properly open to him.


    Failure to put matters to the appellant


27.   It is alleged in the grounds of appeal that the adjudicator  erred  in
    failing to put to the appellant for her response a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings made by  him  at  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  his
    determination in relation to the appellant's account of past events  in
    Somalia.  It is argued on the appellant's behalf that in failing to  do
    so, the adjudicator acted both  in  breach  of  the  rules  of  natural
    justice and the Surendran guidelines, i.e. the guidelines  set  out  in
    the appendix to the determination  of  this  Tribunal  in  Surendran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (21679, unreported).

28.   That submission is misconceived.  The appellant was,  or  should  have
    been, well aware from the terms of the respondent's reasons for refusal
    letter that the credibility of her asylum claim had not  been  accepted
    by the respondent.  Accordingly, the burden of proof remained on her to
    satisfy the adjudicator to the appropriate  standard,  i.e.  the  lower
    standard referred to by this Tribunal in its starred  determination  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kacaj [2002] Imm  AR  213,
    [2001] INLR 354, that her account was true.  It  was  no  part  of  the
    adjudicator's responsibility to assist her to do so by pointing out  to
    her during the course of the hearing the weaknesses  and  discrepancies
    in her evidence so as to allow her a further opportunity to  deal  with
    them, if she was able to do so.  Indeed, if the  adjudicator  had  done
    that, it could legitimately be argued on behalf of the respondent that,
    by so doing, he had abandoned his judicial impartiality and had, in the
    time-honoured expression, "descended into the arena".

29.   Instead, the  adjudicator  was  properly  entitled  to  keep  his  own
    counsel and to  remain  silent  throughout  the  hearing,  leaving  the
    parties to advance their respective cases to the best of their ability.
     If authority for this proposition is required, it is to  be  found  in
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 and in the Opinion of Lord
    Carloway in the Outer House of the Court of Session in  Mehmet  Koca  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, IAS Update Vol 7 No 4.


    Refusal to allow witness to give oral evidence


30.   It is alleged on the appellant's behalf in her grounds of appeal  that
    a corroborative witness attended the hearing to give  evidence  on  her
    behalf, but that the adjudicator refused to allow him to do so  because
    no witness statement had been served  as  required  by  the  directions
    given previously.   There  is  no  reference  to  this  matter  in  the
    adjudicator's determination.  He has not been asked for his comments on
    the point.  In the circumstances, we are not in a position  to  make  a
    finding one way or the other as to the truth of the allegation.

31.   However, the allegation is contained in grounds of appeal  which  have
    been settled on the appellant's behalf by the member  of  the  Bar  who
    represented her at the hearing before the adjudicator.  In light of the
    professional obligation on members of  the  Bar  not  to  mislead  this
    Tribunal by making assertions which they know or believe to be  untrue,
    we are prepared to assume  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  the
    contrary that the assertion made on the appellant's behalf is true.

32.   With respect to the adjudicator, we are bound to say  that  if  it  is
    indeed the case that he refused  to  allow  the  appellant  to  call  a
    witness to give oral evidence on her behalf despite the fact  that  the
    proposed witness was present and ready to do so, he allowed himself  to
    fall seriously into error.  It is trite law that asylum appeals require
    "anxious scrutiny" -- see, by way of example, the decision of the House
    of Lords in Bugdaycay v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [1987] AC 514, [1987] 1 All ER 940, [1987] 2 WLR  606,  [1987]  Imm  AR
    250.  They are appeals which potentially involve vital issues of  life,
    limb and liberty.  In consequence, the overriding objective  to  ensure
    that justice is done must inevitably outweigh all other considerations.

33.   The oral evidence which the proposed witness was said to be ready  and
    able to give was plainly material to the outcome of the  appeal.   That
    evidence, if given, might well have persuaded  to  the  adjudicator  to
    arrive at a different conclusion in relation to the appellant's claimed
    nationality.  Indeed, it might well have persuaded the adjudicator that
    the  appeal  should  have  been  allowed  by  him,  rather  than  being
    dismissed.

34.   In the circumstances, it would clearly have required a weighty  reason
    to justify the excluding such potentially material evidence.   Save  in
    the case of a persistent  or  contumelious  refusal  by  the  party  in
    question to comply with directions,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  a
    decision by an adjudicator to  prevent  an  appellant  from  calling  a
    witness who is present and ready to give oral evidence  could  properly
    be  justified  in  any  save  the   most   exceptional   circumstances.
    Certainly, a refusal to allow  such  a  witness  to  be  called  merely
    because the appellant's representatives had failed  to  comply  with  a
    previous direction to file a witness statement  prior  to  the  hearing
    would be difficult (if not impossible)  to  justify.   The  displeasure
    which was evidently felt by the adjudicator, understandable as  it  is,
    at the failure by the appellant's representatives to  comply  with  the
    direction to file witness statements prior to  the  hearing  manifestly
    does not justify his decision to exclude that evidence.

35.   With respect to the adjudicator, his decision to refuse to  allow  the
    appellant's witness to be called was plainly wrong and  amounted  to  a
    denial of justice on his part.  Mr Sheikh, who appeared  before  us  on
    behalf of the respondent, did not seek to persuade us to the  contrary.
    He was right not to do so.  Instead, he  acknowledged,  very  properly,
    that for this reason alone, the adjudicator's determination  could  not
    be allowed to stand.  His exclusion of  potentially  material  evidence
    had the result that his determination could no longer  be  regarded  as
    safe and sustainable.  As a consequence, Mr  Sheikh  acknowledged  that
    the appeal would inevitably have to be remitted for rehearing.

36.   He sought to persuade us that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    same adjudicator for reconsideration.  However, we have  no  hesitation
    in concluding that that would be wholly  inappropriate.   It  is  clear
    from the adjudicator's determination  that  he  has  already  formed  a
    strong adverse conclusion in relation to the truth of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  He would be likely to approach a rehearing in the same frame
    of mind, however hard he might try to put his previous conclusions  out
    of his mind.  In the circumstances, we are satisfied that there  is  no
    alternative save to remit the appeal for a fresh hearing before another
    adjudicator.


      Decision


37.   This appeal is therefore allowed to the  limited  extent  that  it  is
    remitted for a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than Mr D R  M
    Harmston.


Signed                            Dated

L V Waumsley

Vice President

