
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 15 July 2004            |        |LA (Acholi - Gulu detainee -|
|Oral determination         |        |Returnees) Uganda [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00326                 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|05 August 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)                                 |
|Mr J G MacDonald                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:     Ms G. Geddes, counsel
For the Respondent: Mr I. Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.    The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Uganda  who  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs A K  Simpson,  promulgated  on  7
      January 2004 following a  hearing  at  Manchester,  Piccadilly,  on  9
      December 2003 in  which  the  Adjudicator  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  both
      her asylum and human rights claims.

2.    The Appellant claims to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  an
      airport which she did not identify on 4  August  2003.    She  claimed
      that she was using a false passport which was provided to  her  by  an
      agent and then subsequently retained by him.  She claimed asylum on  5
      August 2003.

3.    The Secretary of State made a decision to refuse her asylum  claim  on
      30 September 2003 and gave directions  for  her  removal  to  Kampala,
      Uganda.    That gave rise to a right of appeal under Section 82(1)  of
      the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Appellant
      appealed.

4.    The basis of her claim was set out in  a  statement  attached  to  her
      application of 19 August 2003.   She was born in Kampala on  2  August
      1973 and lived in Gulu town.  Her father  died  in  1990.   He  was  a
      shopkeeper and was a member of the Democratic Party.   She recalls him
      campaigning.  After she left school she remained  at  home  until  she
      formed a relationship with her husband who was a wholesaler of general
      groceries in the area around Gulu.   They subsequently married.

5.    In about 1992 the Appellant experienced difficulties with  the  Lord's
      Resistance Army.  As a result, the family fled from what they believed
      to be an imminent attack.   The shop which was being run  by  her  was
      damaged in the raid.  Her mother died in 1993, leaving  the  Appellant
      alone.  She then married.  During the course  of  her  marriage  there
      were various difficulties as a result of the activities of the LRA.

6.    It is not necessary to consider the detailed  history  of  the  appeal
      here because the issues centre on events that took place in 2003.   In
      April 2003 UDPF forces came to the house and arrested  the  Appellant.
      They accused her of being a collaborator and she was held for  3  days
      in a police station in Gulu town.  She was not questioned but  on  two
      consecutive nights she was raped by a police officer.   He  came  into
      the compound, smuggled her out, raped her and then returned her to the
      police station.   When she was released she was ordered to  report  to
      the army camp on a weekly basis and it appears that she complied  with
      those instructions.  On 20 June 2003, during the course of another LRA
      raid, she was asleep in the house when  militiamen  came.   They  were
      ordered out of the house and she was then abused  by  members  of  the
      LRA.    However, she managed to escape and remained in  the  bush  for
      some hours before going to the army camp to  report  the  LRA  attack.
      Unfortunately, she was detained and accused of being  a  collaborator.
      She remained in detention for  one  month.   She  was  not  questioned
      during that period of detention but was raped on about  ten  occasions
      by different army officers.   Eventually,  she  came  across  an  army
      officer whom she knew whose name was Busingye.   There was another LRA
      raid in the vicinity of the army  camp.   Many  of  the  officers  and
      soldiers went out of the camp.   Security  was  much  less  tight  and
      officer Busingye managed to smuggle her out of the army camp.  He left
      her in the bush and she ran  away.   Subsequently,  arrangements  were
      made for her to be removed from Uganda.  She went to Kampala,  to  the
      house of a friend where she remained for some days before  flying  out
      to England.

7.    The basis of her claim that was  considered  by  the  Adjudicator  was
      whether she was at risk either of persecution or a  violation  of  her
      human rights.

8.    The Adjudicator set out the account that we have set out above.    She
      categorised the Appellant's husband  as  being  a  campaigner  for  Dr
      Besigye.   That  appears  to  be  the  sum  total  of  the   political
      involvement of either the Appellant or her husband.    In  the  course
      of the determination the Adjudicator accepted much of what we have set
      out above.   In paragraph 41 she reaches her conclusions and says:

           "In light of this objective evidence I take the  view  that  the
           Appellant may well have been arrested in April 2003  because  of
           her low level support for Dr  Besigye.    However,  having  been
           released on condition that she reported to the army  camp  on  a
           weekly basis she reported only once.  Consequently  I  take  the
           view that the Appellant's subsequent arrest was a result of  her
           failure to report rather than any  real  suspicion  of  being  a
           supporter of the Lord  Resistance  Army.    Indeed,  I  strongly
           doubt that even an old friend would have released her  had  been
           seriously  suspected  of  support  for  the  LRA,  given   those
           atrocities".

9.    The Adjudicator then went on to consider  the  risk  of  return.   She
      decided that the Appellant was not politically active and  was  not  a
      member or a supporter of the Lords Resistance Army.  She accepted that
      there was substantial evidence of  human  rights  abuses  in  Northern
      Uganda and that the Appellant herself had been the  victim  of  severe
      past ill-treatment.    She  therefore  determined  that  there  was  a
      reasonable likelihood of being at risk of which a  treatment  in  Gulu
      that would violate her rights under each of the Conventions.

10.   The Adjudicator then went on to consider whether or  not  she  was  at
      risk as a  result  of  her  being  Acholi  living  in  Kampala.    The
      Adjudicator noted that there are many Acholi living in Kampala  (which
      she categorised as a multi-ethnic city) and in all  areas  of  Uganda,
      thereby rejecting the Appellant's claim that  she  would  be  at  risk
      throughout Uganda.  The Adjudicator  took  the  view  that  she  could
      relocate in safety in  Kampala  or  other  areas  in  Southern  Uganda
      without any real risk of further persecution.     Indeed,  she  stated
      the Appellant would not be at risk from the UPDF in any  area  outside
      the three  distinct  areas  known  as  Acholiland.   Accordingly,  the
      Adjudicator dismissed both the asylum and the human rights appeal.

11.   We can deal with the position of  the  Acholi  on  return  to  Kampala
      relatively briefly.   In a decision LN [2004] UKIAT  00107  (Chairman,
      Mr G Warr) the Tribunal determined that the Acholi are not at risk  in
      Kampala.   In paragraph 28 of the determination the  Tribunal  decided
      that it would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant in  that  case  to
      relocate in other areas of Uganda including Kampala.     The  Tribunal
      found that the Appellant was able to find adequate  protection  there.
      Accordingly it is our view that that case governs the general position
      of Acholi coming from the Northern parts of Uganda  if  they  seek  to
      relocate in Kampala itself.

12.   It was submitted to us by Ms Geddes who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant, that the Appellant was at risk as  a  result  of  what  had
      occurred in Gulu.  As we see the  issue  it  is  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant on return to Kampala would be identified as somebody who has
      a  history  of  a  type  that  would  excite  the  suspicion  of   the
      authorities.  It is common ground  that  there  are  difficulties  and
      breaches of human rights generally in Uganda.  We were referred to the
      Amnesty International report for 2004 published on 26 May 2004 to  the
      effect that there are widespread abuses of the  security  agencies  in
      Uganda resulting in torture and death in custody  for  offences  which
      may only amount  to  suspicion  of  political  or  criminal  offences.
      Suspects are held  incommunicado  at  unrecognised  detention  centres
      often referred  to  as  safe  houses  and  official  reports  indicate
      security forces frequently extract  information  through  torture  and
      other cruel inhuman or degrading treatment that is sufficient  for  us
      to be satisfied that there breaches of human rights in  Uganda.    The
      issue before us however, is whether the Appellant herself is at  risk.
       Ms Geddes pointed out  the  history  of  what  has  occurred  to  the
      Appellant in the past.   It seems to us that her account of arrest  in
      2003 as set out in her statement is an account of an  informal  arrest
      arising as a result of a suspicion held by the soldiers  of  the  UPDF
      that she was a collaborator.  As is clear from her statement, she  was
      not questioned and it appears that  the  sole  purpose  of  her  being
      detained in the police station was in order to provide an  opportunity
      for her to be raped.  When  she  was  released,  although  ordered  to
      report to the army camp, there is no suggestion that she was  charged.
      There was no suggestion that she was at any  stage  going  to  be  put
      before a court.  She was not interrogated.  There was no  evidence  to
      suggest that she was a collaborator.  Indeed, we know that she was not
      one; nor is there evidence she was perceived to be one.

13.   Similar considerations apply in relation to the arrest in  June  2003.
      She was not questioned during that detention.  It  took  place  in  an
      army camp.  She was raped on a number of occasions and it appears that
      the purpose of her being detained was in order  to  abuse  her.    The
      fact that she was befriended by an army officer who then  assisted  in
      her escape makes it appear  reasonably  likely  that  her  arrest  and
      detention would not have been recorded.  Indeed,  those  who  detained
      her were unlikely to want to maintain any record of  her  presence  in
      the camp.   Similar considerations apply in relation to her  detention
      in the police station.    In  these  circumstances  it  seems  to  the
      Tribunal as it must have seemed to  the  Adjudicator  that  there  was
      little evidence to say that she was  on  a  list  of  wanted  persons.
      Although the circumstances of her departure from the camp may arguably
      give rise to a suggestion that  she  escaped,  there  is  no  credible
      evidence put forward by the Appellant that her departure from the army
      camp would result in any criminal charges or other offences.  Be  this
      as it may, even if there were a record of her detention in  Gulu,  the
      issue then remains as to whether  or  not  it  resulted  in  her  name
      appearing on a list of wanted persons.  The logistics of maintaining a
      list of all those who are unlawfully detained are  formidable.   Given
      that if her name was recorded as an official escapee  or  detainee  in
      Gulu, that information would then have to be transmitted  to  Kampala.
      A list would then have to be prepared upon which her name featured  so
      that it was accessible to those making an assessment of  returnees  to
      the airport of Kampala.

14.   In our judgement there  is  neither  evidence  that  such  a  list  is
      feasible nor that, as a matter of fact, it exists in Uganda.   Similar
      considerations apply when one comes to consider the  position  of  the
      Appellant relocates in another part of Kampala.  Where that occurs  it
      may be that she comes into contact  with  officialdom  in  registering
      herself for voting or indeed  for  local  taxation.   It  is  possible
      therefore that  lists  will  be  consulted  in  relation  to  criminal
      convictions or other recorded matters but, in our judgment,  there  is
      no credible evidence that, were she  to  settle  in  accommodation  in
      Kampala or elsewhere, the events in Gulu are likely  to  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities so as to put  her  at  risk.    In  these
      circumstances it seems to us that she  is  unlikely  to  come  to  the
      attention of the authorities.  This is consistent with the information
      contained in the country report prepared by CIPU and dated April 2004.

15.   At paragraph 6.125 under  the  heading  "treatment  of  failed  asylum
      seekers" we read:

           "The Ugandan  Department  of  Immigration  confirmed  that  only
           failed asylum seekers who have previously committed a  crime  in
           Uganda and are on their wanted list would be arrested on arrival
           in a country.  Someone would not be in prison or simply being to
           Uganda as a failed asylum seeker".

16.   In our judgment this supports the  view  that  we  have  independently
      formed that there is no reasonable likelihood that the Appellant  will
      come to the attention of the authorities as a result of her activities
      in Gulu.

17.    Accordingly,  we  find  that  the  Adjudicator  reached  the  correct
      conclusion when she found that the Appellant would not be at risk.  In
      these circumstances the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Decision: The appellant's appeal is dismissed.







                                             ANDREW JORDAN
                                             VICE PRESIDENT
Approved for electronic distribution






