
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On:  24 June 2004          |        |FK (Respondent's notices -  |
|                           |        |genocide survivors) Rwanda  |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00185          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|08 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr (Vice President)                                        |
|Mrs L R Schmitt                                                   |
|Mr D R Bremmer JP                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals the determination  of  an  Adjudicator
      (Mrs S M Walker) who allowed on human rights grounds the appeal of  a
      citizen of Rwanda (hereinafter for convenience  referred  to  as  the
      claimant) from the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his
      application for asylum.

2.    The Adjudicator dismissed the claimant's asylum appeal.

3.    The Adjudicator's determination was promulgated on 1 October 2003.

4.    The Secretary of State was represented before us by  Mr  M  Davidson.
      Ms E Shaw (Turpin Miller &  Higgins,  Solicitors)  appeared  for  the
      claimant.

5.    The claimant is of Hutu ethnicity.  His  parents  and  siblings  were
      massacred in 1994 by Tutsi forces in Kigali.   The claimant  went  to
      Uganda but had to leave Uganda and arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
      September 2001 and made his application for asylum then.

6.    The Adjudicator found the claimant to have  given  truthful  evidence
      but concluded in the light of the  objective  material  the  claimant
      would not suffer persecution on return to Rwanda.   The claimant  had
      been away from Rwanda for nine years.  The political party  that  his
      father had supported no longer existed.  The claimant was a young man
      of twenty two when he had left Rwanda and he had never  himself  been
      active political.  The  Adjudicator  considered  the  UNHCR  position
      letter of a risk of false allegations  in  respect  of  genocide  but
      concluded that the risk was unlikely.  Thousands of refugees who  had
      left Rwanda at the same time as  the  claimant  had  returned  there.
      Merely being outside the country for a long time was  not  likely  to
      cause the claimant to be at special risk, given the  vast  number  of
      returnees who had returned and who were continuing to do  so.   There
      was no evidence to suggest that being  a  Hutu  in  itself  or  being
      absent  from  Rwanda  for  a  long  period  of  time  would  lead  to
      persecution and accordingly the asylum appeal must fail.

7.    Under the ECHR, the Adjudicator stated in paragraph  38  that,  given
      his conclusions in respect of the asylum claim, any breach "would  be
      in respect of the humanitarian and  security  situation  in  Rwanda."
      The claimant would be a genocide survivor.  there  was  still  nearly
      two hundred thousand families in adequate shelter.  Paragraph  40  of
      the determination reads as follows:

           "The appellant has no family left in Rwanda.  He has no home  to
           which to return.  He has been out of  the  country  for  over  9
           years.  I find that to remove him to Rwanda  would  put  him  at
           serious risk of being unsettled or displaced and if that happens
           he will lack even the basic amenities.  I find that  such  [sic]
           that the treatment he would receive would fall into the category
           of being inhuman and degrading."


8.    The Secretary of State appealed,  submitting  that  in  reaching  her
      conclusion the Adjudicator had applied too low a  standard  of  proof
      and reference was made to the case of Soering.  It was  not  detailed
      how the claimant, as a fit and healthy thirty  one  year  old,  would
      face  a  real  risk  of  inhuman   or   degrading   treatment.    The
      Adjudicator's reasoning was not sufficiently indicated.

9.    The Tribunal granted permission in a decision notified to the parties
      on 17 December 2003.

10.   Ms Shaw requested the Tribunal to  entertain  a  respondent's  notice
      sent under cover of a letter dated 11 June 2004 and received  by  the
      Tribunal on 14 June 2004.

11.   The Tribunal pointed out that  many  months  had  elapsed  since  the
      Tribunal had granted permission to the Secretary of State.   Ms Shaw
      submitted that the special circumstances were that the  claimant  had
      only instructed the firm of solicitors in May  2004.    The  claimant
      had been  represented  before  by  the  Refugee  Legal  Centre.    Mr
      Davidson commented that the notice had been submitted extremely late.
        The special circumstances, in Ms Shaw's submission were  that  the
      Adjudicator had made fundamental errors and it was in the interest of
      justice to receive the notice out of time.  She submitted the  appeal
      should be remitted for a fresh hearing.

12.    The  Tribunal  carefully  considered  the  request  to   admit   the
      respondent's notice.   It is accepted, and rightly accepted that  the
      notice is out of time.  Rule 19 requires that a notice must be  filed
      -

           (a)   within such period as the Tribunal may direct; or


           (b)   where the Tribunal makes no  such  direction,  within  ten
                 days,


      after the respondent is served with notice  that  the  appellant  has
      been granted permission to appeal.


13.   As we have already observed, the  parties  were  notified  about  the
      grant of permission on 17 December 2003 and the notice was  not  sent
      to the Tribunal until shortly before the hearing date and arrived  on
      14 June 2004.

14.   The claimant was represented by extremely experienced representatives
      who are in receipt of public funds.   The Refugee  Legal  Centre  had
      the conduct of the matter and advised the Tribunal  on  1  June  2004
      that the claimant had instructed new solicitors.

15.   We see nothing special or exceptional about the circumstances in this
      appeal.  The claimant was properly represented  by  very  experienced
      representatives until early June  2004.   He  then  instructed  fresh
      representatives.  It was not until very shortly  before  the  hearing
      date that the notice was served.

16.   It would have been obvious to the representatives on receipt  of  the
      Adjudicator's determination on 1 October 2003  that  the  appeal  had
      only been  partly  successful.   It  would  have  been  open  to  the
      representatives, had they felt it appropriate,  to  lodge  an  appeal
      straight away against the dismissal of the asylum aspects.

17.   Although we have considered  the  respondent's  notice,  we  are  not
      satisfied that viewed as a whole the Adjudicator's treatment  of  the
      asylum issues was not properly open to him.   We  see  no  reason  to
      suppose that the  claimant  was  not  appropriately  advised  by  her
      previous representatives.  There has been a very long  delay  in  the
      case as we have mentioned.  The rules  make  it  clear  that  a  time
      period applies and this has been greatly exceeded.   Looking  at  the
      matter in the round, the Tribunal declined to  entertain  the  notice
      out of time.

18.   On the Article 3 issue, Mr Davidson submitted that the threshold  was
      a high one.   Refugees continued to return from  Rwanda  as  appeared
      from the Home Office Country Assessment.  Reference was made  to  the
      case of N (Burundi) [2003] UKIAT 00065.

19.   Ms Shaw submitted that the Adjudicator's findings  should  be  upheld
      notwithstanding that the claimant feared non-deliberate  harm.   Non-
      deliberate  harm  could  occasion  Article  3  although   there   was
      jurisprudence on the question of medical  issues.    The  Adjudicator
      had referred to Ireland v United Kingdom [1978] 2EHRR25 in  paragraph
      41 of her determination.  She had properly directed  herself  on  the
      question  of  inhuman  and   degrading   treatment.    Although   the
      determination might be described as a confident one it  was  properly
      open to the Adjudicator to find as she did.  The absence  of  medical
      care could amount to inhuman or degrading treatment.  The case  of  N
      (Burundi) was not a starred determination.  The amount  of  returnees
      returning  to  Rwanda  were  creating  humanitarian  problems.    The
      claimant would have no family support in Rwanda and he had  been  out
      of the country for ten years.

20.   At the conclusion of the submission we reserved our determination.

21.   The claimant is a fit thirty one year old  with  no  apparent  health
      problems.  Returning refugees are referred to in paragraphs  6.79  to
      6.84 of the Home Office Country Assessment for October 2003.   As  is
      common ground, there are  large  numbers  of  returning  refugees  to
      Rwanda.  For example, according to the UNHCR, some thirteen  thousand
      Rwandan citizens returned to the country  from  the  DRC  during  the
      first nine months  of  2002.    Some  twenty  four  thousand  Rwandan
      refugees were voluntarily repatriated from Tanzania.  The  government
      had made a concerted effort during 2002 to encourage repatriation  of
      Rwandan refugees throughout the region particularly in Tanzania.

22.   Transit centres were established in 2001 to issue new returnees  with
      basic items and identity cards.  Relatively few reports of threats or
      harassment against returnees were received during 2001.  A tripartite
      agreement was signed in  January  2003  facilitating  the  return  of
      refugees.  A further agreement was signed in July 2003 concerning the
      voluntary repatriation  of  some  twenty  six  thousand  Rwandans  in
      Uganda.   Some  Rwandan  refugees  voluntarily  returned  home   from
      neighbouring DRC it was reported in August 2003.

23.   The issue of genocide survivors is set out in paragraphs  6.113ff  of
      the assessment. It is reported that the main problems  faced  by  the
      survivors of genocide is that sometimes they have to live near  those
      who have participated in the genocide who are returning  from  prison
      or from exile.   It has to be borne in mind  that  the  claimant  has
      been outside the country for some ten years.   Among the documents in
      the claimant's bundle that was sent in late in the day  is  a  letter
      from the UNHCR dated 16 September 2003.  This refers to the fact that
      the vast majority of Rwandans had voluntarily returned home since the
      genocide.   During  2001  UNHCR   had   facilitated   the   voluntary
      repatriation of over twenty thousand refugees from the DRC  and  from
      Tanzania.  We note that UNHCR was of the opinion that the question of
      the return of unsuccessful asylum seekers should be  approached  with
      caution particularly in respect of persons originating from the north
      western and south western parts of the country where  sporadic  rebel
      attacks still occur.  The UNHCR recommended that before  deciding  on
      return states should give due regard to the particular  circumstances
      of each individual case, area  of  origin,  educational  level,  age,
      gender, health etc., to determine if any of these persons  should  be
      allowed to remain on their territory  on  humanitarian  grounds.   We
      were not specifically referred to any  documents  in  the  claimant's
      bundle by Ms Shaw.  Some of the documents date  back  to  2001.    We
      note that the claimant has training  to  drive  forklift  trucks  and
      other vehicles and has worked to a good standard with his company.

24.   The Adjudicator dismissed the claimant's  asylum  appeal.   He  found
      that he was at serious risk of being  unsettled  or  displaced.    If
      that occurred, the claimant would lack even the basic amenities.

25.   We do consider that having regard to the authorities,  in  particular
      the authorities mentioned in the case of N (Burundi) that the Article
      3 threshold is a high threshold - see for  example  SK  [2002]  UKIAT
      05613 which is referred to at paragraph 6 of  N  and  Fazilat  [2002]
      UKIAT 000973.   Ms Shaw referred us to no authority indicating to the
      contrary.   Reference may be made to the recent decision of the House
      of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL27 - see the opinion of  Lord  Bingham,
      for  example,  at  paragraph  4  where  reference  is  made  to   the
      admissibility decision of the Strasbourg Court in Henao v Netherlands
      - the case illustrated "the stringency of the  test  applied  by  the
      Court when reliance is placed  on  Article  3  to  resist  a  removal
      decision."

26.   We appreciate that the claimant will face hardship  and  difficulties
      in Rwanda.  However, we find that the Adjudicator erred in concluding
      that the risk of unsettlement or displacement  to  which  she  refers
      would lead to a level of inhuman or degrading treatment  which  would
      reach the high threshold required to breach Article 3.   As  we  have
      observed, the claimant is a fit thirty one year old who  is  able  to
      hold down a job.  He is not a vulnerable individual.   We  take  into
      account the UNHCR position paper to which we have made reference.  We
      were not directed by Ms Shaw to any material that would indicate that
      the claimant would face inhuman or degrading treatment on  return  to
      Rwanda.  Although the case of N (Burundi) is not a starred  decision,
      we see no reason why it should not be applied in the circumstances of
      Rwanda.

27.   For the reasons we have given, the Adjudicator erred in allowing  the
      appeal  under  Article  3.    The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
      accordingly allowed and the decision of the Adjudicator on Article  3
      is reversed.




                                                                      G Warr
                                                              Vice President





                    Approved for electronic distribution


