
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |            |BA (Persistent questioning by Adjudicator)  |
|                  |            |Turkey [2004]                               |
|                  |            |UKIAT 00123                                 |
|                  |            |                                            |
|                  | |                                                       |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |                |                  |
|Heard on:         |26th May 2004         |                |                  |
|Date typed:       |26th May 2004                                            |
|Date promulgated: |27th May 2004                                            |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS. D. K. GILL (VICE PRESIDENT)                                             |
|MRS. M. E. MCGREGOR                                                         |
|MRS. E. MORTON                                                              |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |




|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Rossier, of Kuddus Solicitors.
For the  Respondent:     Mr.  S.  Ouseley,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                        Officer.

1.1   The Appellant (a national of  Turkey,  born  on  10th  May  1967)  has
     appealed against the determination of Mr. J. R.  A.  Hanratty,  RD,  an
     Adjudicator (sitting at Hatton Cross),  who  dismissed  his  appeal  on
     asylum and human rights grounds against the  Respondent's  decision  of
     20th April 2004 to refuse  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.  The
     Appellant's appeal was brought under Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal is being dealt  with  under
     the  Fast  Track  procedures.  He  is  in  immigration   detention   at
     Harmondsworth.

1.2   This case is being reported because it raises the issue as to  whether
     persistent questioning by an Adjudicator means that  an  appellant  has
     not had a fair hearing.

2.    The Appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  12th  April  2004,
     having left Turkey on 8th April 2004. His appeal before the Adjudicator
     was heard on 28th April 2004. His application for permission to  appeal
     to the Tribunal raises four grounds of appeal.  By a decision  notified
     on 6th May 2004, a Vice President of the Tribunal refused permission to
     appeal to the Tribunal. The Appellant challenged that decision  by  way
     of Statutory Review. By an Order of the High Court of Justice  notified
     on 24th May 2004, the Tribunal's decision was reversed, on  the  ground
     that it is arguable  that the Tribunal's rejection of the first  ground
     of appeal was based upon a wholly false premise.

3.    The first ground of appeal as contained in  the  Appellant's  original
     grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Tribunal alleges
     that the Adjudicator had asked the  Appellant  a  series  of  questions
     which crossed the line from being clarification  to  cross-examination,
     with 13 probing questions having been  put  to  the  Appellant  by  the
     Adjudicator about the details of the torture endured in  detention.  It
     is alleged that the Appellant's representative at  the  hearing  before
     the Adjudicator, Mr. Baharat Ali (a solicitor, of Aman Solicitors)  had
     objected to the Adjudicator's "cross-examination/intervention"  but  to
     no avail.

4.    Mr. Ali has lodged a witness statement dated 2nd May  2004,  in  which
     he refers to his record of the evidence and the proceedings  (which  we
     shall hereafter refer to as the Appellant's ROP). He says that, in  his
     opinion, the Adjudicator had overstepped the mark in seeking to clarify
     matters with the Appellant to the extent  that  he  had  cross-examined
     him; that he had objected  to  the  Adjudicator's  questioning  of  the
     Appellant on two occasions (pages 16 and  17  of  the  Appellant's  ROP
     refer) because of the manner in which the Adjudicator  was  questioning
     the Appellant and that, in his opinion, the Adjudicator had treated the
     Appellant in a manner which was unfair and  wrong.   However,  Mr.  Ali
     makes it clear that he does not make any  allegation  of  prejudice  or
     bias against the Adjudicator.

5.    We have compared both the Adjudicator's ROP and  the  Appellant's  ROP
     and are satisfied that the records of both documents as to the  content
     of  the  questions  asked  by  the  Presenting  Officer  and   by   the
     Adjudicator, and the answers given,  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
     alleged ill-treatment are substantially the same. However, we found the
     Adjudicator's ROP difficult to read and we have therefore referred here
     to the Appellant's ROP. The parties before us were content  to  proceed
     on the basis of the Appellant's ROP.

6.    We set  out  below  relevant  extracts  of  the  refusal  letter,  the
     Appellant's statement dated 27th April 2004, the  Appellant's  ROP  and
     paragraphs 13 and  16  of  the  Determination.  We  have  numbered  the
     questions and answers as recorded in the Appellant's  ROP, for ease  of
     reference in this Determination.

7.    It is clear that the refusal letter put  the  Appellant's  credibility
     in issue and that the Adjudicator's  overall  questioning  covered  the
     three credibility points mentioned at paragraphs 19, 20, 22 and  26  of
     the refusal letter. These raised the following points:

      (a)   that it was not credible that the Appellant  had  been  detained
           on 1st  March  2004,  as  he  had  only  been  distributing  the
           newspaper of EMEP, a legal party (paragraph  19);  paragraph  22
           raises a related credibility issue;

      (b)   that, if the Appellant had been as badly beaten as  claimed,  he
           would  have  had  more  severe  injuries  (the  first  point  in
           paragraph 20);

      (c)   that  the  Appellant's  failure  to  mention  at  his  screening
           interview  that  he  had  received  treatment  for  his  alleged
           injuries called his credibility into account (the  second  point
           in paragraph 20); and

      (d)   that the Appellant had fabricated an account in  an  attempt  to
           join his siblings in the United Kingdom (paragraph 26).

8.    It is only the Adjudicator's questioning regarding the first point  in
     paragraph 20 of the refusal letter which  is  before  us.  Accordingly,
     only  paragraph  20  of  the  refusal  letter  is  quoted  below.   His
     questioning on the other credibility points was not before us. We  were
     concerned as to why, given the challenge in paragraph 20 of the refusal
     letter, examination-in-chief before the Adjudicator had not gone beyond
     the Appellant's adoption of his witness statement. Mr. Rossier drew our
     attention to paragraphs 18, 19, 20 and 23 of the Appellant's  statement
     dated 27th  April  2004,  in  which  the  Appellant  had  responded  to
     paragraphs 19, 20, 22 and 26 of the refusal letter.  We only quote from
     paragraph 19 of his statement, in which he responds to paragraph 20  of
     the refusal letter.

9.    It is clear that the Presenting Officer, at  the  hearing  before  the
     Adjudicator, had cross-examined the Appellant about  his  alleged  ill-
     treatment in detention and specifically about the falaka. Under  cross-
     examination, the Appellant's evidence was that,  as  a  result  of  the
     falaka treatment, his feet were swollen and blood had been drawn. It is
     clear  from  paragraph  13  of  the  Determination  that,  before   the
     Adjudicator commenced his questioning of the Appellant, he said that he
     was going to ask questions to clarify issues in his  own  mind  and  to
     give the Appellant a greater opportunity to explain his case.  This  is
     clear because paragraph 13 of the Determination is then followed by the
     Adjudicator's summary of the questions he  asked  the  Appellant  about
     delivering  newspapers/magazines  for  EMEP  which,  according  to  the
     Appellant's ROP, was  the  first  issue  the  Adjudicator  dealt  with.
     Paragraph 13 of the Determination is quoted below, as well as paragraph
     16 which is also relevant.

10.   We now set out the extracts to which we have referred.

      Paragraph 20 of the refusal letter:

      20.   Additionally you claim that you  were  tortured  throughout  the
           three days you were detained, and were only released  after  you
           signed a blank piece of paper. You claimed that you were  beaten
           by 3, 5 and 10 people throughout that period,  and  were  beaten
           with truncheons, hosed with pressurised water, and  had  falaka.
           You claimed that the torture lasted from 15  minutes  up  to  an
           hour. (asylum interview Q54 - 64). If you were beaten  as  badly
           as you claim you would have received more severe  injuries  than
           you claim. It is also noted that in your Screening Interview you
           stated that you last received treatment about  a  year  ago  for
           flu, and made no mention of receiving treatment for the injuries
           you claim. (Screening Form Level 1 Q1.8). If  you  had  had  the
           injuries you claim, which would only have  been  about  a  month
           before your screening Interview they would have  been  fresh  in
           your mind, and you would have mentioned them. Your failure to do
           so at the earliest opportunity  undermines  the  credibility  of
           your claim. It is  considered  that  you  have  manufactured  an
           account in order to claim asylum.

      Paragraph 19 of the Appellant's statement:

      19.   (RFRL, Paragraph 20) I have given  a  detailed  account  of  the
           events that happened to me in  Turkey,  both  at  the  Screening
           Interview and the Asylum Interview. There  is  no  contradiction
           between the two. After I was released from detention, my  father
           arranged for a nurse to come and treat me, not a doctor.

     Cross-examination, on alleged torture:


     L1     Question:  What injuries suffer from torture?
     L2     Answer:    During torture I had bruises on  back  foot  swollen.
                       Also pressurised water heavy  handed  hitting,  nasty
                       words


     L3     Question:  What injuries suffered as a result of this treatment?
     L4     Answer:    This tortures were 6 weeks ago all of them vanished I
                       only have one mark from it left lower shin / knee.


     L5     Question:  What wrong with it?
     L6     Answer:    Kicked with boot that is


     L7     Question:  Any other injuries?
     L8     Answer:    Purple bruises on back.  Scratch  on  chin.  On  foot
                       because of falaka.


     L9     Question:  Describe what happen to foot?
     L10    Answer:    Make lie down with truncheon and stick hit me,  2  of
                       them.


     L11    Question:  What happened, swollen, blood as well?
     L12    Answer:    Yes. Swollen + blood.


     L13    Question:  Had it all disappeared when in UK ?
     L14    Answer:    Only on knee / shin.


     L15    Question:  When last beaten?
     L16    Answer:    4/3/04. torture 3 days.

      Paragraph 13 of the Determination:

      Para 13          I asked just a few questions in order to clarify  the
                 issues in my own mind and, as I expressed it in  court,  in
                 order to  give  the  appellant  a  greater  opportunity  to
                 explain his case.

      Paragraph 16 of the Determination:

      Para 16          I asked  the  appellant  to  describe  precisely  the
                 nature of the ill-treatment that he  said  he  received.  I
                 told him that I was very  sympathetic  to  people  who  had
                 suffered from torture and recognised that  it  was  such  a
                 dreadful experience that sometimes it was not  possible  to
                 give a  coherent  account  of  torture  which  was  both  a
                 physical and mental degradation of an individual.

     Questions by Adjudicator, on alleged torture:


     L17    Question:  I am familiar  that  torture  takes  police?  3  days
                       beaten?
     L18    Answer     Yes.


     L19    Question:  What beaten with?
     L20    Answer:    First took all of my clothing put  pressurised  water
                       on body. Like pipe of fire engine, 2 of them make  me
                       lie down and hit me with stick round and long about 3
                       feet.


     L21    Question:  Day 1 - how treated regarding beating?
     L22     Answer:     First  day  put  in  falaka,  hit  with  stick  and
                       truncheon. When fainted, put water on me.


     L23    Question:  How many times hit on feet on first day?
     L24    Answer:    To be honest I can't remember up until midday hit  me
                       frequently


     L25    Question:  How many times guess? On first day e.g. 50, more less
     L26    Answer:    I could say 100 to 120 times on foot.


      Interrupted and objected to Adj but continued.


     L27    Question:  120 times a day was that in evening as well?
     L28    Answer;    From am to midday about 120 times falaka but  it  was
                       not just 120 hits or falaka. After that take me punch
                       me and left me. After that pm torture not  as  severe
                       no falaka.


     L29    Question:  Day 2 and 3
     L30    Answer     falaka pm as fell


     L31    Question:  120 am and 120 p.m.
     L32    Answer:    That day was falaka and punching and kicking.


     L33    Question:  Was it 120 in am and 120 pm. Got story right.
     L34     Answer:     During  2nd  same  system.  After  midday,  putting
                       pressurised water, 120 strokes, water, other torture.




     L35    Question:  Afternoon 120 strokes as well .... in pm?
     L36    Answer:    Second day hit me near 120 times pm after torturing


     L37    Question:  Same routine day 3?
     L38    Answer:    Sir.  On   third  I  had  already  suffered  I  can't
                       remember clearly what did.


     L39    Question:  Do you think it was same?
     L40    Answer:    No falaka on  day  3,  hitting  with  truncheon,  and
                       stick..... Then pressurised water + punching.


     L41    Question:  I have studied torture been on courses.  Goes  on  in
                       countries including Turkey. Falaka  is  a  horrendous
                       torture? I have to put it to you. You  would  not  be
                       walking. The very least I would  have  is  a  medical
                       report to show what injuries have.


      "objected again but Adjudicator continued".


     L42    Answer:    I said to you I can't remember hit a lot.

11.1  At the hearing before us, Mr. Rossier  confirmed  that  there  was  no
     allegation of improper conduct or bias on the part of the  Adjudicator.
     It is not being alleged that the Adjudicator  adopted  an  attitude  of
     hostility  towards  the  Appellant.  Although  initially  Mr.   Rossier
     asserted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  asked  too  many  questions,  he
     subsequently confirmed that he was  not  saying  that  the  Adjudicator
     asked the Appellant too many questions about the alleged  ill-treatment
     in detention. The objection is taken to the persistence with which  the
     Adjudicator had questioned the Appellant about the  alleged  falaka  he
     endured - specifically, the persistence in asking the  Appellant  about
     the number of times he had been beaten on his feet,  despite  the  fact
     that the Appellant had said that he could not remember.

11.2  Mr. Rossier drew our attention to the fact that, at questions  62  and
     63 of his interview (page E19 statutory appeal bundle),  the  Appellant
     had given details of his alleged ill-treatment.  He  had  said  at  his
     interview that he could not walk for a week after the ill-treatment  by
     the falaka method. Paragraph 20 of the refusal  letter  refers  to  the
     Appellant's account at his interview that he was beaten by 3, 5 and  10
     people throughout the period of his detention, that he was beaten  with
     truncheons, hosed with pressurised water and been subjected to  falaka.
     Mr. Rossier submitted that paragraph 20  referred  to  the  Appellant's
     account at his interview that the torture had lasted for 15 minutes  to
     20 minutes. Accordingly,  clarification  of  the  Appellant's  accounts
     would have led the Adjudicator to ask the Appellant the  proportion  of
     this time which related to the falaka ill-treatment and the  proportion
     which related to other sort of ill-treatment. In  his  submission,  the
     Adjudicator's line of questioning about the  Appellant's  ill-treatment
     had deviated quite far from the questions the Appellant had been  asked
     at interview. In other words, the refusal letter raised the subject  as
     to how long the ill-treatment lasted each day, whereas the  Adjudicator
     questioned the Appellant about the number of times he was beaten.

11.3  Whilst Mr. Rossier acknowledged that the  Adjudicator  had  stated  in
     the Determination at paragraph 31 that he did not expect the  Appellant
     to have remembered the precise number of times he had been beaten  with
     a cane on his feet. An independent observer would have been left with a
     great sense of unease in his mind about the  Adjudicator's  questioning
     on the subject of the Appellant's ill-treatment. In his submission,  an
     independent observer would not have concluded that  the  Appellant  had
     had a fair hearing.

11.4  In Mr. Rossier's submission, it  was  also  questionable  whether  the
     Adjudicator was entitled to have referred to his own  knowledge  gained
     in a training course about ill-treatment by the falaka method. However,
     he acknowledged that this was not part of Ground 1  and  therefore  not
     before us.

12.   In response, Mr. Ouseley relied on the comments  in  the  Respondent's
     Notice in relation to  Ground  1.   The  refusal  letter  disputed  the
     Appellant's alleged ill-treatment, as well as raising other credibility
     issues. Although the Appellant had responded to the refusal  letter  by
     way of his witness  statement,  he  did  not  provide  details  in  his
     statement about the alleged ill-treatment. Furthermore,  these  alleged
     events were not historic events, in the sense that they had  not  taken
     place some time  ago.  They  were  all  alleged  to  have  taken  place
     recently, on 1st March 2004. The Appellant had only  one  scar  on  his
     shin as a result of the  alleged  ill-treatment.  The  Adjudicator  was
     provided with no medical evidence. He noted that the Appellant had  not
     sought medical treatment  in  detention  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
     Adjudicator was therefore only asking questions which would enable  him
     to determine the appeal fairly. In other words, he was trying  to  seek
     out the truth. He was attempting to find out the exact  nature  of  the
     ill-treatment, given that the Appellant had no scars other than the one
     scar on his shin. He made it clear that he did not expect the Appellant
     to  remember the exact number of times  he  had  been  beaten.  In  Mr.
     Ouseley's submission, the Adjudicator was only clarifying the evidence,
     and not cross-examining. The real issue is whether  the  Appellant  was
     believable. The Adjudicator did not believe him.

13.1  In response, Mr. Rossier  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator  had  gone
     beyond merely giving the Appellant a further opportunity, at the end of
     cross-examination, to address him on issues which concerned him.  Pages
     15 to 17 of the Appellant's ROP  show  that,  rather  than  giving  the
     Appellant  an  opportunity  to  rescue  himself,  there   was   "dogged
     pursuance" on the part  of  the  Adjudicator  of  an  answer  from  the
     Appellant as to the number of times he had been  beaten.  It  was  only
     after that evidence had been elicited that the Adjudicator said that he
     was aware of the horrendous nature of such ill-treatment.

13.2  The Adjudicator's rejection of the Appellant's  alleged  ill-treatment
     led him to reject his account of his detention and that in turn led him
     to reject the  claim  that  the  Appellant  had  come  to  the  adverse
     attention  of  the  Turkish  authorities.  In  response,  Mr.   Ouseley
     submitted that this  was  because  the  Appellant's  claims  about  his
     alleged ill-treatment in detention was the core of his claim.

13.3  In conclusion, Mr. Rossier submitted that the real issue  was  whether
     an independent observer sitting at the back of the hearing  room  would
     have considered that the hearing was unfair. The question  was  whether
     the Adjudicator's questions were hostile in nature, although it was not
     being alleged that the manner in which they were asked was hostile.

14.   We pointed out that the Adjudicator had asked 10 questions  about  the
     Appellant's delivery of newspapers/magazines for EMEP, as  compared  to
     13 questions on the alleged ill-treatment. We asked why there had  been
     no assertion in the grounds that the Adjudicator's questioning  of  the
     Appellant about his delivery of newspapers/magazines for EMEP  amounted
     to cross-examination and whether this means that there was no objection
     to the number of questions the Adjudicator had  asked  about  the  ill-
     treatment.  Mr.  Rossier  confirmed  that  the  objection  was  to  the
     Adjudicator's persistence in asking the Appellant about the  number  of
     times he was beaten on his feet.

15.   We reserved our determination.

      Determination and reasons

16.   We have decided to dismiss this appeal. We now give  our  reasons  for
     doing so.

17.    Although  we  have  quoted  paragraph   16   of   the   Adjudicator's
     Determination immediately before the extract from the  Appellant's  ROP
     of the Adjudicator's questions on the  alleged  torture,  we  recognise
     that it is not entirely clear that the Adjudicator told  the  Appellant
     what is summarised at paragraph 16, before questioning  him  about  the
     alleged torture, or only at the end of that series  of  questions.  The
     placing of paragraph 16 in the Determination suggests the former; there
     is some slight support for this in the  way  the  question  at  L17  is
     phrased. However, the question at  L41  may  suggest  the  latter.  The
     Adjudicator's summary of the proceedings is set out at paragraphs 8  to
     23 of the Determination. It is clear  from  these  paragraphs  that  he
     progressed from summarising the evidence  in  examination-in-chief,  to
     his evidence under cross-examination, then the evidence in response  to
     his own questions, re-examination,  and  finally  submissions.  We  are
     therefore satisfied that he informed the Appellant of his sympathy  and
     understanding before  he  began  his  questioning  as  to  the  alleged
     torture. However, we make it clear that, even if this is not  the  case
     and he only told the Appellant of his  sympathy  and  understanding  at
     L41, it would not have affected the outcome of this appeal.

18.    Although  proceedings  in  asylum   and   immigration   appeals   are
     adversarial, it is clear from a long line of decided  cases  (see,  for
     example, [2004] UKIAT 00061 K (Cote d'Ivoire),  [2004]  UKIAT  00044  M
     (Chad) and [2004] UKIAT 00048 Y (Turkey)) that there is no objection in
     principle to Adjudicators' questioning of appellants. The issue we have
     to determine is whether the Appellant has had a fair hearing. Would  an
     independent and fair-minded observer sitting at the back of the hearing
     room  who  is  in  possession  of  all  of  the  material   facts   and
     circumstances conclude that the Appellant had had a  fair  hearing,  or
     not? Where a refusal letter challenges credibility  in  specific  terms
     (as in this case), the appellant knows the issues he needs to  address.
     It is for him to address those issues. Some appellants  may  choose  to
     address those issues straight on, whilst others  may hope  that  "least
     said, soonest mended"  (see  paragraph  5  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
     judgement in  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v.
     Maheswaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173).

19.   It is important to note that, in this case,  there  is  no  allegation
     that the Adjudicator was biased. Nor is there  an  allegation  that  he
     conducted his questioning of the Appellant at any point  in  a  hostile
     manner. Nor is there an allegation that he asked the Appellant too many
     questions on  the  subject  of  the  alleged  ill-treatment.  The  only
     objection raised is with regard to the Adjudicator's questioning  about
     the number of times the Appellant was subjected to falaka - Mr. Rossier
     describes this as the Adjudicator's "dogged pursuit" of the  issue.  He
     says that these questions were hostile in nature, although not  in  the
     manner in which they were put.

20.   In the instant appeal, the refusal letter puts  credibility  in  issue
     very  clearly.  There  are  clear  and  specific  challenges   to   the
     Appellant's accounts in core respects.  Paragraph  20  of  the  refusal
     letter does not only call  into  question  the  severity  of  the  ill-
     treatment alleged. Paragraph 20, read as a whole, makes it  clear  that
     the Respondent disputed that the alleged ill-treatment  took  place  at
     all. Paragraph 20 of the refusal letter called for an answer  from  the
     Appellant.

21.   Mr. Rossier incorrectly stated that the refusal letter refers  to  the
     duration of the alleged ill-treatment being for  15  to  20  minutes  -
     paragraph 20 refers to "15 minutes up to 1 hour".  Furthermore,  it  is
     not the case that the Appellant had said  at  his  interview  that  the
     total duration of the ill-treatment over the three days was between  15
     minutes to one hour - see questions 59 to 63 on pages E18 to E19 of the
     statutory appeal bundle.  The  Appellant  said  that  he  was  tortured
     "sometimes for half an  hour,  sometimes  for  an  hour,  sometimes  15
     minutes".  In terms of the severity of the alleged  ill-treatment,  the
     answers given at interview raise quite a broad spectre. The severity of
     the alleged ill-treatment would affect the weight to be  given  to  the
     lack of any medical evidence and the limited scarring in this case   An
     assessment of how severely the Appellant was ill-treated  would  depend
     on the duration of the sessions and the number of such sessions of ill-
     treatment over the three days.  We do not agree with Mr. Rossier  that,
     simply because the refusal letter refers to the  alleged  ill-treatment
     having taken place for about 15 minutes to one hour,  this  means  that
     the Adjudicator's questioning should have been limited to  finding  out
     what proportion of this time related to  ill-treatment  by  falaka  and
     what proportion of the time to other methods of ill-treatment.

22.   It cannot be  said  that  the  Appellant's  answer  (as  contained  at
     paragraph 19 of his statement) was an adequate response  to  the  first
     point raised in paragraph 20 of the  refusal  letter.  The  second  and
     third sentences of paragraph  19  of  the  statement  are  intended  to
     address the second point raised in paragraph 20 of the refusal letter -
     namely, the alleged discrepancy referred to  in  paragraph  20  of  the
     refusal letter. Accordingly, it is only the first sentence of paragraph
     19 of the statement which appears to be an attempt to address the first
     point in paragraph 20 of the refusal letter. We would say that it falls
     far short of being an adequate response.

23.   In examination-in-chief, the Appellant was merely asked to  adopt  his
     statement. There was no obligation on the Presenting Officer to  cross-
     examine the Appellant on the issue of  his  alleged  ill-treatment.  He
     would have been entitled to take the view that the  Appellant  had  not
     met the case against him. However, he did cross-examine  the  Appellant
     on the issue in question. The Appellant's answers in  cross-examination
     elicited the evidence that blood had been drawn  from  the  Appellant's
     foot during the course of the alleged ill-treatment by  falaka.  It  is
     clear from the question at L41 that the Adjudicator was concerned about
     the lack of medical evidence given the ill-treatment  which  was  being
     alleged (see questions 59 to 63 on pages E18 to E19  of  the  statutory
     appeal bundle). He would also understandably have  had  concerns  about
     the fact that the Appellant only had one small scar on his  shin  below
     the knee.

24.   Whilst the Adjudicator was not obliged in the  circumstances  of  this
     particular case to give the Appellant a further opportunity to  address
     his concerns (the Appellant had already had that opportunity),  he  did
     so. No doubt he was aware that this matter was of  such  importance  to
     the Appellant's case that, if it  was  not  adequately  addressed,  the
     Appellant's  case  would  (as  he  puts  it  at  paragraph  34  of  the
     Determination) "fall apart". There were already real issues  raised  as
     to the credibility of the Appellant's claims  about  the  circumstances
     which led to his alleged detention. If the claims as to his alleged ill-
     treatment in detention were not credible, there was nothing left of his
     case.

25.   As we have said, the weight  to  be  given  to  the  lack  of  medical
     evidence and the limited  scarring  depends  on  the  severity  of  the
     alleged ill-treatment. It is clear, from the Adjudicator's questioning,
     that this is the point he focused on. Rather than  "doggedly  pursuing"
     the point, we are satisfied that he was trying to get some idea of  the
     overall severity of the alleged ill-treatment in order  to  assess  the
     weight to be given to the lack of medical evidence (as he  mentions  at
     L41), the lack  of  any  serious  medical  treatment  and  the  limited
     scarring (see paragraph 33 of the Determination). We agree that, on one
     view,  the  Adjudicator's  questioning  concerning  the  alleged   ill-
     treatment by falaka  may  be  seen  as  persistent,  but  there  is  no
     objection in principle to this because, seen in context,  it  is  clear
     that the persistence was directed towards obtaining an overall view  of
     the alleged ill-treatment  over  the  three  days  of  the  Appellant's
     alleged detention. Indeed,  by  questioning  the  Appellant  separately
     about each day, he was guiding the Appellant to focus on  each  day  in
     turn, so that the evidence could be clearly understood.

26.    It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  Adjudicator's
     questioning took place within the context  of  the  statements  by  the
     Adjudicator as summarised at paragraphs 13 and 16 of the  Determination
     - that he was only clarifying issues in  his  own  mind,  that  he  was
     giving the Appellant a greater opportunity to explain his case, that he
     had sympathy towards persons who had been  tortured  and  that  it  was
     sometimes not possible to give a coherent account of torture.

27.   We are satisfied that the Adjudicator's questions were not hostile  in
     nature. It is important in this case that it has been accepted that the
     Adjudicator did not display a hostile attitude. Whether questioning  is
     hostile in nature is not to be equated with the  discomfort  a  witness
     might feel or difficulties he might have  in  answering  questions.  An
     untruthful witness might experience the same problems. A representative
     may feel questioning is hostile. This is, of course, the reason why Mr.
     Ali objected twice to the Adjudicator's questioning. However, the  fact
     that Mr. Ali made  these  objections  does  not  mean  that  there  was
     anything improper or hostile about the Adjudicator's questioning.

28.   Although this issue is not before us (as it is not part of Ground  1),
     we consider that the Adjudicator was entitled to rely on his  knowledge
     about ill-treatment by the falaka method. As he is required to  do,  he
     made the parties aware that he had such knowledge.

29.   We are satisfied that an independent observer fully  informed  of  all
     of the above facts would have concluded that the Adjudicator was  doing
     no more than giving the Appellant a further opportunity to address  his
     concerns and that the Adjudicator was merely obtaining clarification as
     to the severity of the ill-treatment  allegedly  endured  in  order  to
     fairly determine the appeal. We are satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator's
     questioning did not amount to cross-examination, We are satisfied  that
     the Appellant's hearing before the Adjudicator was a fair one.

30.   It follows that we must dismiss this appeal.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
Vice President                               Date: 27th May 2004
