
KH
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On  1 November 2004        |        |                            |
|                LK (Adjudicators: "anxious scrutiny"- public      |
|interest) Democratic Republic                                     |
|of Congo [2004] UKIAT 00308                                       |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|Signed:           01.11.2004                                      |
|Issued:            25th November 2004                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr JG Freeman (vice-president)                                    |
|Mr M J Griffiths                                                  |
|Ms V S Street                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |appellant                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr D White
For the respondent:    Mr J Bild, IAS (London)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is an appeal by the Home Office in the case of  a  citizen  of  the
   Democratic Republic of Congo, whose appeal was allowed  on  both  asylum
   and human rights grounds by an adjudicator, Mr D N  Bowen,  sitting  at
   Birmingham on 30 May 2003. The adjudicator's decision  did  not  go  out
   until 13 June; so it follows that the provisions of the 2002 Act by then
   applied, and (as the Court of Appeal made clear in CA [2004] EWCA  1165)
   the Home Office need to persuade us that there was an error  of  law  on
   the part of the adjudicator, if we are to allow their appeal.

2.  Regrettably,  in  far  flung  Birmingham,  no  presenting  officer  was
   available to help the adjudicator and this appears to us to  be  at  the
   root of a number of things that went wrong.  The relevant  part  of  the
   adjudicator's decision is as follows:



   48.      This appellant has a fear of  the  government  because  of  her
         religious beliefs that she is a follower of  the  Bundi  Dia  Kongo
         this is a religious organisation which is seen to be  a  threat  to
         the government and to which the government is opposed as is clearly
         outlined in the objective evidence which has been placed before me.
   49.      There was a religious festival which took place on 20 July 2002
         which is well reported in the objective material there is  evidence
         of violent outbreaks and killings.  The appellant claims  that  far
         more people died and has been recorded in the objective evidence.
   50.      The appellant was criticised in the reasoins for refusal letter
         for not having attended the  celebrations,  however  she  explained
         that she was required to stay at home  to  look  after  her  infant
         siblings who could not be left alone to fend  for  themelves.   She
         cannot be criticised for that.
   51.      I believe the account that this appellant has given of herself.
          It is clear that the objective evidence points to  the  fact  that
         the public prosecutor views the supporters of the Bundu  Dia  Kongo
         as having publicly committed offences against the head of state  in
         the Province of Bascongo sometime during the year 2002.
   52.      This appellant is as a returned asylum seeker to the DRC  would
         clearly be interrogated at Kinshasa and I sure that it would easily
         come to light that she was  a  supporter  of  Bundu  Dia  Kongo,  I
         suspect then  that  she  would  be  detained  and  ill-treated  and
         possibly tortured.
   53.      Even if I am wrong given the objective evidence in so far as it
         relates to young single females and having regard to the  views  of
         the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Ramazani even if  the  appellant
         were to escape ill-treatment at the  hands  of  the  authorities  I
         suspect that she would find that she had nothing in the DRC and  in
         all probability would have to turn to prostitution.
   54.      I am satisfied be the appellant has  fear  of  the  authorities
         that the internal flight relocation is not a viable option in  this
         application's case.


3. Mr Bild realistically  concedes  that  the  adjudicator's  reasoning  at
   paragraph 53 cannot be supported and his decision on that point needed a
   good deal more investigation. No more need be said about that,  and  the
   appeal turns on what the adjudicator said  at  paragraph  52.  The  main
   piece of evidence that Mr Bild has pointed us to  on  the  appeal  comes
   from the report of a seminar organised by the UNHCR on 28  and  29  June
   2002, which was compiled by one of their officials and  one  of  Amnesty
   International's. The relevant passage appears at page 123 of the report,

   Against this background it  can  no  longer  be  said  that  only  those
   deportees who are discovered by the authorities to  have  sought  asylum
   abroad undergo interrogation sessions upon arrival at Kinshasa  Airport.
   In fact reports from local human rights NGOs victims and  eye  witnesses
   show that groups of individuals who are deported having  or  not  having
   sought asylum or  repatriated  voluntarily  may  face  serious  problems
   following possible interrogation conducted  by  security  services  upon
   arrival at Kinshasa. Should the authorities in Kinshasa discovered  that
   a deportee has a political or military  profile  or  has  sought  asylum
   abroad owing to a political or military background such person may be at
   risk of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment.  People who are  returned
   without any assurances that the government  does  not  hold  any  grudge
   against them could be in serious trouble and get detained  as  prisoners
   of conscience or could even be at  risk  of  the  death  penalty  always
   depending on their activities.


4. The adjudicator accepted that this claimant was a  member  of  the  BDK:
   although there was no evidence that she had gone through the  initiation
   procedures (described at some length in the CIPU  Report  at  paragraphs
   6.52 to 6.55), nothing turns on that, because Mr White's point  is  that
   the authorities had no means of knowing that she was a  BDK  member.  Mr
   Bild relies first  on  the  fact  that  she  was  from  a  town  with  a
   substantial BDK membership and history of trouble with  the  authorities
   for that reason.   The second point on which  he  relies  is  that  this
   appellant's own father had been killed in a BDK disturbance there, on 20
   July 2002, at the same demonstration as  she  did  not  attend,  through
   having to baby-sit at home.

5. We accept that the claimant would no doubt have to give the  details  of
   her place of origin during the questioning described in the UNHCR Report
   we have read. There is nothing to link her with the  disturbance  of  20
   July, except for being her father's daughter. It is not  a  question  of
   blaming her, or not, for staying at home baby-sitting: the  question  is
   whether the authorities would have any reason to  elicit  from  her  any
   information  about  her  father  having  been  killed   during   a   BDK
   demonstration there.  Mr Bild's point is that this  would  be  bound  to
   come out during any questioning of a young single woman  on  return,  in
   which the authorities might be expected to  ask  her  about  her  family
   background.  He accepts that there is no reasoning to that effect by the
   adjudicator; but he asks us to infer it as being reasonable.

6. We accept that, if there were a clear inference to  be  drawn  that  the
   process of questioning described in the UNHCR report would lead  to  the
   father's manner of death coming to light, then on the evidence before us
   that might possibly lead to some  risk  on  return  for  this  claimant.
   However, there was no investigation by the adjudicator who  was,  as  we
   say, not helped by the absence of  a  presenting  officer,  as  to  what
   questions were likely to be asked of someone with no record  herself  of
   any hostile contact with the authorities at all; or how the answers  the
   claimant would be obliged to give to such questions as she was likely to
   be asked would lead to the revelation of her father's manner of death.

7. We think there should have been such an investigation.  We have  to  say
   that, in the unfortunate absence  of  a  presenting  officer,  the  very
   experienced adjudicator on this occasion failed in the duty of what,  in
   rather old-fashioned  language,  has  been  called  "anxious  scrutiny".
   That is just as important in the interests of the public as in those  of
   the claimant, especially where the organization appointed  to  represent
   those interests has fallen down in its duty by not even being present at
   the appeal hearing.

8. For the reasons we have given, we have to say that the  adjudicator  did
   go wrong in law on this point: the result is that there will have to  be
   a fresh hearing before another adjudicator.

Appeal allowed
Case "remitted", not to Mr Bowen
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman

                                      (approved for electronic distribution)
