

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 16 March 2004           |        |                            |
|                        VK (Marriage of Convenience) Kenya [2004] |
|UKIAT 00305                                                       |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:  24/11/2004                          |
|                                                                  |
|................................................                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Barnes - Vice President                                      |
|Mr J Perkins - Vice President                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION OFFICER - WATERLOO                                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr R  Khubber  of  Counsel  instructed  by  the
                    Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
For  the  Respondent:           Miss  C  Hanrahan,  a  senior  Home   Office
                    Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya.  She was born on 1  November  1972  and
so is now 31 years old.  She appeals the decision of an Adjudicator, Ms C  A
Parker, who in a determination promulgated on 15 August 2003  dismissed  her
appeal against a decision of the Respondent that she  was  not  entitled  to
admission to the United Kingdom as the wife of an EEA national and that  the
decision complained of was contrary to her human rights.  Unless, as is  the
case here, it is alleged that the decision is contrary  to  the  Appellant's
human rights, appeals of this kind cannot be heard  when  the  Appellant  is
within the  United  Kingdom.   By  reason  of  Regulation  30(3)(b)  of  The
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000  the  appeal  can  be
heard whilst the Appellant remains in the United Kingdom.   We  assume  that
it is for this reason that the appeal is numbered in the  "HR"  rather  than
the "IM" series.

The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 March 1992  with  her  son.
She claimed asylum on arrival.  On 16 December 1998 she was refused  asylum.
  She  appealed  that  decision.   The  appeal   was   dismissed   and   the
determination promulgated  on  10  February  2000.   On  1  March  2000  the
Appellant was  refused  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
Tribunal.

Sometime in April 2000 a   , a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Ireland  and
therefore an EEA national, asked the Appellant to marry him.  They  had  met
in November 1999.  They married on 8 May  2000  and  on  29  June  2000  the
Appellant applied for permission to remain on  the  basis  of  her  marriage
was issued with a residence permit on 18 August 2000.  No decision was  made
on this Appellant's application until it was refused on 23  July  2001.   On
26 July 2001 the Appellant entered a notice of appeal complaining  that  the
decision was wrong and that the proposed removal to Kenya  was  contrary  to
her human rights.  The Adjudicator heard the appeal on 15 August 2003.

It was the Appellant's case that she and her husband separated  in  November
2001 but her husband contacted her in February 2002 and again  on  29  March
2003 to discuss their relationship and to try to reconcile.

It was the Respondent's case  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  the  EEA
national was a marriage of convenience and for that reason  the  Immigration
Officer was right to refuse the application.

Regulation 13(1) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2000 provides that an Entry Clearance  Officer  must  issue  an  EEA  family
permit to a person who applies for  it  if  he  is  a  family  member  of  a
qualified person.  Regulation 6 of  the  same  regulations  defines  "family
members" in a way that includes a person's spouse and Regulation 2  provides
that "spouse" does not include a party to a marriage of convenience.

At paragraph 18 of her determination  the  Adjudicator  said  "both  parties
agreed that the burden of proof of showing that  the  marriage  was  one  of
convenience lay upon the Respondent".  At paragraph 25 of her  determination
the Adjudicator reviewed cases that she had  considered  and  said  "I  have
extracted below the main ratios in those cases and do not  believe  that  my
finding that this is a marriage of convenience is inconsistent  with  them".
One of the cases cited  by  the  Adjudicator  was  R  v  Immigration  Appeal
Tribunal ex parte Wai Kwan Cheung [1995] 104.  There at page 106  Popplewell
J said "In our view, as we have said, the Secretary of State  must  show  on
the balance of probability and bearing in mind the seriousness of the  issue
that the marriage has no substance.  It may be that a marriage entered  into
for  the  purpose  of  achieving  residence  would  nevertheless  have  some
substance.  It is all a matter of evidence."

The Adjudicator noted that it was the Appellant's case that  the  burden  of
proof on the Respondent was higher than that of the normal civil burden  and
was akin to the burden applicable in fraud cases.  It is plain  to  us  that
the Adjudicator did not accept that.  She did not apply that standard.   She
applied the approach approved in Cheung that the Secretary of State  had  to
prove that the marriage was a marriage of convenience and the  standard  was
the "balance of probability and bearing  in  mind  the  seriousness  of  the
issue that the marriage has no substance."

At paragraph 22 of the determination the Adjudicator says "I have  carefully
considered all the evidence and submissions before me and I find  that  this
is a marriage of convenience for the reasons which follow."  It is clear  to
us from reading those reasons that the Adjudicator found that  the  marriage
was a marriage of convenience when she considered it and it had  never  been
anything else.  This interpretation,  which  is  clearly  justified  in  the
light of the Adjudicator's findings, is of some importance in the  light  of
the submissions made to us.

At paragraph 22.1  of  her  determination  the  Adjudicator  said  that  the
Appellant and her  husband  "gave  unconvincing  and  inconsistent  evidence
about why they were not living together and I found  their  evidence  lacked
in credibility."  At paragraph 22.2 of  her  determination  the  Adjudicator
said "in my view, none of the reasons put forward for  not  living  together
were credible and, if they had decided before they married that  they  would
not be living together there did not seem to be any reason for them to  have
married in  the  first  place  apart  from  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
immigration status."

At paragraph 22.3  the  Adjudicator  noted  that    had  given  inconsistent
evidence about when he last saw his wife before March  2003.   According  to
the Adjudicator the Appellant and   made statements before  the  hearing  in
which they said that they separated in November 2001 and did  not  see  each
other again until February 2002.  They met then to  try  and  resolve  their
differences.  They failed and did not  see  each  other  again  until  March
2003.  However at the hearing   said that before  seeing  the  Appellant  in
March 2003 there had been a period of about one month when he had  not  seen
her.  In his previous evidence there had been a gap of more than  one  year.
The Adjudicator found this incredible.

The Adjudicator further found that there was no particular  reason  for  the
couple having seen each other in March 2003  except  that  the  hearing  was
approaching.  At paragraph 22.4 the Adjudicator  noted  that  the  Appellant
and her husband differed about when they saw each other.  They both  claimed
that they saw each other several times a week  but  could  not  agree  about
when they met.  At paragraph 22.5 the Adjudicator noted that  the  Appellant
and her husband were still living apart when she heard the  case.   And  the
Adjudicator found no "convincing explanation" as to why they  did  not  live
together.  She found the absence of such an explanation to  undermine  their
claim to be in a genuine marriage.  At paragraph 22.6 the Adjudicator says

  "the couple remained living  together  separately  after  their  marriage
  ceremony and   continued claiming benefits as a single  person.   Neither
  of them gave a convincing  explanation  as  to  why  they  did  not  live
  together  and  the  absence  of  any  such  explanation  undermines   the
  credibility of their claim to be in a  genuine  marriage.   They  married
  very soon after meeting and the timing of their marriage  coincided  with
  the Appellant's application for leave to appeal to the Immigration Appeal
  Tribunal being  declined.     apparently  proposed  a  month  after  that
  decision was promulgated and they then married a month later.  When  they
  married they had no intention to live together in the foreseeable  future
  so that such haste is all the more questionable.  I further note that the
  'reconciliation' between the couple allegedly occurred towards the end of
  March 2003, shortly before the parties were sent  notification  that  the
  Appellant's appeal would be heard which is  highly  coincidental.   Apart
  from the marriage certificate, wedding photographs and  the  evidence  of
  the Appellant and her husband, there is  no  evidence  to  support  their
  claim to be in a genuine relationship.  They do not live together;  there
  is no joint bank account; no evidence of joint  purchases  or  bills;  no
  evidence of joint  activities;  no  statements  from  family  members  or
  friends concerning their relationship.  The Appellant is represented and,
  if such evidence existed, I would have expected it to have been submitted
  but none has been.  When this situation is looked at, in the round, I  am
  satisfied that this is a marriage of convenience."

As indicated above it is quite plain to us that the Adjudicator  here  meant
that the marriage was a marriage of convenience at its  inception,  when  it
was considered by the Immigration Officer and when she heard the case.

The Adjudicator also found that the Appellant had established a private  and
family life in the United Kingdom with her son  .  She did not accept  there
was a protected private or family life between the Appellant  and    or  the
Appellant's child and   even though   is the  Appellant's  stepfather.   She
noted that even on the Appellant's evidence there had been long  periods  of
time when   had had  no  dealings  with  them.   Although    recognised  how
removal would have some impact on     because he had been  educated  in  the
United Kingdom and would not be used to life  in  Kenya  it  was  only  when
prompted that he made any comment about his relationship   .  The  Appellant
said that her husband  and  her  son  both  enjoyed  football  and  watching
television.  The Adjudicator did not find that this was enough to  establish
a protected private and family life.  The  Adjudicator  found  that  removal
would not be contrary to the Appellant's rights under Article  8(1)  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights.  She  also  found  in  the  alternative
that  there  had  been  no  evidence  that  there  were  any  insurmountable
obstacles in the way of   removing to Kenya with the Appellant and  her  son
if, contrary to the adjudicator's findings,  the  alleged  family  life  did
exist.   It  followed  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   not   be
disproportionate.

Mr Khubber began his submissions by inviting us to adjourn  the  matter  and
refer to the European Court of Justice the question of the  proper  approach
to the interpretation of the words "marriage of convenience".   This  is  an
area of some controversy.  European law does not provide for an  examination
of how the parties  to  a  marriage  met  or  why  they  decided  to  marry.
However, as Mr Khubber quite properly drew to our attention,  the  provision
in the Rules that a person is not entitled to benefit  from  a  marriage  of
convenience as a means of circumventing  immigration  control  derives  from
Council Resolution  12337-97.   Although  it  is  expressed  to  be  without
prejudice to community law we see no point in seeking the  guidance  of  the
European Court of Justice when the provision  complained  of  comes  from  a
Council Resolution and it is a matter for the national courts  to  interpret
the regulations made.

Mr  Khubber  submitted  there  were   four   fundamental   errors   in   the
determination.  The Adjudicator had not shown appreciation of  the  need  to
consider the evidence at the date of  decision;  she  had  not  applied  the
"higher civil standard"; she had wrongly equated a narrow  understanding  of
cohabitation with the proper meaning of marriage; she had  not  applied  the
evidence to the test that she had formulated.

It was common ground between the parties that it was for  the  Secretary  of
State to prove that the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.   This
concession is, presumably, based on the general position in common law  that
a person who makes an assertion has to  prove  it.   We  are  aware  of  the
starred decision of the Tribunal Chang 01TH00100  (Ockelton  DP,  Drabu  VP,
and Story VP) that left open the possibility that the  proper  approach  was
for the Appellant who wanted to take advantage  of  her  married  status  to
prove that her marriage was not a  marriage  of  convenience  and  therefore
excluded by the Rules.  Mr Ockelton was careful to state  in  that  decision
that the Tribunal did not have to decide the point.  Whilst it  must  remain
open to argument we find, given the specific concession of the Secretary  of
State, that unless the Secretary of State makes it  plain  in  a  particular
case that he takes a different position (in which  case  the  question  will
have to be reconsidered) it is now established that it is for the  Secretary
of State to prove that a marriage is a marriage of convenience  if  that  is
what he alleges.  For the reasons already discussed it  is  clear  that  the
Adjudicator accepted this and set out to apply it.

Mr Khubber submitted that the Adjudicator had applied the wrong standard  of
proof.  He refers to the Tribunal decision  in  Kim  Fuenum  Yuen  IAT  1998
(18283) which refers to the allegation that a  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
convenience as an allegation of deceit and that the  standard  of  proof  is
high.  However we do not agree that there is a special  standard  of  proof.
We have consulted Phipson on evidence at  4-36.  This  shows  that  where  a
serious allegation is made in a civil case the  standard  of  proof  remains
the civil standard, in other words the balance  of  probabilities.   However
where the allegation made is particularly grave good evidence is  needed  to
overcome the unlikelihood of what is alleged to have  happened.   We  accept
that marriage is a serious matter for most people.  The  suggestion  that  a
person has entered into a marriage of  convenience  is  inherently  unlikely
and for that reason will usually be hard to prove.  We do  not  accept  that
it has to be proved to the criminal standard.  It has to be  proved  to  the
civil standard in a way that is commensurate with  the  seriousness  of  the
allegation made.   We  see  no  error  in  the  Adjudicator's  direction  at
paragraph 25 of the determination that she had applied the ratio  in  Cheung
which was that  the  Secretary  of  State  "must  show  on  the  balance  of
probability and bearing in mind  the  seriousness  of  the  issue  that  the
marriage has no substance".  We find no merit in  the  suggestion  that  the
Adjudicator did not direct herself correctly about the standard  and  burden
of proof that had to be applied.

The concept of "marriage of convenience" has appeared from time to  time  in
the development of the law of  immigration  control.   Certainly  it  was  a
feature of the 1977 Immigration  Rules  for  control  on  entering.   It  is
perhaps surprising that it has  not  been  authoritatively  defined  by  the
courts.  However Mr Khubber, in his extremely helpful  "outline  submissions
of the Appellant"  refers  to  paragraph  36  of  Cheung  where  the  Deputy
President accepted that: "the phrase "marriage of convenience" is not to  be
given the meaning it had acquired in UK  immigration  law  many  years  ago,
before even the (now abolished) "primary purpose" Rule was developed."   For
this reason we have not given close attention to those cases put  before  us
that concerned the "primary  purpose  rule".   However  Cheung  gave  little
guidance about the nature of a "marriage of convenience" in the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2000.

Mr Khubber introduced us to the "without substance" test in Yew-Kee Kwonk  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department (TH-23417-93) where the  Tribunal
considered an appeal by a citizen of Hong Kong  who  had  married  an  Irish
national.  There the Tribunal (Professor D C Jackson)  decided  that  treaty
rights could not extend to a party to a marriage "which  exists  only  as  a
shell.  Particularly if this is so when the  relationship  is  entered  into
specifically to achieve the benefits of residence attaching  to  a  marriage
of substance."  He continued "the  question  is  therefore  whether  on  the
evidence the marriage of Mr and Mrs Kwonk was a  shell  or,  at  least,  was
entered into by Mr Kwonk to achieve his residence."

Professor Jackson built on the Tribunal's decision in Kwonk in Kam  Yu  Lau,
Appellant and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  TH/45202/92
(10859) where Professor Jackson said:

  "where the relationship  is  entered  into  solely  for  the  purpose  of
  achieving residence it seems to us, as  it  seemed  to  the  Tribunal  in
  Kwonk, to undermine the very purpose for which the  right  is  conferred.
  To argue that enquiry into the substance of the status would itself deter
  freedom of movement is to ignore that substance.  We agree and follow the
  Tribunal in Kwonk in  focusing  on  the  substance  and  purpose  of  the
  relationship on which the right is founded rather  than  on  the  outward
  reflection of it.  There has been some suggestion that  this  view  would
  simply introduce the concept of "primary purpose" into community law.  It
  is argued that for the Secretary of State to succeed  in  establishing  a
  sham  marriage  he  must  show  that  there  is  no  substance   in   the
  relationship.  This is far removed from assessing the purpose and  is  to
  be decided according to the evidence produced of a relationship."

In Kim Fung Yuen and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Professor
Jackson) TH/60615/94 (18283) the Tribunal emphasised "it must be shown  that
the marriage when entered into had no substance".  The  Tribunal  left  open
the possibility of a marriage that began as a sham becoming genuine  by  the
date of  decision.   Although  most  of  the  jurisprudence  of  this  point
emanates from Tribunals chaired by Professor Jackson we  know  of  no  other
decisions that undermine them.

It follows that there is merit in Mr Khubber's submission that the  relevant
test is not cohabitation, or even an intention to cohabit  but  whether,  in
all the  circumstances,  the  marriage  has  substance.   Apart  from  these
decisions it must be right that cohabitation is  a  defining  characteristic
of a marriage.  We all know of stories of serving prisoners marrying.   They
cannot cohabit.  Further it is by no means  fanciful  to  imagine  a  couple
living in  different  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom  pursuing  independent
careers but still enjoying what is to them a  fulfilling  marriage.   We  do
not intend to set out an exhaustive list  of  the  qualities  that  indicate
that a marriage has substance.  Certainly  cohabitation  is  something  that
can be expected.  If there is no cohabitation then  its  absence  should  be
explained but a decision maker must be open to the  possibility  that  there
may be very good reasons other than the  marriage  being  without  substance
for the parties to a marriage choosing not to cohabit.

We cannot accept that a marriage of substance  would  be  without  signs  of
companionship and support.

We do accept that a marriage that started off as  a  marriage  of  substance
but descended to something that was of form only would  not  normally  be  a
marriage of convenience within the meaning of the phrase in the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2000.   It  is  theoretically  possible
that a marriage that would otherwise have been  terminated  by  divorce  was
continued for the sole purpose of conferring a benefit under  European  law.
It may be that  such  a  marriage  would  be  characterised  properly  as  a
marriage of convenience but the facts that could support such  a  conclusion
would be highly unusual.  We  find  that  "Marriage  of  convenience"  is  a
phrase that essentially describes the state of a marriage at its  inception.
 We also find that a marriage that began this way could  become  a  marriage
of substance as the relationship between the parties  developed  but  it  is
inherently unlikely that a marriage would develop in this way because  there
would be no relationship between the parties from  which  anything  intimate
could be expected to grow if the marriage was a marriage of  convenience  at
its inception.

We reject the submission  in  the  Presenting  Officer's  skeleton  argument
before the Adjudicator that a couple who have no intention from  the  outset
of the marriage of living together as man and wife in a settled and  genuine
relationship is necessarily a marriage of convenience.  The absence of  such
an intention is significant evidence but no more.

However it is plain to us from paragraph 22.6 of the determination that  the
Adjudicator did not apply the wrong test.  She noted  that  the  parties  to
the marriage did not live together  immediately  after  their  marriage  and
found that when they married they had no intention  of  living  together  in
the foreseeable future.  However the Adjudicator also noted that  there  was
no evidence beyond the marriage certificate,  wedding  photographs  and  the
evidence of the Appellant and her husband  that  there  was  a  marriage  of
substance.  Not only did they not live  together  but  they  did  not  share
their money in a joint bank account.  Neither was there any evidence of  any
joint purchases or bills or joint activities or  evidence  from  friends  or
family members explaining how they  lived  as  a  couple.   The  Adjudicator
looked beyond cohabitation and, we find,  reached  a  perfectly  sustainable
conclusion that this marriage was at  its  inception  and  at  all  material
times a sham marriage or a marriage of convenience  within  the  meaning  of
the rule.

Although framed as a "human rights" case there is at the core of  this  case
an appeal against an immigration decision made on 23 July 2001.   That  must
be the date  that  the  Adjudicator  had  to  consider.   The  question  the
adjudicator should have asked was "was the marriage entered into  on  8  May
2000 a marriage  of  convenience  within  the  Rules  when  the  Immigration
Officer made his decision on 23 July 2001" For the reasons given above  this
consideration of this question must have involved considering the status  of
the marriage at its inception.  And the Adjudicator had  no  other  date  in
mind.  Obviously when considering the appeal against the decision under  the
immigration rules the adjudicator had to consider the facts at the  date  of
decision.  The adjudicator does not appear to have said in terms  that  this
is what she has done.  However there is no reason  for  her  to  have  found
that this marriage was ever anything other than a marriage  of  convenience.
It follows that the adjudicator's apparent failure to  direct  herself  that
she had to consider the status at the date of decision is  not  material  in
this case.

The only remaining area of concern is  the  Adjudicator's  consideration  of
the  Article  8  claim.   The  Adjudicator  noted  that  the  Appellant  was
concerned for herself and also for her child who was  well  settled  in  the
education system in the United Kingdom and the Adjudicator does  not  appear
to have considered the interference with the private and family life of  the
Appellant and her son consequent on their removal from the  United  Kingdom.
However we see no basis in which she could have concluded that  the  removal
was disproportionate.  The Appellant's own  immigration  status  has  always
been precarious.  There is no basis on  which  the  Adjudicator  could  have
concluded that removing her was disproportionate to the  proper  purpose  of
enforcing immigration control.

The case of the child is a little different.  He had served  his  own  "One-
Stop Notice" in which he complained that he  would  be  separated  from  his
stepfather.  Given the nature of the relationship that  exists  between  the
Appellant and her husband we  do  not  accept  that  there  is  a  protected
private and family life established between  the  Appellant's  son  and  her
husband.  This is a marriage of convenience and the  normal  presumption  in
favour of family life does not apply.  However even if we  are  wrong  there
we see no basis for saying that the removal is disproportionate.  Of  course
we must always pause and reflect on the consequences of removal of  a  young
person who has known no life outside the United Kingdom.  However  he  would
be removed with his mother.  There is no evidence that he  would  be  facing
destitution or other similar hardship.  Many children  grow  up  happily  in
Kenya.  We see no basis on which the Adjudicator could have  concluded  that
removal was disproportionate.

In the circumstances although we are grateful to Mr  Khubber  for  his  very
helpful submissions on the case law relating to marriage we  find  that  the
Adjudicator was not wrong in law.  We dismiss this appeal.





                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
APPROVED FOR ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION

