

                               AN (Tunni Torre) Somalia [2004]   UKIAT 00270



                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                                        Date of Hearing:  15 September  2004
                                            Date Signed:  15 September  2004

                           Date Determination Notified:  24 September   2004




                                   Before:




                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)

                              Mr J Blair-Gould


                               Mr A E Armitage




Between

            Appellant

                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Mr G McIndoe , instructed by  Messrs  Robert  Lizar,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Ms K Amos, Presenting Officer.


  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Somalia, appeals, with permission,  against
     the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr K Heynes, dismissing his appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 30 January 2001 to refuse  to
     grant asylum but to grant exceptional leave to remain in the  UK  until
     19 January 2005. This is therefore an upgrade appeal under  section  69
     (3) of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.  Accordingly  we  are
     concerned only with the issue of asylum. Also, by reason of the date of
     the Respondent's decision, the "error of law" limitation on appeals  to
     the Tribunal under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
     does not apply.

  2. The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. He is a  member  of
     the Tunni clan, who was born and brought up in Mogadishu.   His  father
     was a policeman who was shot by the  Hawiye  militia  as  a  person  in
     uniform working for the government. On  another  occasion,  the  Hawiye
     militia burned the Appellant's house, killed his brothers  and  injured
     his wife.  In 1991 he left Somalia for Kenya with his wife  and  child.
     He remained there until  he  left  Kenya  for  the  United  Kingdom  in
     November 2000.  He did not live in a  refugee  camp  in  Kenya  but  in
     Nairobi.  He suffered harassment and discrimination from time  to  time
     by the Kenyan police because of his illegal status. He  fears  that  on
     return to Somalia he will be killed.

  3. The Adjudicator heard evidence from the Appellant  and  two  witnesses.
     He accepted that the Appellant was in Somalia in 1991 and held that the
     corroborative evidence from the two  supporting  witnesses  did  little
     more than confirm that he was in Somalia at  that  time.  He  concluded
     that the Appellant's failure to seek international protection in  Kenya
     or to regularise his status there over the many years that he lived  in
     Nairobi was not  indicative  of  a  person  in  need  of  international
     protection.  Moreover his father's death was because he was in  uniform
     and perceived as working for the government and not on account  of  his
     clan. This suggested that the Appellant himself  was  not  at  risk  on
     account of his clan.  The Appellant  gave  different  accounts  of  the
     circumstances in which his house was attacked.  One  occasion  he  said
     the house was caught in a crossfire. On another he said that the Hawiye
     deliberately targeted it. The Adjudicator having assessed the  evidence
     with care, concluded that the Appellant's  house  and  members  of  his
     family were casualties of the civil war at that time and had  not  been
     targeted by reason of their clan membership.

  4. The Adjudicator also assessed with care the Appellant's  claim  of  the
     association between the Tunni and other clans. He noted the  submission
     on the Appellant's behalf that they were associated with the Bravanese.
     However on his analysis of the objective evidence he did  not  consider
     that this was as straightforward  as  suggested.   Whilst  they  shared
     largely the same culture, the Bravanese  considered  themselves  to  be
     Benadiri, whilst the Tunni do not. The Tunni belong to the  Digil  clan
     family.  The report on the minority groups in  Somalia  classifies  the
     Tunni with the Digil and does not show them as  a  subdivision  of  the
     Bravanese. The Adjudicator noted that the Appellant claimed  he  was  a
     Tunni Torre, and the evidence indicated that some  Tunni  Torre  had  a
     relationship with the Hawiye clan family.  The  Adjudicator  considered
     further evidence on the subject including the Appellant's own claim  in
     his asylum interview to be a member  of  the  Reer  Hamar.  Taking  the
     evidence as a whole, he concluded that the Appellant was  a  member  of
     the Tunni clan, but was not Bravanese.  He  did  not  consider  in  the
     context of the current objective evidence that a Tunni or a Digil would
     be at any real risk on return to Mogadishu now.   Moreover  there  were
     areas where the Tunni were present  in  significant  numbers,  such  as
     Mekla, where the Appellant had spent some time before leaving for Kenya
     and he could live safely there are also.  Accordingly  the  Adjudicator
     dismissed the asylum appeal.

  5. The grounds of appeal challenge the Adjudicator's rejection of the link
     between the Tunni and the  Bravanese  and  sought  to  produce  further
     evidence.  Permission to appeal was refused on the basis that  the  new
     evidence strengthened rather than weakened the Adjudicator's  findings.
     However an application for statutory view to Collins J  was  successful
     and the appeal was remitted to the Tribunal on the following terms.
           "The Adjudicator's determination in this case seems to  me  more
           thorough in its consideration of  the  link  between  Tunni  and
           Bravanese than Hanaf, although I note the reference in Hanaf  to
           other Adjudicators' decisions (which probably  should  not  have
           been cited). It seems to me in the circumstances that there  are
           reasons other than the chances of success to grant permission to
           make this issue (ie Tunni/Bravanese) and the risk of persecution
           of minorities to be settled by a legal Tribunal.  I am bound  to
           say that this particular Appellant seems to  have  little  merit
           having regard to his lengthy stay in Kenya and a finding  of  no
           prior persecution."

  6. The terms of this referral have been overtaken by events. Several legal
     panels of the  Tribunal  have  very  recently  considered  the  precise
     questions posed by Collins J and  given  country  guidance.   The  most
     recent decision is in MN (Town Tunnis regarded as Bravanese) Somalia CG
     2004 UKIAT 00224, which we agree with  and  adopt.  In  that  case  the
     Tribunal reviewed and brought together the recent jurisprudence and  in
     so doing had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from Dr Luling, which
     it accepted as reflecting a proper academic  analysis  consistent  with
     her role and reputation as an anthropologist. Plainly the  question  of
     clan relationships, descriptions and perceptions  is  complex.  However
     the Tribunal's conclusions can be  summarised  very  briefly  as  this.
     There are in reality three distinct groups using the name Tunni.  There
     are the "town" Tunnis, who live near  to  Brava  and  have  practically
     assimilated  into  the  Bravanese  community  and  are   perceived   as
     Bravanese. There are the "country" Tunnis, who live away from the Brava
     area and should be considered as associated with the Digil clan family.
     Finally there are the "Tunni Torre".  They are described in MN as being
     "a negroid group federated to the Tunni of Brava as  vassals".  However
     their situation  was  not  considered  in  that  determination,  beyond
     distinguishing them from the two Tunni groups.

  7. We have before us a further generic report from  Dr  Luling,  dated  20
     August 2004, about the  "Tunni  Brava".  It  does  not  refer  to  this
     particular appeal, but in one passage gives  some  further  information
     about the Tunni Torre. It states
           "The distinct group known as the Tunni Torre belong to  the  so-
           called "Bantu".  They  are  descended  either  from  slaves  and
           freedmen of the Tunni, or from a group  of  Negro  peasants  who
           became the clients of the Tunni - or very likely from both."
     Thus it appears that the Tunni Torre are not part of  the  Tunni  clan,
     but are a distinct group within the wider Bantu grouping.

  8. The report on minority groups in Somalia reports that
           "Perouse de Montclos note that some of the Tunni  Torre  of  the
           hinterland claim a relationship with the Ajuran,  the  Gaalijaal
           and the  Gurreh  of  the  Hawiye  clan,  while  others  claim  a
           relationship with the Helai and the Hadam of the Rahanweyn  clan
           family. In concrete terms, they are the  vassals  of  the  Tunni
           Digil of the Brava Coast."

  9. The CIPU Report states in relation to the Bantu generally that
           "6.100 According to the JFFMRs of December 2000 and  July  2000,
           conditions for Bantu reportedly vary according to the region  in
           which they live....They are usually able to remain in their home
           areas, to work mainly as labourers for  the  Somali  clans  that
           have taken their traditional land.
           6.101 Bantu try to link themselves to the dominant Somali  clans
           that have dispossessed them of most of their land, as, for their
           own security, they still need their protection.


 10. The Danish Immigration Service report from January 2004 states
           "Somalia features a number of low  status  and  minority  groups
           which are frequently subject to  abuse  and  exploitation.   The
           Somali  Bantu  population  is  now  the  best  known  of   these
           minorities representing about 5% of the total  population.   The
           Bantu are prone to theft of their land, rape, forced labour, and
           a range of discriminatory behaviour.

 11. The above summary reinforces the view expressed by the Tribunal in  MN,
     and in the previous cases referred to in it, that the level of risk  on
     return in every individual case relating to any alleged minority has to
     be assessed on its own  facts,  and  thus  "not  every  town  Tunni  is
     entitled to refugee status, any more than every Bravanese". Indeed  so,
     and this applies also to those who might fall within the broader  Bantu
     grouping such as the Tunni Torre.

 12. The difficulty in assessing this appeal is that the Adjudicator,  being
     unaware of the various  distinctions  described  above,  did  not  make
     sufficient findings of fact. He accepted that the Appellant  was  Tunni
     but not that he was  connected  to  the  Bravanese.   He  recorded  the
     Appellant's claim that he was a "Tunni Torre" but made no finding about
     whether he accepted this. In the light of the matters we have described
     above, it seems that these are contradictory findings.  The  Tunni  are
     distinct from the Tunni Torre. Some Tunni can be  associated  with  the
     Bravanese, whilst others are associated with the Digil. The Tunni Torre
     could be associated with a variety of different clans as well as  being
     part of the wider Bantu grouping.

 13. The Adjudicator also accepted the  credibility  of  the  death  of  the
     Appellant's  father  in  Mogadishu  and  of  the  destruction  of   the
     Appellant's house and the death of various family members, although  he
     did not consider that either was based on clan targeting.  However  the
     objective evidence shows that clan membership  became  an  increasingly
     important factor as the civil war developed due to the growing need  to
     engage group protection. The Appellant and his family left  Somalia  in
     the early stages of the civil war before this  needfully  evolved.  The
     real issue is not whether there has been past persecution  for  a  1951
     Convention reason, but whether the Appellant will on return face a real
     risk of such persecution on account of his clan  membership.   Such  an
     assessment can only proceed on the basis of clear findings of  fact  as
     to exactly which clan and group the Appellant belongs to, the nature of
     the protection arising, and the risk if any that follows.  There  might
     also have to be an assessment of the internal flight option  and  undue
     hardship in the light of the  Appellant  present  circumstances,  which
     have not been explored in the determination.

 14. Collins J in granting the statutory view was  clearly  of  the  opinion
     that this particular Appellant appears to  have  little  merit,  having
     regard to his lengthy stay  in  Kenya  and  the  finding  of  no  prior
     persecution. That may in the event be so, but we do not  consider  that
     this was intended as a binding judgment on us, given  the  new  country
     guidance now available in MN. Nor was the guidance of MN  available  to
     the Adjudicator when he had to consider the very complex and  at  first
     sight conflicting objective evidence before him.  We  consider  that  a
     proper assessment of the risk on return now in the  context  of  asylum
     must start from a firm finding of fact as  to  the  Appellant's  actual
     clan membership and the alliances  and  risks  flowing  therefrom.  The
     determination does not contain such a finding and we are  not  able  to
     cure this error.

 15. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  the
     Adjudicator's determination be set aside and the appeal be remitted for
     hearing afresh by Adjudicator other than Mr Heynes.


                                                             Spencer Batiste
                                                            (Vice President)

                                        Approved for electronic transmission

