
ar
|Heard at Field House       |        |MA (Lebanon - Palestine -   |
|                           |        |Fear - Fatah - Relocation)  |
|                           |        |Palestine [2004] UKIAT 00112|
|On: 7 May 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|........19th May 2004.........                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Miss K Eshun                                                      |
|Mr C P O'Brian                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from the determination of
      Mrs Turquet sitting as an Adjudicator on the 9th September 2003.  The
      claimant is a Palestinian who was living in a refugee camp in Lebanon
      until he left for the United  Kingdom.   He  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom illegally on or about 21 April 2003 . He claimed asylum on 28
      April 2003.  The claimant was  found  by  the  Adjudicator  to  be  a
      credible witness and there is no challenge in the grounds  of  appeal
      to the Adjudicator's  findings of fact.   The claimant said  that  he
      was born on 10 December 1986. That makes him now seventeen-and-a-half
      years old although he would have arrived in the United  Kingdom  when
      he was just sixteen.

2.    He has lived throughout his life in the Ain Al Hilweh refugee camp in
      Lebanon. This is a camp which is  largely  controlled  by  the  Fatah
      group loyal to Yasser Arafat.

3.    In December 2002, round about his sixteenth birthday,  Fatah  members
      came to his parent's house to conscript him, as the eldest son of the
      family. Although he and his family have always wished  to  return  to
      Palestine, neither he nor his family could be described as militants,
      and  he certainly had  no  wish  to  fight  for  Fatah  at  all.   He
      therefore refused.

4.    Three days later they came back, this time armed with guns.   He  was
      driven to their base at Sabra. When they got there they  again  asked
      him to join, but he said he did not want to. He was  then  beaten  up
      and kicked, he was threatened that his family  would  be  killed  and
      also threatened that he would be tortured with a soldering  iron.  It
      is no surprise at all that under this brutal  level  of  coercion  he
      agreed to  join  Fatah.    He  then  began  his  training  with  that
      organisation.

5.    After about a month he was taken to Ain Al Hilweh for five days leave
      and then was brought back for another month  followed  by  a  further
      five days leave. It appears he did three months of service and  then,
      at the end of his third period of service he and a friend,  with  the
      assistance of an agent who had been procured   by  his  father,  left
      Lebanon via Syria and Turkey for  the United  Kingdom   on  12  April
      2003.

6.    His asylum claim was refused by the Home Secretary and he appealed to
      the Adjudicator.  In his appeal he stated that if he were  to  return
      home his life would be in danger because Fatah were known to  execute
      those whom they considered to be traitors and who had fled abroad  to
      avoid military service.

7.    It is a great pity that the Adjudicator was not assisted by the  Home
      Secretary in the conduct of the appeal before her.    No CIPU  Report
      was placed before her, indeed there was  no  representation   by  the
      Home Secretary at all. If there had been it is likely  that  some  of
      the points  that have arisen in this appeal would not have done.

8.       The Adjudicator was referred to two cases of the  Tribunal.    The
      first was Nabil-el-Arid [2002] UKIAT  07474. This  case  concerned  a
      Palestinian who had lived all his life  in  a  refugee  camp  in  the
      Lebanon and joined Fatah in 1997.   The Adjudicator found there was a
      real risk that his desertion from Fatah would  be  discovered  should
      he try and live in a different refugee camp and the  consequences  of
      that could amount to persecution at the hands of Fatah. The Secretary
      of State appealed that finding  but did not take issue  with  any  of
      the findings  on persecution. It appears therefore that  that  matter
      was conceded before the Tribunal but was never investigated.

8.    Another case was cited, that of Nasser Thaer [2002] UKIAT  02725.  In
      that determination, as well as the  then  current  CIPU  Report   for
      April 2002, the Tribunal had before them  a  report  from  Mr   Joffe
      which is briefly cited by the Adjudicator  in  the  case  before  us.
      That report dealt with the difficulties that Palestinians would  have
      in  living  outside  the  camps  in  Lebanon  and  enjoying  Lebanese
      citizenship. That is not an issue that arises in the case  before  us
      today because it is conceded that unless one is  a  Palestinian  with
      financial means or a particular  professional  qualification,  it  is
      difficult to live outside the camps  and  very  difficult  to  obtain
      Lebanese  citizenship,  in  the  former  case  because  one  requires
      sufficient means to live outside the camps and  acquire  property  in
      Lebanon, and in the latter because the Lebanese government   is  very
      reluctant to grant citizenship to Palestinians.   Mr  Joffe  said  in
      that report:

             '[the claimant] could not  seek refuge elsewhere in Lebanon as
             he has no residence rights  outside  the   refugee  camps  and
             would be subject to profound discrimination as a  Palestinian,
             especially in Maronite areas.'

9.    What Mr  Joffe did  not deal with is the issue that  arises  in  this
      case, which is whether a Palestinian can relocate  from  one  refugee
      camp to another, if the refugee camp in which he has  lived  hitherto
      is a place to which it would be unsafe for him to return.

10.   On the material before her, the Adjudicator found that  the  claimant
      would be at risk of persecution within the camps and could  not  seek
      refuge elsewhere in Lebanon. At paragraph 28 of the determination she
      held:

             'As a Palestinian he has no right  of  residence  outside  the
             camp. It would not  be reasonable to expect him to relocate to
             another camp, which in any event may well have  Fatah  members
             within it ...  Having considered  all the evidence   including
             the background material, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
             would face a real risk of persecution on return.'

11.   We have to say that with the benefit of  the  material  that  we  now
      have, which the Adjudicator did not have, we find the cases of  Nabil
      El Arid and Nassar Thaer of no real  assistance  in  determining  the
      point that is raised in the grounds of appeal here.  That  point,  as
      the argument developed before us, was essentially  that  even  if  he
      would be in  difficulties  in  Ain  Al  Hilweh   the  claimant  could
      relocate elsewhere in the camp system in Lebanon.

12.   We have before us the CIPU Report  for April 2004 on  Lebanon.   This
      deals in some detail with the position  of  Palestinian  refugees  in
      Lebanon. We will cite what we take to be the  relevant passages:

            '6.25 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon are free to relocate from
                 one camp to another, although their freedom of movement can
                 be restricted. Also, their ability to move to another  camp
                 depends   upon   whether   they   can   find    appropriate
                 accommodation. In the already  overcrowded  southern  camps
                 ... construction work is prohibited  and  there  is  little
                 habitable space for newcomers. In Beirut, the north and the
                 Beka'a, living space is more plentiful and rents tend to be
                 less. There is also no obligation for Palestinians to  live
                 in any one of the twelve refugee camps; nearly half of  all
                 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon  live  outside  the  camps.
                 Nevertheless, for many it is  too  expensive  for  them  to
                 leave the camps.


            6.27 According to various reports, different refugee camps tend
                 to be "controlled" by different political factions.  Fatah,
                 led  by  Yasser  Arafat,  is  the  main  component  of  the
                 Palestine  Liberation  Organisation    (PLO).    Fatah   is
                 currently believed  to  be  in  overall  "control"  of  the
                 largest refugee camp, Ain Al  Hilweh,  but  various  groups
                 opposed to Fatah also have a present in Ain Al Hilweh, such
                 as Asbat el Ansar.   Fatah is also reported to be active in
                 the camps in the south, around  Tyre.   However,  there  is
                 said to be virtually no support for Arafat in the  northern
                 camps. A professor of political science, who specialises in
                 Palestinian refugee studies, stated in correspondence  with
                 the Canadian Immigration Research  Board  dated  23  August
                 2002, that he considered the practice of forced recruitment
                 in Palestinian refugee camps unlikely to occur.     He said
                 that individuals could simply seek protection from  one  of
                 the other factions or leave the camp if necessary.


            2.30 ....   With the exception of Ain Al Hilweh, the  camps  in
                 the central and northern regions of Lebanon  are  currently
                 "controlled"   by   pro   Syrian/anti   Arafat    political
                 organisations. However, the general  political  climate  in
                 the Middle East has become fluid  since  October  2000  and
                 this could cause residents  of  the  camps  in  Lebanon  to
                 switch their allegiance suddenly.'

13.   Had these passages been placed before the Adjudicator it seems to  us
      that she would have been driven to a conclusion  different  from  the
      one to which she came as to whether the claimant  could  relocate  in
      Lebanon. We take as a starting  point  that  the  material  that  was
      before her, which she accepted, shows that this claimant  is  someone
      who has been  conscripted by Fatah in Ain Al Hilweh  and  might  well
      be sought out by them again if he were to return to  that  camp.   We
      are of the view that although conscription of the sort this  claimant
      described may be rare, as it has happened to him  in  Ain  Al  Hilweh
      once there must be a real risk that it would happen again, or that he
      would be  punished  for  desertion  were  he  to  return  there.   We
      consider, therefore, that there must be a real  risk  of  persecution
      for him in that camp, and that we  must  assess  the  possibility  of
      internal relocation within the Palestinian camp system in Lebanon.

14.   It seems to us that this claimant could relocate.  The camps  in  the
      north are camps where there is only  a  minimal  presence  of  Arafat
      supporters and indeed the camps seem  to  be  under  the  control  of
      people who are antipathetic to Arafat. If he were to relocate to  one
      of those camps we cannot see that there would be any real  risk  that
      he would be persecuted by Fatah or indeed by anyone else.

15.   We further consider that it could not be said to be a cause of  undue
      hardship to him  that he would be required for his own safety to move
      to one of these camps,  because in these  camps  there  are  not  the
      gross conditions of overcrowding that there are in some camps in  the
      south, and rents tend to be lower.  Thus it would  seem  to  us  that
      there is no foundation for an undue hardship argument in this case.

16.   It was submitted to us that because the claimant is a minor, he would
      be subjected  to  undue  hardship.   We  note  that  the  Adjudicator
      accepted  tacitly, if not expressly, that he was the age  he  claimed
      to be.   In those circumstances it is true to say that he is still  a
      minor and will not attain his eighteenth birthday until December 2004
      but he is not, looked at realistically, someone who is so young  that
      it would be  improper for him  to  be  returned,  although  we  would
      expect the Home Secretary to adhere to his usual policy   in  respect
      of unaccompanied minors. The practicalities are that he  is  unlikely
      to be returned in the next few weeks in any event and his  eighteenth
      birthday is soon going to be upon him.   In any event, before he left
      Lebanon he had been in employment, selling vegetables.  His family is
      still in Lebanon and, whether they remain in Ain Al Hilweh or  choose
      to go with him to a northern camp, they will not be far from him  and
      can provide moral support, if not financial support. These,  however,
      are matters of speculation and we prefer to take the  view  that  his
      age is not a factor that leads us to conclude that  he  would  be  at
      risk of being placed in a situation of undue hardship if he  were  to
      relocate to the north, because he is now seventeen and a half and  he
      has been in the working environment already in  Lebanon.

17.   We were urged finally to remit this matter to  the  same  or  another
      Adjudicator so that the issue of internal  flight  could  further  be
      dealt with. We do not consider that that would be at all  appropriate
      in this case. The issue of internal flight was before the Adjudicator
      and the claimant was represented by experienced counsel. There was  a
      full opportunity for all the relevant points to be  canvassed  before
      the Adjudicator and we do not consider that the interests of  justice
      require  that this matter be remitted.

18.   For the reasons which we have given, we  consider  that  this  appeal
      must be allowed.






                          HIS HONOUR JUDGE N AINLEY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
