
ar

AM (Extra statutory recommendations generally undesirable) Angola
[2004] UKIAT 00146


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing : 23 March 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 8 June 2004

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP



                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant     : Ms D. Gibbons, Counsel, instructed by Perera & Co.
For the respondent : Mr G. Phillips, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant  is  a  national  of  Angola.  He  appeals  against  the
      Adjudicator,  Mr  D.  Taylor's  determination  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision giving directions for removal  following  refusal
      to grant asylum.

2.    The issue in this case is a  narrow  one.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      confined to the issue of whether the Adjudicator was right to  dismiss
      the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

3.    The nub of the appellant's  argument was that by the  terms  in  which
      the  Adjudicator  made  an  extra-statutory  recommendation   he   had
      effectively  accepted  that  the  decision  was  disproportionate.  At
      paragraph 49 he had stated:

             'Although I have  been  obliged  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
             appeal on asylum and human rights grounds, it  is  clear  from
             the objective evidence that Angola is a terrible place  to  be
             living and one cannot have anything but  sympathy  for  anyone
             who seeks to leave that country  to  better  themselves.   The
             appellant's wife and child and  the  wife's  sister  have  all
             received exceptional leave to remain until  19  October  2006.
             Although I have no power to direct the Secretary of  State  in
             this matter, having seen the parties give  evidence,  I  would
             recommend that the appellant be given  humanitarian  leave  to
             remain until at least the same date that  his  wife  has  such
             leave to remain. she is about to give birth  to  their  second
             child and it would be entirely  lacking  in  humanity  if  the
             Secretary of State were to enforce  the separation of  husband
             and wife at this time.'

4.    It was submitted that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  relating  to  the
      objective  situation  in  Angola,  his  wife's  current   status   and
      pregnancy, read together with his use of the phrase "entirely  lacking
      in humanity" equated to a breach of Article 8.

5.    We are not persuaded that  the  Adjudicator  made  any  findings  that
      would have justified a conclusion that the decision  was  contrary  to
      Article 8.

6.    In the  first   place  the  Adjudicator  quite  clearly  confined  his
      reasons  cited  earlier  to  the   context   of   an   extra-statutory
      recommendation.

7.    Secondly, he  had  earlier  set  out  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for
      concluding that the  decision was  not  contrary  to  Article  8.   He
      wrote:

             'On the question of Article 8, the  appellant  has  only  just
             established a family  life here with his wife and child.   She
             came to the UK, on her own account, believing that  she  would
             have to make a life for herself  and  her  child  without  her
             husband whom, she said, she had not seen him since June  2001.
             I find that it  would  not  be  disproportionate  in  all  the
             circumstances of this case for  the  respondent  to  interfere
             with such family life as there is in accordance  with  Article
             8(2). In so deciding I  bear in mind the decision of the Court
             of  Appeal  in  Blessing  Edore  [2003]  EWCA  Civ   716   and
             accordingly I must dismiss the Article 8 appeal.'

8.    It is true that the Adjudicator's assessment of  the   nature  of  the
      tie between the appellant and her husband was somewhat  at  odds  with
      his estimation at paragraph 44 that "It is most likely they planned to
      come to the UK and meet together here".  However, it remains  that  he
      was entirely correct to identify that the appellant had only  recently
      established a family life in the  UK.   Furthermore,  the  appellant's
      wife did not have settled status in  the  UK.   Albeit  she  did  have
      exceptional leave to remain  until 19 October 2006, there was  nothing
      to indicate that at  the  time  she  arrived  in  the  UK  she  had  a
      legitimate claim to enter (by virtue, for example, of coming within  a
      policy protecting persons who arrive in the UK fleeing the dangers  of
      civil war).  On the evidence before the Adjudicator, that is  to  say,
      both knew that their immigration status was precarious.

9.    Thirdly, even within the context of an extra-statutory  recommendation
      it was otiose of the Adjudicator to have assumed that the Secretary of
      State would seek to enforce removal of the wife whilst she was in late
      pregnancy.  It was otiose because she  had  limited  leave  to  remain
      until 2006 and hence was not subject to removal anyway.  It  was  also
      otiose because even in respect of a person who is subject  to  removal
      it cannot and must not be assumed that the Secretary  of  State  would
      seek to act contrary to his obligations under the  Human  Rights  Act.
      It is not the policy of the Secretary of State to enforce removals  in
      situations where that would jeopardise health and safety.

10.   As regards the Adjudicator's reliance in  the  context  of  making  an
      extra-statutory recommendation on Angola "being a  terrible  place  to
      live in", it is clear that whatever he meant by this  phrase,  he  did
      not mean to assert that nationals of Angola per se face a real risk of
      serious harm, since he had dismissed the asylum and Article 3 grounds.
       Furthermore, the objective country materials relating to Angola which
      were before the Adjudicator, whilst highlighting serious human  rights
      areas of concern, fell well short of  indicating  that  conditions  in
      Angola were so dire as to place  everyone  living  there  at  risk  of
      serious harm.

11.   In our view, the Adjudicator's remarks about living  in  Angola  being
      "terrible" illustrate a further reason why the Tribunal  has sought to
      discourage Adjudicators from making  extra-statutory  recommendations.
      The  principal  difficulty  the  Tribunal  has  identified   is   that
      Adjudicators are rarely in a  position to  know  all  the  facts  that
      would be relevant to an exercise by the  Secretary  of  State  of  his
      discretion to allow a person to stay: therefore it is wrong to seek to
      bind the Secretary of State to act on  findings  based  on  incomplete
      evidence.  But  another  difficulty  illustrated  here  is  that  such
      recommendations can be seen as  a   vehicle  for  applying  their  own
      subjective  standards  as  to  what  is  or  is  not  a  compassionate
      circumstance.  There is  often  no  clear  set  of    objective  legal
      principles, such as those which govern assessment  under  the  Refugee
      Convention and the Human Rights Act, which an Adjudicator can be  seen
      to be drawing upon.

12.    This  brings  us  to  Ms  Gibbon's  submission  which  dwelt  on  the
      Adjudicator's reference to  enforcement  of  removal  being  "entirely
      lacking in humanity". If that was the effect of removal,  she  argued,
      then it would be  plainly  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights  Act.  The
      difficulty with this submission is that plainly  the  Adjudicator  had
      earlier given specific and  express  consideration  to  the  issue  of
      whether the decision to remove contravened the Human Rights  Act   and
      decided it would  not.  Moreover,  his  expression  of  concern  about
      "humanity" was only made in respect of the threat  as  he  saw  it  of
      removal of the appellant's wife whilst she was in late pregnancy.  For
      reasons already given that was an unfounded source of concern.

13.   Ms Gibbons sought to argue that the Adjudicator's findings on  Article
      8 were flawed for other reasons. However, in our view that  submission
      went beyond the scope of the grounds of appeal  which  relied  on  the
      purport of the extra-statutory  recommendation.   In  any  event,  the
      Secretary of State considered  the  position  of  the  family  in  his
      Reasons for Refusal letter, correctly noting in our view that his wife
      and children all hold Angolan nationality and  have  been  in  the  UK
      only a short while.  Bearing in mind that in respect  of  neither  the
      appellant  nor his wife has it been accepted there is an asylum  basis
      for their claims,  we  do  not  consider  there  exist  insurmountable
      obstacles to the family returning to Angola  to  resume  their  family
      life there.  Even if it were considered  unjustified  to  require  the
      appellant's wife and child  to  accompany  him  back  to  Angola,  the
      appellant would be able to apply from abroad for entry clearance.

14.   Against this Ms Gibbons submitted that  the  appellant  would  not  in
      fact have a viable option of applying for  entry  clearance  since  he
      could not qualify under the Immigration Rules. His wife,  she  pointed
      out, was not settled. Leaving to one side the real  prospect  that  in
      2006 the appellant's wife will in fact be able to obtain  ILR  at  the
      end of her four year period of limited leave, we  do  not  accept  the
      appellant would have no viable basis of application.  Paragraph  2  of
      HC 395 requires an Entry Clearance Officer to ensure that any decision
      he makes is  not  contrary  to  a  person's  human  rights.    If  the
      appellant sought entry clearance on Article 8 grounds,  not  only  was
      this a legally viable basis for an application, but  if  it  met  with
      refusal, that refusal would attract a right of appeal under  s.65   of
      the  Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (now s.84 of the Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002).


15.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT






-----------------------
      5


