
Heard at Field House
On 17 May 2004

 TC (Mixed ethnicity - Rwandan) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2004]
UKIAT OO238

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date Determination notified:

                                                              20 August 2004


                                   Before:

                       Dr H.H. Storey (Vice President)
                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                              Mr A.G. Jeevanjee


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation
For the appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr A. Sheikh, Home Office
                                  Presenting Officer
For the respondent/Claimant: Mr H. Kannangara, Counsel instructed by
                                  Shanthi & Co., Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an Adjudicator,
      Mr  C.  C.  Wright,  promulgated  on  9  December  2003  allowing  the
      Claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
      refuse the Claimant's asylum and human rights claims.

   2. The Claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
      and was born on 6 May 1986.  Although  the  Secretary  of  State  took
      issue with the Claimant upon his age, on the Claimant's  own  case  he
      has now reached adulthood.  Mr Sheikh, who appeared on behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State, accepted that nothing now turns  on  his  disputed
      age.  Although in paragraph 2 of the grounds of  appeal,  it  is  said
      that the Adjudicator failed to make any finding on the Claimant's age,
      this ground was no longer pursued before the Tribunal.  In any  event,
      it was not apparent what bearing it  had  on  the  issues  before  the
      Adjudicator.

   3. The Claimant stated that he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  using  a
      passport that was not his own and  that  had  been  provided  for  his
      benefit.  Accordingly, he  entered  without  leave.   He  applied  for
      asylum on 6 January 2003.  The Secretary of State  refused  his  claim
      and made a decision on 5  March  2003  to  issue  directions  for  his
      removal to the DRC.  This gave rise to a right of appeal under section
      69 (5) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Claimant  appealed
      within time on 21 March 2003.

   4. The nature of the Claimant's case was set out in the application  (the
      SEF) that the Claimant signed  on  17  January  2003.   In  answer  to
      question 1 of the form, found at C4, the Claimant stated:

           "My life was in real danger in my country, not because I was  an
           opponent to the regime, but simply, my mother  is  from  Rwanda.
           All the family collapses now on this arbitrary reason."


   5. From the very outset of the claim, the principal  reason  advanced  by
      the Claimant for his claimed fear of return was  his  mixed  ethnicity
      resulting from his mother coming from Rwanda.  The same point is  made
      in answer to question 5:


           "Yes.  My mother has been  killed.   The  circumstances  of  her
           death is unknown by the family.  I was just  informed  that  she
           had been killed due to her Rwandese citizenship.  My father  who
           is 100% Congolese has received the same treatment."


   6. For the sake of completeness, the same reason is advanced  in  answers
      to questions 7 and 9 and at C2, question 1 and at C4, question 7.  The
      statement, annexed to the application, raises the same ground.


   7. Part of the Claimant's account was that on 14  May  2002  a  group  of
      young people, members of the BYEU, came  to  the  Claimant's  home  in
      order to kill his mother because she was Rwandan.  The BYEU,  although
      not referred to in the objective evidence, is said to form part of the
      RCD.  When approached, the Claimant denied that he  was  Rwandese  but
      refused to assist them.  As a result, he claimed that he was taken  by
      force and later  engaged  in  a  conflict  with  Rwandese  troops  who
      captured him.  He stated that  he  was  detained,  tortured  and  only
      managed to escape in  December  2002  when  he  was  recognised  by  a
      Rwandese army officer who assisted  him  to  escape.   Eventually,  he
      claimed that he was helped by priests with whom he travelled  when  he
      left the country.

   8. The Adjudicator decisively rejected much of  the  Claimant's  account.
      See paragraphs 12 and 13 at the determination.  In paragraphs  17  and
      18 of the determination, however, the Adjudicator stated:


           "17. In the Tribunal's determination  in  Kaninda  [2002]  UKIAT
           5899 there is a reference to an expert report dated  22  October
           2002 from a Dr E.  Kennes.   In  that  appeal,  Counsel  for  Mr
           Kaninda  submitted  that  there  was  clear  evidence  based  on
           ethnicity  that  Tutsis  and  persons  perceived  to  be  Tutsis
           including  ethnically-mixed  Tutsis  fell  into   one   of   the
           categories identified by UNHCR as being  subject  to  harassment
           and persecution on return to the  DRC.   The  Tribunal  accepted
           this proposition, and allowed Mr Kaninda's appeal.


           "18. I have come to the conclusion that, as  the  appellant  has
           satisfied me that he is of mixed ethnicity, there is  a  serious
           possibility of a real risk that on his return to DRC at the date
           of the rehearing of the appeal he will be identified as the  son
           of a Tutsi Rwandese mother and, accordingly, is  within  one  of
           the categories identified by the UNHCR as at risk."


   9. Accordingly, the Adjudicator allowed both the  Claimant's  asylum  and
      human rights appeal.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal begin
      by challenging the Adjudicator's  finding  that  the  Claimant  is  an
      ethnically mixed Tutsi because, it is said, the Adjudicator failed  to
      give adequate reasons.  We do not consider that this challenge is well-
      founded.  It is our view that the Adjudicator was justified in finding
      that the Claimant was of mixed ethnicity.  As we have set  out  above,
      the Claimant's consistent and detailed  account  was  based  upon  his
      mother's ethnicity.  His application, his statement and his  interview
      were each based  upon  this  element.   In  the  Refusal  letter,  the
      Secretary of State set out the claim in paragraph 7:


           "You claim that being of mixed Congolese/Rwandan ethnic  origin,
           you will be at risk of persecution in the area under  government
           control.  It is accepted that people of Tutsi ethnic origin have
           been viewed by the DRC Government as a potential threat and  are
           generally resented and viewed with  suspicion  by  other  tribal
           groups who make up the civilian population of the country."


  10. In paragraph 8 of the Secretary of State's letter reference is made to
      intermarriage  and  to  the  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  the
      population is of mixed ethnic origin.  In our judgment,  it  is  clear
      that the Secretary of  State  was  not  making  any  specific  adverse
      credibility finding upon the Claimant's case to be of mixed ethnicity.
       Although in paragraph 11  of  the  letter,  the  Secretary  of  State
      reaches  a  global  conclusion  that  the  Claimant's  account  was  a
      fabrication, this central element was not expressly touched upon.


  11. As far as we know, the claim put forward  by  the  Claimant  that  his
      mother was a Rwandan national and that he was of mixed  ethnicity  was
      not  challenged  during  the  course  of  the   hearing   before   the
      Adjudicator.  Mr Kannangara, who appeared before  us  and  before  the
      Adjudicator, told us that it was not and there is nothing to  indicate
      he was incorrect on this score.  In these  circumstances,  we  do  not
      consider that  the  assertion  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
      Adjudicator reached his conclusion without sufficient justification or
      reasoning is well-founded.  It was not an issue in the  appeal  before
      him and that is sufficient to justify his conclusion that the Claimant
      was and is of mixed ethnicity.

  12. The central issue, in our judgment, both before  the  Adjudicator  and
      before us, is whether the Claimant is at risk  of  persecution  simply
      because of his  mixed  ethnicity.   The  Adjudicator  found  that  the
      Claimant  had  not  been  persecuted  in  the  DRC  and  there  is  no
      respondent's notice disagreeing with that finding.  In any event,  the
      acts upon which the Claimant based his claim of persecution took place
      in that area of the DRC occupied by rebel forces.   According  to  the
      Claimant, he was held in Kisangani, outside  the  area  of  government
      control.  Since the Claimant will be returned to Kinshasa, there is no
      possibility,  far  less  a  reasonable  likelihood,  of  such   events
      repeating themselves there.

  13. The Adjudicator reached his conclusion on the basis of a consideration
      of the Tribunal's decision in Kaninda  [2002]  UKIAT  5899  (HH  Judge
      Slinger, Chairman) promulgated in  January  2003.   The  Tribunal  had
      before it material from the UNHCR to the effect that Tutsis, including
      ethnically mixed Tutsis, fell into one of the categories identified by
      the UNHCR as being subject to harassment and persecution on return  to
      the DRC.  As is apparent from paragraph 10 of the  determination,  the
      HOPO conceded the strength of the case in favour of the appellant  and
      conceded that the appeal should be allowed.  Accordingly, the risk  of
      return was not fully explored.  The Adjudicator, however, was provided
      with a number of other cases, including that of  Mozupa  [2002]  UKIAT
      08145 (Mr H. J. E. Latter, Chairman)  promulgated  some  months  after
      Kaninda in April 2003.  We  are  not  satisfied  that  this  case  was
      brought to the attention of the Adjudicator.  In paragraph  2  of  his
      determination, the Adjudicator expressly refers to three decisions  of
      the Tribunal but omits reference to Mozupa.

  14. The appellant in Mozupa was a DRC national.  His father was  Congolese
      and  his  mother  was  a  Rwandan  Tutsi.   In  paragraph  10  of  the
      determination, the Tribunal deals with the conflict of evidence as  to
      the risk faced by Tutsis in the DRC. Reference was made  to  the  CIPU
      report for October 2002 and the UNHCR letter of 10 October  2002.   It
      had been reported that persons of Tutsi ethnic origin were known to be
      among the targets of extreme human rights  abuses.   The  problem  was
      described as being equally  applicable  to  ethnically  mixed  Tutsis.
      However, the  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Operational  Guidance  Notes
      (December 2001) recorded that those of  mixed  Congolese/Tutsi  ethnic
      origin were not now likely to risk persecution.   The Tribunal  stated
      in paragraph 11 of the determination:

           "The Adjudicator specifically considered the  issue  of  whether
           the appellant would be at risk due to  his  physical  appearance
           and the loss of his family.  He said that he did not find such a
           claim to be credible.  He had no  reason  to  believe  that  the
           family were not alive  and  living  in  the  DRC.   He  was  not
           satisfied  that  simply  due  to  the  physical  traits  of  the
           appellant he would be anything other than able to  live  without
           being persecuted or ill-treated by the authorities.   There  was
           no evidence before the Adjudicator or indeed before the Tribunal
           to support the contention that the Claimant looks like  a  Tutsi
           or would be regarded as one by reason of his physical appearance
           alone."


      As a result,  the  Tribunal  upheld  the  Adjudicator's  determination
      dismissing the appeal.


  15. In more recent times and since the  Adjudicator  decided  the  appeal,
      [2004] UKIAT 00007 L (DRC) (Dr HH Storey, Chairman) has considered the
      general issue of a risk on return.   In addition, the  risk  faced  by
      the Tutsi community in Kinshasa was specifically considered in  [2004]
      UKIAT 00075 M (DRC) (Dr HH Storey, Chairman).


  16. In [2004] UKIAT 00007 L (DRC) the categories of continuing  risk  were
      set out in paragraph 93 of the determination as  being  firstly  cases
      where a nationality or perceived nationality of a  state  regarded  as
      hostile to the DRC, in particular those who have or  are  presumed  to
      have Rwandan connections or are of Rwandan  origin.   Secondly,  there
      are those who have or are perceived as having an adverse  military  or
      political  profile  or   background.    In   paragraph   95   of   the
      determination,  however,  reference  was  made   to   other   possible
      categories including those from rebel held areas, those of a family of
      mixed ethnicity and those of Tutsi origin or  being  perceived  to  be
      Tutsis.  The Tribunal concluded that the evidence in relation to these
      latter categories was not clear cut and the Tribunal did not find they
      were currently effective risk categories.

  17. In [2004] UKIAT 00075 M (DRC), the Tribunal stated:

      "15.  Firstly, we note that both confirm that  as  a  result  of  1998
           pogroms against Tutsis the authorities in conjunction  with  the
           ICRC took specific steps  to  protect  the  Tutsi  community  in
           Kinshasa. Secondly, even though  the  Belgian  source  does  not
           describe the level of protection  as  complete,  neither  source
           identifies any significant level of  civilian  violence  against
           Tutsis since specific protection steps were taken.


      "16.  Secondly, both sources are dated 2002.  They do  not  deal  with
           the situation since August 2002.  As  already  noted,  the  CIPU
           Report,  which  deals  with  developments  since,  identifies  a
           significant improvement beginning in 2001.


      "17.  Thirdly, we do not quite understand Mr  Khan's  contention  that
           Tutsis fall into a separate risk category  by  virtue  of  being
           confused with Rwandans. It is clear  that  the  authorities  now
           protect Tutsis in Kinshasa.  If there is a  failure  to  make  a
           distinction sometimes between Tutsis and Rwandans, it is made by
           civilian Kinois, not by the authorities. The latter, to  repeat,
           are described as affording protection to Tutsis against civilian
           actions.


      "18.  We also consider that the argument advanced by Mr Khan does  not
           in any event easily fit the particular facts  relating  to  this
           Claimant. On his own account, his mother was a Congolese, not  a
           non-Congolese Tutsi. It appears from the background sources that
           suspicion and hostility against  Tutsis  is  primarily  directed
           against non-Congolese Tutsis.


      "19.  Since returns from the UK to the DRC are to Kinshasa  and  there
           is no evidence to indicate that Tutsis who originate from  other
           areas are prevented from remaining  in  that  city,  it  is  not
           necessary for  us  to  address  the  evidence  relating  to  the
           treatment of Tutsis in other areas, particularly those in rebel-
           held areas, although we note that the CIPU refers to  continuing
           discrimination against them, not to any  significant  levels  of
           violence or other forms of serious harm."

  18. In our judgment, the Tribunal's reasoning  in  [2004]  UKIAT  00075  M
      (DRC) properly addresses the risk faced by  citizens  of  the  DRC  of
      mixed Rwandan/Tutsi ethnicity.


  19. Adopting this approach, we think it is unnecessary to consider whether
      the Claimant will be identified as a Tutsi by reason of  his  physical
      appearance.  We have, nevertheless,  considered  in  some  detail  the
      Claimant's account set out in the SEF.  It omits any reference to  the
      Claimant being recognisable as a Tutsi or  of  mixed  ethnicity.   The
      accompanying statement does not refer to the Claimant being at risk by
      reason of his physical appearance alone. The Record of Proceedings (as
      far as  we  can  tell)  makes  no  reference  to  the  Claimant  being
      physically identifiable as a Tutsi.   It was  argued  before  us  that
      this omission was because the Secretary  of  State  never  raised  the
      issue that the Claimant would not be recognised as a Tutsi.   For  our
      part, we consider the starting-point  must  be  that  it  is  for  the
      Claimant to establish his case and that, if  he  expressly  wished  to
      claim that his physical appearance would alone put him at risk, it was
      necessary to  adduce  evidence  to  that  effect.   It  would  not  be
      sufficient for the Claimant  himself  to  claim  that  his  appearance
      placed him at risk because such a contention should normally be  dealt
      with by expert evidence.  It is conceded that there was no such expert
      evidence.


  20. We were referred to paragraph 6.58 of the Country Report  prepared  by
      CIPU in October 2003.  It is there said that Tutsis are recognised  by
      other Congolese by their great height, their pointed noses  and  their
      oval faces.  The Claimant appeared before  the  Tribunal  and  exactly
      matched that description.  We do not, of course, make any  finding  as
      to the Claimant's ethnicity by reason of that  short  passage  in  the
      Country Report.  Far less do we set ourselves up as experts  and  base
      our conclusion on the Claimant's appearance.  We  are  satisfied  that
      the Claimant himself failed to adduce sufficient evidence  to  satisfy
      the Adjudicator that his appearance  renders  him  recognisable  as  a
      Tutsi.  Irrespective of this, we cannot but note the close resemblance
      the Claimant bears to the description of a Tutsi as described  in  the
      CIPU report.  Even if we are unable, on the state of the evidence,  to
      accept that the Claimant will  be  regarded  as  Tutsi  by  appearance
      alone, we are prepared to consider his case on  the  basis  he  is  of
      Tutsi or mixed Tutsi ethnicity and  would  be  perceived  as  such  on
      return.


  21. Some of the material passages  to be found in the October 2003 Country
      Report are found in paragraphs 6.54 to 6.61:

           6.55   Societal discrimination on  the  basis  of  ethnicity  is
           widely practiced by members of virtually all ethnic  groups  and
           is evident in private hiring and buying patterns and in patterns
           of de facto ethnic segregation in some cities. In large  cities,
           however, intermarriage across ethnic  and  regional  divides  is
           common.
           6.57  Immigration and settlement in  the  eastern  part  of  the
           country by the Banyarwanda people,  who  are  Twas,  Tutsis  and
           Hutus of Rwandan origin, occurred at different periods and for a
           variety of reasons. There is historical  evidence  that  Rwandan
           agricultural colonies were established in the  islands  of  Lake
           Kivu in the 18th century. In addition to this, a group of ethnic
           Tutsis claim to have settled during  the  17th  century  in  the
           hills they named "Mulenge" between Lakes Kivu and Tanganyika  or
           between Bukavu and Uvira in South  Kivu  Province.  Accordingly,
           they called themselves Banyamulenge. Congolese Tutsis are  often
           described as Banyamulenge or "Rwandans" by Congolese from  other
           ethnic groups.
           6.58  Since the start of the conflict between the  rebel  forces
           and the Government  in  1998,  Tutsis  have  been  subjected  to
           serious human rights abuses, both in Kinshasa and elsewhere,  by
           government security forces and by some citizens for perceived or
           potential disloyalty to the  regime.  In  August  and  September
           1998, an undetermined number of people who were not  Tutsis  but
           looked like Tutsis were subjected to indiscriminate human  right
           abuses simply  because  of  their  appearance.  The  Tutsis  are
           recognised by other  Congolese  by  their  great  height,  their
           pointed noses and their oval faces.  Despite  being  subject  to
           human rights abuses by the  security  forces  and  the  civilian
           population since 1998, the Government has allowed  international
           agencies to resettle thousands of  Tutsis  in  other  countries.
           Human  rights  abuses  committed  against  Tutsis  significantly
           decreased during 2002 but human rights  groups  have  complained
           that discrimination against persons perceived  to  be  of  Tutsi
           ethnicity and their supporters continued in that year.

  22. During the course of his submissions, Mr Kinnangara did not  establish
      that  there  were  any  features  of  the   Claimant's   appeal   that
      distinguished his client's case from that  of  [2004]  UKIAT  00075  M
      (DRC). Although he sought to extend his argument  to  claim  that  the
      Claimant was a risk because of his father's military profile,  we  are
      satisfied that this was not open to him.  The Adjudicator made no such
      findings.   Indeed,  he  rejected  most  of  the  Claimant's  account.
      Secondly, the Claimant had made no attempt  to  issue  a  respondent's
      notice within the time required by the Rules or at all.


  23. For these reasons, we consider that the Adjudicator was wrong to place
      reliance upon  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  Kaninda.   Having
      considered Mozupa [2002] UKIAT 08145, [2004] UKIAT 00007 L  (DRC)  and
      [2004] UKIAT 00075 M (DRC), the Tribunal considers that  the  Claimant
      has failed to establish that his return to  Kinshasa  will  result  in
      persecution or a violation of  his  human  rights  by  reason  of  his
      mother's ethnicity as a Rwandan/Tutsi.   Accordingly,  the  appeal  is
      allowed.


Decision:  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.






Andrew Jordan
Vice President
11 August 2004
Approved for electronic distribution
