
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |SH (Immigration - Rule      |
|                           |        |57(ii) (b) - Student )      |
|                           |        |Pakistan[2004] UKIAT 00211  |
|On 2 July 2004             |        |                            |
|Prepared 2 July 2004       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge Huskinson (Vice President)                       |
|Mr C Bennett                                                      |
|Mr G F Sandall                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD                               |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    [                 ] (Sponsor)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, who is the Entry Clearance Office  (ECO)  at  Islamabad
      appeals to the Tribunal, with permission, from the Determination of Mr
      J Graeme Peart, Adjudicator, promulgated on 11 December  2003  whereby
      he  allowed  the  appeal  by  the  Respondent  (hereafter  called  the
      Claimant) against the  ECO's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  to  the
      Claimant leave to enter to the United Kingdom as a student under  Rule
      57 of the Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended.

2.    The Claimant was, obviously, not present before the Tribunal.  Neither
      was  she  professionally  represented.    However,   her   sponsor   [
                         ], (hereinafter "the Sponsor") who appeared on  her
      behalf before the Adjudicator and who is the husband of the Claimant's
      aunt, was present before the Tribunal and made representations on  the
      Claimant's behalf.

3.    The Adjudicator found that the Claimant is clearly a woman of  ability
      and a child psychologist working in Pakistan with an  MSc  in  Applied
      Psychology and post graduate qualifications in her field of expertise.
        The Claimant wishes  to  attend  a  course  at  the  New  School  of
      Psychotherapy and Counselling (NSPC) which is based at Royal  Waterloo
      House, 51-55 Waterloo Road, London  SE1  8TX.   NSPC's  writing  paper
      makes clear that it is section of London City  College  and  its  post
      graduate courses are validated by the University of Sheffield and that
      London  City  College  is  a  division   of   Schiller   International
      University.

4.    It is convenient at this stage set out the requirements which need  to
      be met if leave to enter as a student under Immigration Rule 57 is  to
      be granted:

      "57.  The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to  enter
           the United Kingdom as a student are that he:


            (i)   has been accepted for a course of study at:


                 (a)   a publicly funded institution of  further  or  higher
                       education; or


                 (b)   a  bona  fide  private  education  institution  which
                       maintains  satisfactory  records  of  enrolment   and
                       attendance; or


                 (c)    an  independent  fee  paying  school   outside   the
                       maintained sector; and


           (ii)  is able and intends to follow either:


                 (a)   a recognised full time degree course  at  a  publicly
                      funded institution of further or higher education; or


                 (b)   a weekday full time course involving attendance at  a
                      single  institution  for  a  minimum  of   15   hours
                      organised daytime study per week of a single subject,
                      or directly related subjects; or


                 (c)   a full time course of study  at  an  independent  fee
                      paying school; and


           (iii) if under the age of 16 years is enrolled at an independent
                 fee paying school on a full time course  of  studies  which
                 meets the requirements of the Education Act 1944; and


           (iv)  intends to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  his
                 studies; and


           (v)   does not intend to engage in business or take  employment,
                 except part time  or  vacation  work  undertaken  with  the
                 consent of the Secretary of State for Employment; and


           (vi)  is able to meet the costs of his course and  accommodation
                 and the maintenance of himself and any  dependants  without
                 taking  employment  or  engaging  in  business  or   having
                 recourse to public funds."


5.    The date upon which the Claimant made her application to the  ECO  was
      19 December 2002.    By  reason  of  the  then  current  situation  in
      Pakistan the ECO considered the Claimant's application solely  on  the
      documents submitted.  There was  no  interview.     The  ECO  was  not
      satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the Claimant met  the
      requirements of  Rule  57  and,  in  particular,  concluded  that  the
      Claimant's course was outside the Immigration Rules and also  that  he
      was not satisfied that the  Claimant  intended  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom at the end of her studies.    The ECO's decision  is  dated  6
      January 2003 and the reasons given for refusal were as follows:

      "I am not satisfied that you  are  enrolled  on  a  weekday  full-time
      course involving attendance at a single institution for a  minimum  of
      15  hours  of  organised  day  time  study  per  week  of   a   single
      subject/directly related subjects.

      Your account of your personal, economic and social  circumstances  and
      how you will use these studies does not satisfy me, on the balance  of
      probabilities,  that  you  intend  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  on
      completion of your course."

6.    Accordingly the two provisions in Rule  57  which  the  ECO  concluded
      were not satisfied were those to be found in Rule 57(ii)(b) and  (iv).



7.    As regards the question of whether the Claimant intends to  leave  the
      United Kingdom at the end of her studies, the  Adjudicator  considered
      the additional material which the Claimant had lodged,  including  the
      matters contained in her grounds of appeal, and  heard  evidence  from
      the Sponsor.    The Adjudicator found the Sponsor a  credible  witness
      and he saw no reason to doubt either  his  evidence  or  that  of  the
      Claimant herself.   He accordingly concluded  that  the  Claimant  did
      have the intention to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her
      studies.  The ECO seeks to challenge the Adjudicator's  conclusion  on
      this point in the grounds of appeal - the challenge being based on the
      complaint that  the  Adjudicator  failed  to  provide  any  sufficient
      reasoning for this finding.   In argument before the Tribunal Ms  Hart
      did not concede this point but accepted, quite rightly,  that  it  was
      not a point she felt able to press with further argument  beyond  what
      was already stated in the grounds of appeal.    The  Tribunal  has  no
      hesitation in  rejecting  the  ECO's  attack  upon  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion on this aspect of the case.  The Adjudicator  was  entitled
      to find and did find that the Claimant genuinely wished to come to the
      United Kingdom for the reasons she stated, namely to pursue the course
      which she identified, and that she genuinely  intended  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom at the  end  of  her  studies.    The  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to reach this conclusion after considering the documents  and
      hearing the Sponsor.   He rehearsed the  Claimant's  evidence  and  he
      noted the Sponsor's evidence that the Claimant has become  engaged  to
      be married.  Accordingly the Tribunal considers this case on the basis
      that the Claimant has made an entirely genuine  application  and  does
      intend to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her proposed studies.

8.    The crucial question therefore in the  present  case  is  whether  the
      course  which  the  Claimant  intends  to  follow  falls  within  Rule
      57(ii)(b).   It is therefore necessary to see what was the  nature  of
      the course which NSPC was offering to the Claimant.

9.    NSPC's letter of 5 July 2002 makes clear that the  Claimant  has  been
      accepted for training at the Post-Graduate Certificate in  Existential
      Psychotherapy and  Counselling  starting  in  October  2002.    It  is
      stated:

      "Unfortunately, the Wednesday in-take is full at present, however,  we
      can offer you a place on the waiting list for Wednesday in-take and  a
      definite offer of a place on the Saturday in-take."

      This letter indicates that the course runs from 10 am to  5  pm.     A
      letter from NSPC dated 16  August  2002  makes  clear  what  the  M.A.
      programme requires, namely:

      "6 hours a week of tuition
              6 hours a week (at  least)  of  individual  study  -  includes
      working
                towards writing dissertation
        3 hours a week (at least) of clinical work
        1 hour a week (at least) of supervision for clinical work at the
           placement
        1 hour a week of personal therapy"

10.   As it turned out the  Claimant  was  unable  to  take  up  the  course
      starting in October 2002.    There was before the Adjudicator  further
      documentation from NSPC dated 21 October 2003 making  clear  that  the
      Claimant was  now  offered  a  course  (which  is  a  3  year  course)
      commencing in January 2004 on the Wednesday in-take.   Thus the course
      would run on Wednesdays from 10 am to 5 pm.  One of the letters of  21
      October 2003 repeats the ingredients of the MA programme the terms  of
      which have already been set out above.    The letter then states:

      "Therefore the total number off (sic) hours per  week  that  Ms  Habib
      will be studying is 17, which is equivalent to full-time status".

11.   The Adjudicator in paragraph 22  of  the  Determination  set  out  the
      requirements of the course which total 17 hours study  per  week,  and
      observes that NSPC indicates that  this  is  equivalent  to  full-time
      status.   The Adjudicator then continues in  the  following  terms  in
      paragraphs 24-28 of the Determination:

      "24.  I find that organised daytime  study  of  a  single  subject  or
           directly related subjects  includes  tuition,  individual  study
           working towards a dissertation, clinical  work,  supervision  of
           clinical work and personal therapy.

      25.  I accept that such tuition, study, clinical work, supervision of
           clinical work and personal therapy will be under  the  direction
           of the New School of Psychotherapy and Counselling and  in  that
           sense,  involves  attendance  there  or  under  the  control  or
           direction of the New School  of  Psychotherapy  and  Counselling
           elsewhere, for a minimum of 15 hours organised  day  time  study
           per  week  of  the  directly  related  subjects  comprising  the
           substance of the MA course.


      26.  It might well be that the individual study will, like any  other
           Masters degree, take place wherever it is  appropriate  for  the
           appellant to carry out, for example, research and writing of her
           dissertation.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  term   "involving
           attendance" prevents the appellant  from  studying  in  whatever
           academic  libraries  the  New  School   of   Psychotherapy   and
           Counselling make available to its students by  arrangement  with
           the many research facilities available within academic  life  in
           London.


      27.  In the same way, I accept that clinical  work,  its  supervision
           and personal therapy may  or  may  not  take  place  within  the
           physical structure  of  the  New  School  of  Psychotherapy  and
           Counselling but I do not accept that if it takes  place  outside
           that single institution that 57(ii)(b) is thereby infringed.
      28.  In my view, the essence of 57(ii)(b) is that this Masters degree
           course at post graduate level involves attendance  at  or  under
           the auspices of a single institution, that is, the New School of
           Psychotherapy and Counselling.   Given  that  the  appellant  is
           studying at post graduate level, in my view, it would be  wholly
           inappropriate to expect any institution running  validated  post
           graduate  courses  to  expect  attendance  wholly   within   its
           buildings and in my view, that  is  not  the  intention  or  the
           spirit 57(ii)(b)."


12.    Accordingly  the  Adjudicator  concluded  that   all   the   relevant
      requirements of Rule 57 were satisfied and he allowed the appeal.

13.   Ms Hart  has  relied  upon  and  developed  in  argument  the  matters
      contained in paragraph 2 of the grounds of  appeal.   In  summary  she
      submits:

      1.    The Adjudicator should not have  taken  into  consideration  the
           fact that in  October  2003  (i.e.  9  months  after  the  ECO's
           refusal)  the  Claimant  was  offered  a  Wednesday  course   in
           substitution for the original Saturday course.    She  submitted
           that on the basis that the offer was of a Saturday  course  then
           this could not in any event satisfy Rule  57(ii)(b)  because  it
           was not a weekday course.

      2.    Quite apart from the forgoing, she submitted that  what  was  on
           offer  was  not  a  "full-time  course"  nor  did   it   involve
           attendance at a single institution "for a minimum  of  15  hours
           organised day time study per week".

      3.    She contended that, even assuming in the Claimant's favour  (but
           without actually conceding the point) that the  three  hours  of
           clinical work and the 1 hour of supervision for clinical work at
           the placement and the 1 hour  of  personal  therapy  could  fall
           within Rule 57(ii)(b), the 6 hours a week  of  individual  study
           could not do so.  This 6 hours could not qualify because  the  6
           hours of study was something which the Claimant (and  any  other
           student) could do independently in their own time  and  wherever
           they wished - in other words  the  6  hours  of  study  did  not
           involve attendance at the institution nor was it  organised  day
           time study.


14.   [                   ] in response to these arguments pointed out:

      1.    That the problem regarding the Saturday had been  cured  by  the
           substitution of the Wednesday course.

      2.    That NSPC was clear in its letter of 21 October  2003  that  the
           number of hours studied per week is 17 which  is  equivalent  to
           full time status.    He asked the Tribunal to accept that and to
           accept the argument of the Adjudicator.   He also drew attention
           to a further letter from NSPC dated 18 March  2004  which  draws
           attention to the considerable amount of background reading which
           students are expected to do in preparation for  classes.     The
           letter states:


            "Students are expected to  be  independent  learners  guided  by
           their tutors and the  courses  they  attend.     They  are  also
           required to produce a dissertation of 15,000 words.    This is a
           standard requirement for  any  Masters  degree  from  a  British
           University, and accordingly involves much independent  learning,
           which is why it is stipulated that students should  complete  at
           least a further 6 hours of individual study each week.


            ...We have had a number of overseas students in  the  past  from
           USA,  Israel  and  Russia,  who  have  all  been  successful  in
           obtaining student visas to take this course."


15.   With respect to the learned Adjudicator we are unable  to  agree  with
      his conclusion that the proposed course satisfies Rule 57(ii)(b).   We
      reach this conclusion substantially for the  reasons  advanced  by  Ms
      Hart in argument.   The nature  of  the  course  is  set  out  in  the
      documents from NSPC.   It can be noted (looking for the moment at  the
      proposed Wednesday course) that what the course involves is attendance
      at NSPC on Wednesday from 10 am to 5 pm.    So  far  as  concerns  the
      hours of study, these have been set out above and include  6  hours  a
      week (at least) of individual study.  This individual study clearly is
      not study involving attendance at NSPC nor is it study  which  can  be
      said to be "organised day time study".  Instead it  is  study  in  the
      nature of independent study (which might perhaps be called "homework")
      which the student is expected to do independently and in  his/her  own
      time between attendance on Wednesdays at NSPC's premises between 10 am
      and 5 pm for the 6 hours a week of tuition and, perhaps, some clinical
      work or supervision for clinical work or personal therapy.  We  cannot
      accept that the fact that the independent study, or homework, is  done
      under the control or direction of NSPC means that  it  counts  towards
      the relevant 15 hours irrespective of where or how it is carried  out.
       What rule 57(ii)(b) requires is that the student is following a "full-
      time course" and that this full-time course involves  "attendance"  at
      the relevant institution for a minimum of 15 hours "organised day time
      study" per week.   We cannot see how the  proposed  course,  requiring
      attendance on Wednesdays, can be said to be a full-time course.    Nor
      do we see how the 6 hours of independent  study  can  count  as  being
      hours when the Claimant is attending at NSPC for  organised  day  time
      study.   This 6 hours can be done (and would appear to be expected  to
      be done) away from NSPC premises and during such hours of the  day  or
      night or weekend as the student may choose.

16.   Accordingly, with respect to the learned Adjudicator we  cannot  agree
      with his interpretation of Rule 57(ii)(b).   The  Adjudicator  may  be
      correct in saying that for someone studying at post graduate level  it
      is inappropriate to expect that the student will  carry  out  all  the
      study wholly within the  buildings  of  the  institution.    There  is
      nothing  unreasonable  in  NSPC  expecting  students  to   carry   out
      substantial independent study away from  their  premises.     However,
      this does not constitute study which can count towards  the  15  hours
      required by the Rules.

17.   The foregoing being our conclusion even  assuming  that  the  proposed
      course is to be held on Wednesdays rather than Saturdays,  it  is  not
      necessary for us to reach a conclusion on whether the Claimant must in
      any event fail because  the  originally  proposed  course,  which  was
      considered by the ECO,  was  a  course  which  was  to  be  held  upon
      Saturdays.  However,  if it were necessary for the point to be decided
      the Tribunal would incline towards agreeing with Ms Hart's  submission
      that the fact that the Claimant was able, 9  months  after  the  ECO's
      decision, to obtain admission on a  Wednesday  course  rather  than  a
      Saturday course is not something  that  can  properly  be  taken  into
      account by the Adjudicator or the Tribunal in considering whether  the
      Claimant is entitled  to  succeed  upon  her  appeal  from  the  ECO's
      decision.    If this were the only point the Claimant had lost  on  it
      would, of course, be possible for a fresh application to  be  made  in
      relation to the Wednesday course.

18.   The Tribunal has not overlooked the fact that NSPC has stated that  it
      has a  number  of  overseas  students  who  have  been  successful  in
      obtaining student visas to take the course.   The  Tribunal  does  not
      know the facts of these other cases and  the  Tribunal  can  and  must
      decide the present Claimant's case on the relevant  evidence  relating
      to her case.   There may be other reasons  why  these  other  students
      have been granted a student visa or it may that these other visas were
      wrongly granted.   However, we are in no doubt that the only  decision
      we can properly come to is that, for the reasons mentioned above,  the
      ECO's appeal must be allowed.


19.   For completeness we should add that the case has  been  considered  by
      the ECO and by the Adjudicator solely under sub paragraph (b) of  Rule
      57(ii).  It has not been considered whether the claimant could succeed
      under sub paragraph (a) on the basis that the course is

       "A  recognised  full  time  degree  course  at  a   publicly   funded
      institution or further or higher education".

      There is no evidence before us that NSPC (or London  City  College  or
      Schiller International University is a publicly funded institution  of
      further or higher education.  Even if it were we would be unable  (for
      reasons already stated) to accept that this particular proposed course
      could be a "full time" degree course.

20.   Accordingly, the appeal by the ECO is allowed.



                                        His Honour Judge Huskinson
                                        Vice President



















