
H-MGM-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |SS (sufficiency of          |
|                           |        |protection - Roma -         |
|                           |        |evidence) Romania [2004]    |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00274                 |
|On 3 August 2004           |        |                            |
|Dictated 3 August 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|....29th September 2004....                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr R Chalkley,  Vice President                                    |
|Mrs J Holt                                                        |
|Mr M L James                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Mr I Kumi, of Counsel, instructed by Rahman & Company,  Solicitors  appeared
for the appellant; and Mr L Parker, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer
appeared for the respondent.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Romania.  She was born  on  8  December
    1966 and claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 7  October  2002,
    hidden in the back of a lorry.  She claimed asylum on 9  October  2002.
    She appeals, with leave of the Tribunal, against  the  decision  of  an
    Adjudicator, Mr R J Manuell, who in a determination promulgated  on  24
    October 2003, following a  hearing  at  Surbiton  on  6  October  2003,
    dismissed her appeal against the decision of the Respondent, taken on 9
    December 2002, to direct her removal after refusing asylum.

2.    The Appellant's claim is that she was forced to leave Romania because
    both she and her family had been harassed by the  Romanian  police,  by
    doctors and by their fellow countrymen, because of the Appellant's Roma
    ethnicity.  The police, in particular, had been a  constant  source  of
    problems.  The Appellant had suffered frostbite in 1999/2000  when  she
    had fled to a forest to escape the police.  The family  again  fled  to
    the forest in early 2002, after the  police  raided  their  home.   The
    Appellant complained in writing about the police in mid 2002, but  that
    only resulted in her husband being beaten.  Their home was again raided
    in August or September of 2002, when the  Appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained for 24 hours, during which she was beaten.

3.    The Appellant claimed that  she  had  undergone  some  six  or  seven
    surgical operations which had left her scarred.  Her friends and family
    had paid for most of the  operations.   They  had  to  pay  the  doctor
    secretly,  because  he  had  refused  to  treat  her,  because  of  her
    ethnicity.  The Appellant decided to leave Romania but could  not  take
    the whole of her family with her and  decided  to  leave  some  of  her
    children behind.

4.    Leave was granted in respect of the first  three  paragraphs  of  the
    application  for  permission  to  appeal,  which  suggested  that   the
    Adjudicator had erred in law in requiring corroborative evidence to  be
    produced concerning the events which the Appellant claimed had occurred
    to her in Romania, prior to her departure.

5.    At the hearing before us, Counsel sought our leave to adduce  further
    documentation.  He told us that it was  evidence  which  had  not  been
    before the Adjudicator.  The evidence comprised documents which  showed
    that the Appellant had an appointment to attend hospital in  September.
    We asked why these documents had not been submitted in accordance  with
    directions and disclosed to the Home Office.   He  told  us  that  they
    related to the fourth paragraph of the grounds of application for leave
    to appeal.  We advised him that  he  had  not  been  granted  leave  in
    respect of the fourth paragraph of the application.  He submitted  that
    the evidence of admission to hospital  could  not  be  adduced  earlier
    because it is only dated 18 May 2004 and he sought to  vary  the  leave
    now, by asking us to grant permission now in respect of paragraph 4  of
    the application.

6.    The condition in respect of which the Appellant is due to be admitted
    to hospital is a pre-existing  one.   Counsel  accepted  that  evidence
    could have been produced and indicated to us that he  had  appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant before the Adjudicator and recollected  that  a
    medical report had been placed before the Adjudicator.

7.    We indicated to him that there was no evidence in  the  file  of  any
    medical evidence being adduced at the hearing  before  the  Adjudicator
    and no reference to it in the determination.  There was nothing in  the
    bundle before us, nor in the bundle before the Adjudicator,  indicating
    that medical evidence had been adduced.  We expressed our surprise that
    it should be claimed that medical evidence was produced on the  day  of
    the hearing before the Adjudicator, because we noted that there was  no
    Presenting Officer before the Adjudicator and we did not  believe  that
    this experienced Adjudicator would accept additional evidence at such a
    late stage, when there was no Presenting Officer present.  Counsel  did
    not pursue the argument.

8.    For the Respondent, Mr Parker expressed some surprise that  paragraph
    4 of the grounds of application were being raised at such a late  stage
    and objected to the grounds being varied.  There was no evidence in the
    form of medical report before the Tribunal and if any evidence had been
    obtained then it should have been served.  He submitted that there were
    no special circumstances, as required by Rule 20(ii) of the Immigration
    and Asylum (Appeals) Procedure  Rules,  2003,  which  would  render  it
    unjust to refuse to vary leave.  The Appellant's  representatives  have
    been on notice since January last that leave had not  been  granted  on
    the point in issue.

9.    Counsel submitted that the special circumstances which arise are that
    the Appellant now has an appointment at the hospital.

10.   After conferring, we concluded that we would consider the  documents.
    We were handed a letter of 18 May 2004 addressed to the Appellant  from
    Sister Angela Gilmore at the  Pain  Clinic,  Northwick  Park  Hospital,
    Watford Road, Harrow referring to an admission of the  applicant  under
    the care of a Dr J Harris on Thursday 16 September  2004  at  9am.   It
    advises that the Appellant should fast prior  to  admission.   We  were
    also supplied with  a  letter  dated  4  June  2004  addressed  to  the
    Appellant from the principal occupational therapist  at  Brent  Council
    confirming  that  she  had  been  referred  for  occupational   therapy
    assessment.  The last document we were supplied with was a photocopy of
    an unsigned letter from "GP Direct" dated 22 March  2004  addressed  to
    the Home Office in respect of the Appellant which referred  to  her  as
    having:

         "...Significant problems with her mobility due to arterial disease
         which affects the arteries in her legs for which she  has  already
         had bypass surgery and a small amputation of her toes on the  left
         foot.  She had complications with the grafting at the surgery time
         and as a result of this has been seen at the  local  hospital  and
         been given further treatment including a chemical sympathectomy to
         help reduce her foot pain.  We have taken a lot of time to get  to
         understand the family and try to help  them  with  their  multiple
         health needs."

11.   We noted that there was no evidence as to why the Appellant was being
    admitted to a pain clinic.

12.   We retired again and upon resuming the hearing indicated that we were
    not minded to vary leave.  The claimant's condition was a  pre-existing
    one.  It was not something  that  has  deteriorated  recently  and  the
    Adjudicator makes clear that he was aware of her condition at the  time
    of the hearing.  The ground discloses no error of law.  Even today  the
    only document we have giving any indication of the Appellant's  medical
    condition is a photocopy of an unsigned letter dated 22 March 2004.

13.   Counsel advised us that in the circumstances he  was  not  seeking  a
    variation  of  leave  to  include  paragraph  5  of  the   grounds   of
    application, but he does seek leave to  vary  the  grounds  to  include
    ground 6.  For the sake of clarity this ground is as follows:-

         "6.      There was no material before the Adjudicator  to  justify
             his  finding  'that  because  the  Appellant  had  a   serious
             circulatory problems  and  her  sister  had  died  of  cardiac
             problems, there was a history  of  a  predisposition  to  such
             problems': paragraph 20.  The Adjudicator erred in reaching  a
             medical finding contrary to the principles set out  in  Kheira
             and  Kheira."

14.   The Presenting Officer again expressed some surprise that this  issue
    had not been raised earlier  and  he  submitted  that  the  application
    amounted to little more than an abuse of the appeal system.

15.   Counsel accepted that the application was late.

16.   After retiring we concluded that we would allow  the  grounds  to  be
    varied to include paragraph 6 of the original application, as  set  out
    above.

17.   Counsel  then  addressed  us.   He  submitted  that  there  were  two
    fundamental errors of law identified in the  grounds  and  that,  as  a
    result, that the appeal should be remitted to be  heard  again  by  the
    Adjudicator.  He accepted that the Tribunal could correct  the  errors,
    but he suggested that the matter needs to be reconsidered in the  light
    of up-to-date objective evidence and in the light  of  the  Appellant's
    medical condition.

18.   We enquired of Counsel as to why, if there were errors identified  in
    the grounds, the Tribunal could  not  correct  the  determination.   We
    asked him whether he had any up-to-date  objective  evidence.   Counsel
    handed to us a copy of the Amnesty International Report covering events
    from January to December 2003 in relation to Romania.  We  advised  him
    that we were familiar with the Tribunal's decision in  IM  (sufficiency
    of protection - Roma) Romania CG [2002] UKIAT 04872 and  also  with  FD
    (sufficiency of protection - Roma - Muteanu) Romania  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00001 and assumed that he was familiar with the latter  case  since  he
    was Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant in  that  appeal.   He
    confirmed that he was.  As to the case of FD, he  suggested  that  each
    case needs to be looked at on its own merits.

19.   We pointed out to Counsel that according to  paragraph  5.67  of  the
    Country Information and Policy Unit Report, medical care  was  provided
    free of charge to citizens in Romania.  This Appellant requires medical
    treatment but, submitted correctly, "I cannot assist the court  because
    the letter from the doctor  says  'complicated  medical  problems'  and
    there is no detail as to what it is."

20.   We declined to hear from the Presenting  Officer.   We  reserved  our
    determination.

21.   We have concluded that we must dismiss this appeal.

22.   We find that unfortunately, this very  experienced  Adjudicator,  did
    err in requiring there to be corroborative material.  What he  said  at
    paragraph 22 is as follows:

         "There is no suggestion in the Appellant's evidence that there was
         any reason at all why she could not have gathered  at  least  some
         corroborating evidence concerning the event that she said occurred
         to her in Romania prior to her departure, nor any reason why  such
         materials could not have been  gathered  subsequently.   The  fact
         that the Appellant felt able to leave at least one of her children
         behind is a clear indication that she felt her son would  be  safe
         and also that there are trustworthy persons  in  Romania,  perhaps
         close relatives, with  whom  she  is  in  contact  and  from  whom
         assistance in the  provision  of  corroboration  could  have  been
         sought."

23.   Corroboration of an individual's account of events  is  not  normally
    required in asylum claims, except in those few  cases  there  is  clear
    evidence that it is available without difficulty  and  without  causing
    any risk to the Appellant and no information as to why it has not  been
    provided.

24.   In paragraph 20 the Adjudicator said:-

         "No independent expert medical evidence  was  provided  concerning
         the Appellant's state  of  health,  but  no  expert  knowledge  is
         required to see that  the  Appellant  unfortunately  suffers  from
         serious circulatory problems, which have required repeated surgery
         to her arteries and which are likely to explain the  loss  of  her
         toes.  Such surgery may well have been life saving.  The fact that
         the Appellant's sister died last month at the tragically young age
         of 39 from cardiac arrhythmia and severe coronary artery  atheroma
         (see the  official  death  certificate)  suggests  an  unfortunate
         family predisposition to such problems."

    Again, we find that the Adjudicator did  err.   He  had  before  him  a
    medical certificate showing that the Appellant's sister had died on  11
    September 2003 and that the cause of death was cardiac  arrhythmia  and
    severe coronary artery atheroma.  As it now  subsequently  appears,  he
    was right in believing  that the surgery  explained  the  loss  of  the
    Appellant's toes, since that is now confirmed by  the  unsigned  letter
    from GP Direct dated 22 March 2004.  Unfortunately, he  was  not  in  a
    position to say that the evidence before him  suggests  an  unfortunate
    family predisposition to such problems.


25.   Counsel suggested that even if the Tribunal were to accept  what  the
    Appellant claimed had happened to her it would not be safe for  her  to
    return.  He drew our attention to the Amnesty International Report  for
    the period January to December 2003.  This suggested  that  the  police
    resorted to  firearms  in  circumstances  prohibited  by  international
    standards and that many of the victims were Roma.   It  suggested  also
    that  most  people  saw  no  improvement  in  their  living   standards
    particularly their access to vital  services  such  as  healthcare  and
    social support benefits.  We noted however that the reports both of the
    Constitution revision coming into force  following  the  referendum  in
    October.  The amendments of the Constitution were aimed at  making  the
    legislative process more effective and the judiciary more  independent.
    However the report went on to suggest that the adopted  revisions  "may
    not" be sufficient to guarantee that the legislative  process  is  more
    open to public scrutiny or that the judiciary is  less  susceptible  to
    influence by the Ministry of Justice.

26.   Unhelpfully, the report did not say why such  revisions  may  not  be
    sufficient.

27.   The report spoke of Roma being frequently targeted  for  police  ill-
    treatment, apparently to intimidate all members of  their  marginalised
    communities.  Some Roma were ill-treated by  police  licensed  security
    guards.  There was, however, a positive change to the  Penal  Procedure
    Code which reduces the period the prosecutor can hold a suspect from 30
    to three days.  The report continued:

         "Significant improvements with respect to pre-trial detention also
         came into force or were due to  in  January  2004,  including  the
         right to remain  silent.   These  changes  were  prompted  by  the
         European Court of Human Rights judgment delivered in June."

      We noted  that  the  Amnesty  International  delegation  had  visited
    Romania in November to conduct research in respect of their report.

28.   We also considered the Country Information and Policy Unit April 2004
    Report which gave what we believed to be a less dispassionate and  more
    objective report.  We noted, of course, that it is drawn from a variety
    of published documents (including the Amnesty International Report) and
    that, unlike the Amnesty International Report,  it  is  fully  sourced.
    According to paragraph 6.1, the European Commission Accession Report of
    December 2003 noted that Romania continues to respect human rights  and
    freedoms and has made good progress in a  number  of  important  areas.
    Structures  have  been  established  to  implement  anti-discrimination
    legislation.  The capacity of the ombudsman's office was  strengthened.
    Good progress noted in last year's report in reforming  the  system  of
    child protection has continued and further initiatives have been  taken
    to enhance the rights of national minorities.   The  implementation  of
    the Roma strategy has continued although lack of  resources  has  meant
    that the results have been somewhat limited.  Similarly the process  of
    property restitution has continued,  but  remains  far  from  complete.
    Reforms have been launched to a number of other areas: modernisation of
    the police, improving care for the disabled, reducing social exclusion,
    and improving social dialogue.  Progress was reported to have been made
    in promoting equal opportunities between men and women with  developing
    structures  to  reduce  trafficking  in  human   beings.    Legislation
    extending the  official  use  of  minority  languages  was  implemented
    relatively smoothly.  Freedom House, in its 2004  report  on  political
    rights and civil liberties, assessed Romania as being a  free  country.
    It rated Romania in both areas of political rights and civil  liberties
    as having obtained level two, level one being  the  highest  and  level
    seven being the lowest.

29.   In January 2002 the  2000  government  ordinance  on  preventing  and
    punishing all forms of discrimination came into  force.   According  to
    the European Commission, this law represents a step forward in terms of
    the fight against discrimination in Romania.   Apart  from  noting  the
    contents of paragraph 6.1 to 6.9 of the CIPU Report, we paid particular
    attention to paragraph 6.114 to 6.135 dealing with Roma.  We noted that
    in addition to the 2001 national strategy for improving  the  condition
    of Roma, some fifteen commissions had been established in ministries or
    national agencies for the implementation of the Roma sector strategies.
     We noted that the World Bank considered  that  over  the  past  decade
    significant efforts have been made by the state, political parties  and
    NGOs towards improving the condition of Roma in  Romany  and  we  noted
    that the Roma community's rights were represented by political  parties
    and that there was one representative of the RRMA Party in  parliament.
    He is not the only representative of Roma origin in the Romanian Party;
    many more were elected but not on an "ethnic ticket".

30.   The Adjudicator did not find the appellant to be a credible  witness.
    However, as we have indicated above (see  paragraphs  22  and  24)  the
    Adjudicator did err.  He  should  not,  in  these  circumstances,  have
    called for corroboration.  As we  point  out  (at  paragraph  24),  the
    appellant's explanation for the loss of her toes is contradicted by the
    unsigned medical report now submitted.  We have taken  the  appellant's
    claim at its highest and assumed that everything  she  has  claimed  is
    true.

31.   Our reading of the objective material has led us to conclude that the
    progress of the Romanian government to stamp out discrimination against
    the Roma is continuing.  We do not  believe  that  this  Appellant  has
    demonstrated that there is  a  real  risk  that  she  will  suffer  any
    persecutory harm or treatment which would breach her Article  3  rights
    on her return to Romania.  We are satisfied that the progress  made  by
    the Romanian government and reported in IM [2002] UKIAT 04827 and in FD
    [2004] UKIAT 00001 is continuing and that the state of  Romania  offers
    appropriate and adequate protection against both  state  and  non-state
    actors.

32.   We too  do  not  believe  that  the  treatment  experienced  by  this
    appellant passes the threshold amounting to persecution.  The appellant
    stated that she complained in writing about the police to the  military
    courts in mid-2002, but does  not  say  what  response  she  had.   The
    objective material before us leads us to believe that if the  appellant
    had made a written complaint concerning threats made  by  policemen  to
    rape her daughter (see paragraph 9 of the appellant's  statement  of  5
    September 2003), action would have been taken to  investigate  it.   By
    mid-2002 the Government's "Strategy  for  Improving  the  Condition  of
    Roma" was  published  and  it  had  been  in  1999  that  the  Romanian
    Inspectorate of Police had developed a programme to  improve  relations
    between the Roma and the  police.   The  Ombudsman's  office  had  been
    established in March 1997 and was said to have been  fully  operational
    by 1999.  We believe that there is every reason  to  think  that  if  a
    complaint were made in 2002,  it would have been properly investigated.

31.   For all these reasons we find that we must dismiss this appeal.



                                                                  R CHALKLEY
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
