
ar
                   WC (no risk of double punishment) China [2004] UKIAT00253


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing: 24 February 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                           ......15th September 2004........

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr K Drabu (Vice President)
                        Mr J Perkins (Vice President)







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representatives: Miss N, Atreya of Counsel, instructed by David Gray  &  Co.
Solicitors for the appellant;  Mr A. Underwood, QC for  Treasury  Solicitors
for the respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a national of the  People's  Republic  of  China.  He
      appeals against a decision of Adjudicator, Mr J.R. Aitken,  dismissing
      his appeal  against  the  decision   of  14  February  2003  that  his
      deportation would not be contrary to his human rights.

2.    There has been  delay in Tribunal determination  of  this  appeal.  At
      the end of the first hearing on 24  February  2004  we  permitted  the
      appellant's representatives to take steps  to  obtain  further  expert
      evidence. At the end of a hearing on 5 July 2004, the Chairman of this
      Tribunal granted both parties time to  make  written  submissions.  We
      have now received these and would note that  they  include  a  lengthy
      letter from the appellant  and  letters  from   three  other  persons.
      Whilst we are prepared to accept the appellant's letter insofar as  it
      embodies  submissions,  the  other  three  letters  are  clearly   not
      submissions  and accordingly we have ignored them. Our  direction  was
      for further submissions only.  Having received final submissions   and
      taken note of the fact that neither party has sought to comment on the
       substance of each other's  submissions,  we  now  turn  to  give  our
      decision.

3.    At one point, when it was anticipated there would  be  a  need  for  a
      further hearing date, we raised with the parties whether they would be
      agreeable to the case proceeding with only  two  of  the  three  panel
      members. Both parties agreed  that  in  order  to  prevent  delay  the
      Tribunal could proceed if necessary with two members. However, in  the
      event, we have been able to continue to determine this case as a three
      member panel.

4.     Before  proceeding  further  it  is  important   to   summarise   the
      appellant's  immigration  and  appeals  history.  He  entered  the  UK
      illegally on approximately 12 November 1995 and claimed  asylum  on  1
      December 1995.  His asylum application was refused on  6  August  1996
      and no appeal was brought against  that decision. On 19 March 1997  he
      was  tried  and  convicted  for  kidnapping,  false  imprisonment  and
      blackmail and was sentenced to three terms of six years  imprisonment,
      to run concurrently. On   8 October 1998 his  solicitors  made  a  new
      application for asylum. That was met with refusal on 29  October  1999
      in the form of a decision to make a deportation  order  by  virtue  of
      s.3(5)(a) of the  1971  Act.    An  appeal  was  lodged  against  this
      decision.

5.    This basis of the fresh claim for asylum was  twofold. Firstly,  since
      he would be tried and sentenced in China for the same offences  as  in
      the UK, he would experience double  punishment, and secondly, he could
      face the death penalty on return to China  as a result of the criminal
      offence he had committed whilst in the UK.

6.     The  Secretary  of  State,  in  refusing  the  further  asylum  claim
      maintained that they did not accept the  authorities   would  know  or
      would come to know of the appellant's  criminal  history  in  the  UK;
      that in any event he would receive a fair trial;  that China  did  not
      impose the death  penalty for the  types of crimes he  committed;  and
      that there was no reason to consider that punishment he would  receive
      was disproportionate.

7.    On 16 August 2000 a determination of Adjudicator,  Ms  A  Cheales  was
      promulgated  upholding  the  Secretary  of  State's  certificate   and
      dismissing his appeal against the  decision   to  make  a  deportation
      order.  Although dismissing the appeal she accepted the possibility of
      the appellant's prosecution on return to China.   Since  the  decision
      under appeal was pre-October 2000, human rights matters were not dealt
      with in that appeal. Being certified, no further  appeal  was  brought
      against that that determination.

8.    Whilst not accepting a further application for  asylum  the  Secretary
      of State did decide on 14 February 2003 to  consider  the  appellant's
      allegation that to remove him to China would be contrary to his  human
      rights.

9.    The appellant appealed  against  this  decision  on  the  basis   that
      removal to China would be a breach of his  rights under  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.   In  addition  to  his  fears  concerning
      double jeopardy and disproportionate punishment at the  hands  of  the
      authorities, he claimed that he would be at risk from  snakeheads.  He
      had used their services to get out of China, paying them  �14,000  for
      the trip. His offences in the UK had been committed out of desperation
      to repay  the  snakeheads.  Now  the  snakeheads  would  seek  violent
      retribution for his failure to pay his debt.

10.   In addition to other material, the  Adjudicator  had  before  him  two
      reports from a Professor M. Palmer, a statement from Mr  N.  Becquelin
      dated 11 June 2003, a letter from Mr Li Qain,  a  letter  from  Mr  Li
      Qian's lawyers and a medical report on Mr Qian.

11.   In his oral testimony  the  appellant  outlined  how  he  and  another
      Chinese national he met in the UK (Li Qian) attempted with  one  other
      to extort money in order to  repay  debts  to  the  snakeheads.  After
      arrest and imprisonment Li Qian had returned to China.  There  he  had
      been ill-treated by the police, detained and was to be prosecuted  for
      the offences he committed in the UK.

12.   The Adjudicator did not find the appellant credible in most  respects,
      did not find the Li Qian material reliable and did not  consider  that
      Professor Palmer's evidence  demonstrated  a  real  as  opposed  to  a
      speculative risk that  the  appellant  would  face  re-prosecution  or
      double punishment or  disproportionate  punishment  or  administrative
      detention in a re-education camp as an alternative to prosecution.  He
      held that, apart from politically motivated  incidents of torture, the
       Chinese prison  and detention regime albeit harsh could not  be  said
      to be contrary to Article 3.  He accepted there was a serious risk  of
      prosecution for illegal exit, but considered  this would result in  no
      more than a fine or a few weeks   in  detention  in  default.  If  any
      period in a re-education  camp  were  imposed,  it  was  on  Professor
      Palmer's own evidence a Spartan facility rather than an inhuman one.

13.   As regards risk from non-state actors, the Adjudicator  accepted  that
      the appellant entered into an arrangement with  snakehead gangs to pay
      them for facilitating his illegal departure to the UK. However, he did
      not accept these groups would seek retribution since "it would be very
      bad for business if one failed to get a person a permanent place in  a
      foreign country then attacked him on return".  He did not consider the
      Professor Palmer's evidence to the contrary was sound.

14.   The grounds of appeal were lengthy but essentially  consisted  of  six
      main submissions. Firstly it was submitted that the Adjudicator failed
      to take adequate account of the  Home  Office's  own   China  Extended
      Bulletin 1/200-3 stating that  the  "Chinese government will [not may]
       prosecute any returnee they suspect of  having  committed  a  serious
      offence under the Criminal Code irrespective of  whether  the  offence
      was committed in  PRC or  abroad".    Secondly  it  was  argued  that,
      having  accepted   Professor   Palmer's   "eminent   expertise",   the
      Adjudicator has failed to deal adequately  or at all  with his  expert
      assessment confirming the above.   Furthermore  Professor  Palmer,  in
      contrast to his earlier evidence, had now found one documented case of
      double jeopardy, thereby adding  further  reason  not  to  accept  the
      Adjudicator's assessment. Thirdly, the grounds contended, in assessing
      risk on return the Adjudicator not only  applied  too stringent a test
      (wrongly requiring "convincing evidence" that the  appellant  show  he
      would be "singled out");  he also disregarded the  evidence  that  the
      criminal justice system in  China is highly political  and  secretive.
      Fourthly, the grounds argued that in relation  to  prison  conditions,
      the Adjudicator wrongly failed to evaluate the  evidence  of  Nicholas
      Becquelin, an expert on prison conditions in China whose view was that
      they were extremely poor and corrupt  and that torture  in prison  was
      endemic and was not confined to political cases.   Mr  Becquelin  also
      considered that the  appellant  would   be  re-prosecuted,  would  not
      receive legal representation and after conviction could face the death
      penalty. Fifthly, the grounds argued, the Adjudicator  failed to  take
      proper account of Professor Palmer's evidence that the appellant would
      face up to four years detention in a re-education  camp whether or not
      he was re-prosecuted in  conditions which would  be  "oppressive"  and
      therefore contrary  to Article 3.  Sixthly, it was submitted that  the
      Adjudicator  failed to consider that the penalty for illegal exit  was
      likely, according to Professor  Palmer  and  the  CIPU  Assessment  at
      paragraph 6.9, to result in a year or  more  of  re-education  through
      labour.

15.   Other submissions included that the Adjudicator  overlooked  that  the
      Chinese authorities would perceive the appellant rightly or wrongly as
      having a political opinion against the  PRC, overlooked  that  because
      of his criminal history  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  secure
      employment and wrongly evaluated the Li Qian materials.

16.   At the first hearing we heard evidence from Professor  Michael  Palmer
      who is Professor of Law at the  School of Oriental and African Studies
      (SOAS), London.

17.   Professor  Palmer  explained  how  after  he  gave  written  and  oral
      evidence before the Adjudicator he had written to say he had found  an
      important and relevant case  of double punishment on an official   PRC
      judicial website. In this case a Mr Chen Xiangui had been convicted of
      offences in which he had caused financial losses to a Chinese  company
      in Kuwait and being sentenced by the  court  in Kuwait to  a  term  of
      imprisonment. As his conduct was considered   to have had  an  adverse
      impact on China's reputation abroad, the Jintung Xian (Sichuan)  Basic
      Level Court decided to reconvict him for these offences under  Chinese
      law and for  this man therefore to serve  an  additional  three  years
      imprisonment. Professor Palmer also cited  another  case  in  which  a
      Chinese citizen  named Wu Xun committed  burglary  in  Japan  and  was
      tried and sentenced  to eleven years  imprisonment  in  Shanghai  even
      though under Japanese law the maximum penalty for the offence was only
      seven years.

18.   In oral evidence before the Tribunal Professor  Palmer  accepted  that
      he has misread the internet report on the  Chen Xiangui case and  that
      it was not a case of double jeopardy: it  was  an  Article  7  not  an
      Article 10 case;  both of the trials concerned  took place  in  China.
      He apologised to the court for his mistake  caused  by  the  need  for
      speed in preparing his report. He accepted that the Japan case  of  Wu
      Xun was also not a case of re-prosecution   and additional punishment:
      this man was not tried in Japan. The Professor said it  had  not  been
      his intention to mislead the  court by failing to correct what he  had
      stated previously;  the report was done rather in a hurry.

19.   Despite accepting that the  position  was thus as  he  had  stated  it
      before, that there were no known cases  of  re-prosecution  or  double
      punishment in China for persons who had been convicted  and  sentenced
      abroad, Professor Palmer maintained his view that the appellant  would
      be at risk of re-prosecution  and double punishment. The trial in  the
      UK was the first of this kind: because of the  link  with  snakeheads,
      there  was  a  very  strong  possibility  the  authorities  would  re-
      prosecute. The  1997  Criminal Law had been amended  to  increase  the
      provision for  exercise of extra-territorial jurisdiction.

20.   In addition to the written and oral evidence  we  also  received  from
      the appellant's representatives a report from Professor Fu  Hua  Ling,
      an Associate Professor of Law at the University of Hong Kong.

21.   Professor  Fu cited two cases of  re-prosecution  involving  hijackers
      who had hijacked  Chinese aircraft flying from China to Taiwan.
22.   Professor Fu went on to consider the issue of risk of re-prosecution.

             "Illegal immigration is an embarrassment  to  China,  and  the
             Chinese authorities have been using criminal  law  extensively
             as an instrument of deterrence. Chen was an illegal  immigrant
             and committed a very serious criminal offence in the  UK,  the
             combined effect of  these  factors  make  a  prosecution  more
             likely upon  Chen's return to China.  The  national  authority
             and/or authorities in Fujian  are likely to have been aware of
             Chen's case given his frequent  contact  with  his  family  in
             Fujian.  Since  the  local  authorities  have  already   shown
             interest in Mr Chen's case, the risk of prosecution  in  China
             increases drastically.  Chen is  likely  to  be  detained  and
             prosecuted even  without  any  notification  by  the   Chinese
             Embassy in the UK.

23.   In  relation  to  detention  facilities,  Professor   Fu  referred  to
      prolonged detentions, overcrowding and unsanitary  conditions,  noting
      that according to official reports only 15.1% (369) of  the  detention
      centre in China achieved the country's own minimum standards.

Our Assessment
24.   What we have to decide in this case is whether the  decision   of  the
      Secretary of State was  contrary  to  the  appellant's  human  rights.
      Article 3 is in issue, as are Articles 4, 5 ands 6. However in respect
      of non-Article 3 rights we bear in mind the requirement  confirmed  by
      the judgment of the House of Lords in Ullah  [2004] UKHL  26  17  June
      2004 that only a "flagrant denial"  of these can render  an  expulsion
      decision unlawful.

25.   We should next clarify that although  the  grounds  of  appeal  raised
      tangential  concerns  about  the  Adjudicator's  assessment   of   the
      appellant's credibility and the reliability of the Li Qian  materials,
      these were not advanced with any force and in any event we  are  fully
      satisfied that the Adjudicator was entitled to  find  that  except  in
      limited  respects the appellant had not given a credible account.  The
      Adjudicator at paragraphs 23  and  24  gave  sustainable  reasons  for
      finding, in view of the lack of further  contact  with  the  Li   Qian
      lawyer  and the ease with which false documentation   is  obtained  in
      China, that he could not accept that Li Qian had  been  detained   and
      treated as alleged. We  note  that  the  CIPU  Report  of  April  2003
      confirms  the  ease  with  which  false  documents  can  be  procured,
      especially in  Fujian province: paragraphs 6.A.238 to 6.A.286.  It may
      be that during  the  course  of  Habeas  Corpus  proceedings  Treasury
      Counsel indicated that enquiries were being made about the fate of  Li
      Qian, but the  onus of proof in this appeal is on the appellant.    In
      view of the Adjudicator's adverse credibility  findings  there  is  no
      basis  either  for  accepting  the  appellant's    claims   that   the
      authorities  in China have  visited  his  family  to  investigate  his
      involvement in a UK kidnapping.

26.    Having  said  that  we  do  accept,  (as  it  seems  to  us  did  the
      Adjudicator) that the authorities in China would  know  about  his  UK
      criminal history. Originally this was disputed  by  the  Secretary  of
      State.    However, Mr  Underwood  has  not  sought  to  maintain  that
      position. In our view he was prudent not to do so  since,  if  for  no
      other reason, the fact that the Chinese authorities have  visited  the
      appellant in prison on several occasions since the Home Office entered
      into correspondence with the Chinese   Embassy  regarding  his  travel
      document position in October 1997, was a strong indication that checks
      will have been made with the authorities back in  China  to  ascertain
      his identity so that  in turn the authorities there  would  have  been
      informed of his UK history.

27.   The further written submissions  to  the  Tribunal  from  Miss  Atreya
      urged the Tribunal to apply the principles set  out  in  the   starred
      Tribunal determination in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and so  accept
      (as the  Adjudicator  in  this  case  did  not)  the  finding  of  the
      Adjudicator who dealt with the  earlier  asylum  appeal  (Ms  Cheales)
      that the appellant  "may face prosecution were he to return to   China
      ...".  We see no merit in this submission. For one thing  Ms  Cheale's
      conclusions were equivocal as earlier she had stated that it  was  not
      clear he would receive any punishment at all.  For another  she failed
      to explain on the basis of what evidence she reached  this  conclusion
      and in any event  the issue of re-prosecution  and  double  punishment
      was a  general country issue in respect of which he was presented with
      far more evidence.   Accordingly we consider that the Adjudicator  did
      not err in failing to take the previous Adjudicator's findings on  the
      double punishment issue as his starting-point, in view of  "the  level
      of new material".

28.   Much emphasis has been placed in  the  grounds  on  the  Adjudicator's
      alleged failure  to  take  any  or  adequate  account  of  the  expert
      witnesses. However, so far as Mr Becquelin's  evidence  is  concerned,
      the Adjudicator made several  references  to  it,  see  in  particular
      paragraphs 25, 26, 28, and we wholly  reject the argument that he  did
      not take adequate account of it.

29.   The grounds also argue that having accepted  Professor  Palmer  as  an
      "eminent" expert, it was not open to the Adjudicator to reject certain
      aspects of the Professor's evidence. However,  in  our  judgment  this
      submission misunderstands how the Adjudicator approached the  experts'
      evidence.   In places he drew directly on their  evidence  to  support
      his own conclusions.  He was not, however, prepared  to  accept  their
      opinions  where these were not supported by any independent sources or
      case examples. That in our view was a justifiable approach.    Indeed,
      over questions of fact on which country  experts  themselves  confront
      (in Professor Palmer's words) a  "dearth" of  evidence,  it  would  be
      quite wrong for   an Adjudicator  to avoid reaching  his  or  her  own
      conclusions based on the evidence as a whole. The same applies to  us,
      insofar as we now have to  assess  the   further  expert  evidence  of
      Professor Fu.

30.   One matter which made us less ready  to  accept  the  body  of  expert
      evidence in general, is that there are indications that all three were
      not briefed with total accuracy about the  facts  of  the  appellant's
      case.  Professor  Palmer  in  one  of  his  reports  referred  to  the
      appellant committing his crimes "in the context  of  people  smuggling
      and/or illegal immigration";  but there was no evidence for that.

The issue of risk from snakeheads
31.   Although this issue was raised before  the  Adjudicator   it  has  not
      been raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.  For  the
      avoidance of doubt, however,  we  would  note  that  we  consider  the
      Adjudicator gave sound reasons for concluding that the appellant would
      not face a real risk from snakehead gangs. The money he owed them  was
      for their promise to facilitate his illegal exit and onward journey to
      the UK. The Adjudicator took into account that Professor Palmer's view
      was that snakeheads would seek revenge, but correctly  noted  that  it
      was the view of most commentators that it would be "bad for  business"
      if the gang should seek to harm him for failure to pay when  his  very
      presence in China illustrated their failure to deliver on  their  side
      of the contract. That finding was based directly on  the  Home  Office
      Extended Bulletin of August 2002 at paragraph 6.10.  Additionally  the
      Adjudicator's assessment of risk from snakeheads was entirely in  line
      with Tribunal cases dealing with  this topic:  see  Lui  [2002]  UKIAT
      03683 and  C [2003] 00009.

The issue of risk from the authorities : assuming re-prosecution
32.   Turning to the issue of risk from  the  authorities,  we  consider  it
      will simplify matters if we explain first of all that had we  accepted
      that the appellant would face a real risk of re-prosecution for his UK
      offences, we would have allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

33.   That is not simply because Mr Underwood on behalf  of  the  respondent
      raised no  challenge  to  the  expert  evidence  dealing  with  prison
      conditions. In leading cases the Tribunal has not accepted that prison
      conditions in China generally  reach the high threshold  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3: see e.g. the very recent case of  TC (One Child
      policy - Prison Conditions) China [2004] 00138. Hence  Mr  Underwood's
      concession on its own would not have been  determinative.   Rather  we
      would have  allowed  the  appeal  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the
      appellant  would  face  a   combination   of   three   risks:   double
      jeopardy/double punishment  (i.e. being tried and punished  twice  for
      the same offence); adverse prison conditions and  identification as  a
      public example.   The concept of prohibition of inhuman and  degrading
      treatment or punishment within Article 3 of the European Convention on
      Human Rights is constructed by  reference  to  the  fundamental  human
      rights  it  exists  to  protect.  These  include  Article   6,   which
      guarantees the right to a fair trial and Article 4(1) of the   Seventh
      Protocol to the  ECHR, which prohibits the bringing of  a  prosecution
      for the same offence,  although  Article  4(2)  permits  the  original
      proceedings to be reopened in  certain  circumstances.  On  a  dynamic
      interpretation it can also be seen  to  reflect  emerging    norms  of
      international law among which is that contained in Article  14(7)   of
      the UN International Covenant on  Civil  and  Political  Rights  which
      states:


             "No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again  for  an
             offence for which he has already  been  finally  convicted  or
             acquitted in accordance with the law  and penal  procedure  of
             each country".

34.   The same right is set out in broadly similar terms in the  Charter  of
      Fundamental Rights of the  European Union (2000) Article 50.

35.   However, we cannot agree with  Miss Atreya  that  international  human
      rights law on double jeopardy straightforwardly applies  the   Article
      14(7) requirement to punishment  for  offences  committed  in  another
      state.  Whilst Article 14(7) certainly applies the   ne  bis  in  idem
      principle to offences adjudicated twice in a given state,  it  is  not
      settled that it applies to the jurisdictions of  two  or  more  states
      (the Human Rights Committee did not so  apply  it  in  A,  P  v  Italy
      (204/86), albeit more recently the Rome Statute of  the  International
      Criminal Court prohibits a state from  trying  someone  for  the  same
      crime for which he has been tried by the  International Court and vice
      versa).   However, even if the ne bis in idem principle does  not  yet
      constitute a peremptory norm prohibiting being punished twice  in  two
      different states for the same offence, we do consider that the  extent
      to which it would be  overridden   in  this  case  (if  re-prosecution
      occurred) would make the punishment disproportionate. That is  because
      the evidence as to Chinese law  and   practice  in  relation   to  the
      offence of kidnapping, is that it can carry a sentence of  up  to  ten
      years or more.  Even allowing for full account  being   taken  by  the
      Chinese authorities  for the period the appellant has  already  served
      in the UK in prison, that  leaves a likelihood of around four  further
      years of imprisonment. In our view such a punishment, being additional
      to one already imposed,  would be a disproportionate punishment within
      the meaning of Article 3  of the ECHR.

36.   In reaching this conclusion we  have  treated  as  a  relevant  factor
      that, even if falling short of  serious  harm,  prison  conditions  in
      China are  adverse and would  involve far greater hardship  than  that
      experienced by the appellant in the UK.

37.   We have also  treated  as  a  relevant  factor  that  if  the  Chinese
      authorities were to  have  proceeded  to  the  point  where  they  re-
      prosecuted him,  it  was  reasonably  likely  ,  not  simply   that  a
      conviction would  follow, but that the  Chinese authorities would wish
      to make a public example of the appellant  (albeit he claimed to be  a
      victim) by virtue of the snakehead connection.   In our view that is a
      reasonable  inference from the  evidence  we  have  of  the    Chinese
      "strike hard" approach.  We  have  no  concrete  evidence  as  to  how
      persons who are punished as an example are treated in  prison  but  we
      are also prepared to accept that  the  appellant's  position  (if  re-
      prosecuted and reconvicted) would not necessarily be the same as  that
      of an ordinary prisoner.

  38. Whilst none of these risk  factors  on  their   own  would  have  been
      sufficient in our view to establish treatment and punishment  contrary
      to Article 3, we do think that cumulatively they would.   Plainly  too
      we would have also been persuaded  that  there  had  been  a  flagrant
      denial of the appellant's rights under Articles 4, 5 and 6.


  39. However, absent a real risk of re-prosecution  for  the  UK  offences,
      then in our judgment the only  relevant issues would be the  treatment
      and or punishment he would receive as a person who has  violated  exit
      laws  and possibly as a failed asylum seeker.

The re-prosecution issue
40.   The Adjudicator did not accept that the appellant would  face  a  real
      risk of re-prosecution. As already noted, we do  not  accept  that  in
      reaching this conclusion he failed to take  adequate  account  of  the
      evidence  before him from Mr Becquelin and Professor  Palmer  or  from
      the  CIPU Assessment. In any event, we now have further evidence  from
      Professor Palmer to consider as well as a report from Professor Fu and
      must assess matters for ourselves in this fuller light.

41.   It is plain that Chinese law does allow for the possibility of  double
      punishment. Article 7 of the Chinese Criminal Law applies the criminal
      law to any citizen of the  PRC who commits a prescribed crime  outside
      the territory (and territorial waters) of the   PRC.   It  is  equally
      clear however, that  its  application   is  not  mandated.  Where  the
      offence has been punished  abroad there is  discretion.    Article  10
      states:
             "Any person who commits a  crime  outside  the  territory  and
             territorial  waters and space of  the  People's  Republic   of
             China, for which according to the law he should bear  criminal
             responsibility,  may  still  be  investigated   for   criminal
             responsibly according to this Law,  even  if  she  or  he  has
             already been tried in a foreign country.  However  if  he  has
             already received criminal punishment in the foreign country he
             may  be  exempted   from   punishment   or   given   mitigated
             punishment".

42.   It is not in  dispute  in  this  case  that  under   Chinese  law  the
      offences which the appellant committed in the UK would be regarded  as
      serious.  In China, as already  noted,  the  offences  of  kidnapping,
      false imprisonment and blackmail carry  sentences  of  ten  years   or
      more.

43.   It is true there was  before  the  Adjudicator  a  Home  Office  China
      Extended Bulletin 1/2003 stating that the   "Chinese  government  will
      prosecute any returnee who they suspect of having committed a  serious
      offence under the  Criminal Code irrespective of whether  the  offence
      was committed in PRC  or  abroad"  (emphasis  added).   However,  this
      statement was not sourced and it is not obvious to us that  its  basis
      was anything more than the fact that Chinese criminal law provides for
      double punishment.

44.   It is also true that Professor Palmer, Mr Jacquelin and now  Professor
      Fu all agreed that the double punishment  provision  exists  not  just
      formally but is applied in practice to returnees  who  have  committed
      serious offences abroad.   The fact that each in some  measure  is  an
      expert on Chinese law and practice carries considerable weight.   But,
      like the Adjudicator, we have to bear in mind that   in  order  to  be
      satisfied  that return would cause a breach of Article 3 or a flagrant
      denial of non-Article 3 rights   by  virtue  of  re-prosecution    and
      double punishment, we have to find it reasonably likely that this risk
      is real, not  merely  theoretical  or  fanciful.  In  this  regard  we
      consider that  it is right to examine the evidential basis  for  these
      experts' belief that re-prosecution  would occur in this type of case.

45.   At the date of hearing the position  was this. Both  Professor  Palmer
      and Mr Becquelin as well as UNHCR accepted  that  there  had  been  no
      cases of prosecution where  a person has been prosecuted abroad. Since
      Professor Palmer also accepted that there had been  persons  convicted
      abroad who had  returned, this in our  view  was  a  very  significant
      piece of evidence.

46.   In this connection we would point out that we see nothing  wrong  with
      the Adjudicator make reference to needing a  "convincing  reason"  for
      the appellant not being  "singled out".  Use of the word  "convincing"
      was unfortunate, but it is  clear from the determination  as  a  whole
      that he did not  intend by it to apply a different standard  of  proof
      treatment than that which  he  correctly  set  out  in  paragraph  13.
      Requiring in order to establish persecution proof that the authorities
      would "single out" a person can in other contexts constitute an  error
      of law.    Here, however, the Adjudicator was simply making the  point
      that in light  of  the  singular  absence  of  evidence   of  any  re-
      prosecutions there was no valid reason to think the appellant would be
      treated differently from other returnees  known to have convictions in
      other states.

47.   Now, however, evidence has been adduced to the effect that there  have
      been re-prosecutions. Extending the net to cover  both  points  raised
      before the Adjudicator and since, it appears there are  five  possible
      candidates for case examples.

      (1)   The possible case of three people  who  had  returned  to  China
           after having served sentence in Hong Kong pre-1997  and  it  was
           suspected  they  were  considered  not  to  have  served  enough
           imprisonment and may have been  imprisoned  or  sent  to  a  re-
           education camp.

             This  possible  case  was  considered  by  the  Adjudicator  at
           paragraph 25 where  he  observed  that  in  his  oral  testimony
           Professor Palmer accepted he did not know whether  in  fact  the
           convictions in this case were for other  offences  committed  in
           China.  It was not, therefore, a concrete case.

      (2)   The possible case of Mr Chen Xiangui said  by  Professor  Palmer
           in his July  22,  2003  statement  to  have  been  convicted  of
           offences in which  he  caused  financial  losses  to  a  Chinese
           company in Kuwait, and to have been sentenced by the   court  in
           Kuwait to a term of imprisonment, as his conduct was  considered
           to have had an adverse impact on China's reputation abroad,  the
           Jintong Xiaon (Sichuan) Basic Leave Court deciding to  reconvict
           him for those offences  under Chinese law and for him  to  serve
           an additional three  years  imprisonment.  However,  before  the
           Tribunal  the  Professor  conceded  that  he  was  mistaken   in
           describing this as a re-prosecution case.

      (3)   The possible case of Wu Xun who committed burglary in Japan  and
           was  tried  and  sentenced  to  eleven  years'  imprisonment  in
           Shanghai even though under Japanese law the maximum penalty  for
           the offence was only seven years. This case was  also  cited  in
           Professor Palmer's 2 July 2003 letter. However, his own word  in
           that letters were that : "It seems that  he  was  not  tried  in
           Japan, although this is not altogether  clear  form   (sic)  the
           report".  If he was not as it seemed tried in Japan,  then  this
           was  not a case of re-prosecution or double punishment.  In  his
           evidence before the Tribunal the  Professor confirmed  this  was
           not a case in point.

48.    Professor  Hu  documented  two  further  cases   involving   Mainland
      hijackers who had been repatriated from Taiwan to the Mainland.

      (4)   A Chinese couple, Luo Changua and Wing Yuing hijacked  a  flight
           from  Mainland China to Taiwan in 1993.  They were convicted  of
           hijacking in Taiwan and  sentenced  to  nine  and  seven  years'
           imprisonment respectively. They were repatriated to the Mainland
           in 1999 and upon  their  return  were  sentenced  to  a  further
           fifteen and ten years' imprisonment   respectively  by  a  local
           court on the mainland.

      (5)   Huang Shugeng hijacked a flight to Taiwan also in 1993.  He  was
           convicted and sentenced, in Taiwan, Huang was repatriated to the
            Mainland in 1997.  Upon his repatriation, he was reconvicted of
           hijacking and sentence to twenty years imprisonment.

49.   We do not  consider  upon  proper  analysis  these  latter  two  cases
      exemplify the use of re-prosecution or double  punishment  of  persons
      convicted in  foreign  courts.    Even  though  there  does  exist  an
      extradition agreement between  PRC and Taiwan  under Article  2(2)  of
      the Golden Gate Agreement, and even though for limited purposes Taiwan
      is regarded by the  international  community  as  a  separate  country
      (i.e. by the World Trade Organisation),  the   PRC  most  emphatically
      does not recognise Taiwan  as a separate state and in particular  does
      not recognise the  Taiwanese courts. Accordingly,  we  agree  with  Mr
      Underwood's final written  submission  that  the  hijackings  were  of
      flights of  Chinese aircraft flying from China, and  accordingly  were
      not regarded by  the   Chinese authorities  as  constituting  offences
      taking place outside  Chinese territory as a matter of  law.

50.   In our judgment a close examination of all the cases  cited  does  not
      bear out that the  Chinese authorities do enforce  re-prosecutions and
      double punishment in the context of offences wholly committed  abroad.
      Matters remain very much as they stood when the Adjudicator considered
       this case. Indeed as time has moved on the lack of any example  since
      the revised law was issued in 1997  has  become  even  more  striking.
      There  is  still  no  known  example  of  the  use  by  the    Chinese
      authorities of re-prosecution in respect of offences  committed  in  a
      different state. Accordingly, we consider  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      quite entitled to conclude  that  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate
      there was a real risk to this appellant of  re-prosecution.   Bringing
      matters up to date, that is also our conclusion.

  51. Miss Atreya has highlighted the point emphasised in Professor Palmer's
       evidence that the  Chinese  have heavily limited external  monitoring
      of its legal system and so we  should  not  expect  reporting  of  re-
      prosecutions.  She urged us to draw an inference  that  re-prosecution
      occurred based on what was known, namely that there is no doctrine  of
      precedent in Chinese law.   However, even though there is no  doctrine
      of  precedent,  the  Supreme  People's  Court  has   been   publishing
      decisions in its Gazette since 1985 for their "reference and education
      value": see article cited in the appellant's latest submissions  by  S
      Lubman [1999] Bird in  a  cage:  Legal  Reform  in  China  after  Mao,
      Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press  at  p.  284-285.   Despite
      this, there is no  published  case  of  re-prosecution   for  offences
      committed in  another  state.  Since  the  Chinese  authorities   have
      published some details of several  of  the  cases   analysed  earlier,
      there seems no good reason to assume they would want to  be  secretive
      about re-prosecution cases.

The issue of extrajudicial punishment
52.   Miss  Atreya  contended  that  the  Adjudicator   wrongly  disregarded
      Professor  Palmer's  opinion  that,  even  if  not  subject   to   re-
      prosecution,  the  appellant  would  face  up   to   four   years   of
      administrative  detention  in  a  re-education  through  labour  camp.
      However, given that the Professor was (and still  remains)  unable  to
      adduce evidence of any  returnees  so  treated  in  view  of  offences
      committed abroad, we consider  the  Adjudicator  was  quite  right  to
      discount this as a real risk.

53.   It is not in dispute that administrative  detention  by  way  of  "re-
      education by labour" may be imposed  by  government  officials  extra-
      judicially (see paragraph 5.37 CIPU April 2003);  but, very simply, it
      was not established it would be applied in this case.

The issue of punishment for illegal exit
54.   The grounds of appeal contended that even if it were  concluded  there
      was no real risk of re-prosecution for  offences  committed  in  other
      states, the appellant would still experience serious harm by virtue of
      having left China illegally, contrary to Chinese law. We have  already
      noted that it was now agreed between the parties that upon return  the
      appellant  would be apprehended by the authorities.   It  was  further
      accepted that as a result  the authorities would come to know  he  had
      committed in China the offence of illegal exit. Before the Adjudicator
      it was  submitted  by  reference  to  the  expert  evidence,  that  of
      Professor Palmer in particular, that  in   consequence  the  appellant
      would face up to a year or more  re-education through labour for  non-
      payment of the fine. However, the Adjudicator considered that  in  the
      context of the objective evidence read as a whole, Professor  Palmer's
      analysis of this scenario  was  purely  speculative.  The  Adjudicator
      stated that :

             "The background material  I have seen indicates that this will
             be treated leniently, usually a fine or a few weeks  detention
             in default,  rising  to  year's  imprisonment  for  a   repeat
             offender or organiser.   Non payment of a fine may result in a
             year of re-education through labour. Professor Palmer has seen
             such a camp and whilst he suspected it  was  a  model  of  its
             description was of a Spartan facility rather than  an  inhuman
             one."

55.   In the grounds it is argued that this  conclusion  had  no  evidential
      basis. However it was  based  directly  on  the  Home  Office  Country
      Assessment for April 2003 and  on  Professor  Palmer's  own  evidence.
      Plainly the appellant was not a repeat offender or "organiser".     It
      is argued that the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  assume  the  appellant
      could avoid being a non-payer. However, no  evidence  was  adduced  to
      show that the appellant had  no financial means whatsoever and, in the
      absence of such evidence, we are not  prepared  to   accept  that  the
      appellant has discharged the onus on him to prove he would  fall  into
      the category of a non payer.

56.   In any event, Professor Palmer did not identify any source to  support
      his opinion that detention  in re-education through labour camps for a
      first offender would be more than one year.  Even  if  the  period  in
      question  were a little more than one year, we  do  not  see  that  it
      would be disproportionate, even bearing in  mind  that  conditions  in
      such institutions are adverse. Although Professor Palmer  did  at  one
      point in earlier written evidence describe conditions in labour  camps
      as "very oppressive", he did accept before the Adjudicator  that  they
      were Spartan and less than inhumane and he did not seek  to  challenge
      that assessment  in  his  subsequent  response  to  the  Adjudicator's
      determination.   The Extended Bulletin of August 2002 identified clear
      evidence that no harsh punishment was imposed: see paragraphs 6.1-6.9.
       Although we have accepted earlier that if we had found he would be re-
      prosecuted for his serious offences abroad,  he  could  face   further
      risk by virtue of being rendered a public example, we cannot see  that
      there would be an  equivalent risk in  relation  to  an  everyday  and
      relatively minor offence.

57.   In her grounds Miss Atreya has  suggested  that  merely  as  a  failed
      asylum seeker the appellant would be  at  risk  because  he  would  be
      perceived wrongly  to  have  a  political  opinion  against  the  PRC.
      However, we do not consider that the objective  evidence  demonstrates
      that failed asylum seekers per se face a real risk of serious harm  on
      return to China.  Furthermore,  in the case of this  appellant  it  is
      accepted that, by virtue of Embassy contact with him in  the  UK,  his
      personal history would be known  to  the  authorities.  That  personal
      history contained nothing to indicate he had  political  hostility  to
      the PRC.

58.   Miss Atreya has contended that it   was  reasonably  foreseeable  that
      upon  return  to  China  the  appellant  will  be  unable  to   secure
      employment. In our view this contention is unduly speculative  and  is
      difficult to square with the fact that the  Chinese economy is said to
      be expanding at a fast rate and with  a  huge  and  busy  black-market
      sector.

59.   We have noted that Miss  Atreya's submissions raise criticisms of  the
      fact that the Home Office made contact with the   Chinese  authorities
      whilst his appeal was still pending.  As  far  as  we  can  tell,  the
      appellant did not have a pending asylum appeal when contact was  first
      made in October 1997; and as far as we are aware the Home Office  duty
      of confidentiality only arises  in the context of an appeal under  the
      Refugee Convention. (It was too late when it  was  sought  to  make  a
      fresh asylum claim).  However, even if we are wrong about this,  these
      criticisms  are a matter between the appellant and the Home Office and
      do not bear on the issues we have been tasked with  deciding  in  this
      case.

60.   Our principal conclusions are as follows.  Firstly, although  we  have
      to consider evidence not all of which was before the Adjudicator,   we
      do not consider that the appellant has established that on return   he
      faces a real risk of re-prosecution  or double punishment for offences
      committed in the UK.  Secondly, although we  do  accept  he  would  be
      apprehended by the authorities on return and would face conviction and
      punishment for illegal exit, we do not consider that this would result
      in treatment contrary to Article 3 or a flagrant denial  of any  other
      fundamental human rights.

61.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.





                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      8


