
ar
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 10 September 2004       |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|WM (MDC - Low level member- Credibility) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT    |
|00340                                                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|8 October 2004                                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                              |
|Miss R I Emblin                                                   |
|Mr M E Fraenkel                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the appellant:     Mr M Ahmed of Counsel
                 Instructed by the IAS Birmingham

For the respondent: Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appeals with  leave  against  the  determination  of  an
      Adjudicator, Mrs C E S Andrew, who dismissed  her  appeal  on  Refugee
      Convention and humanitarian grounds against the Secretary  of  State's
      refusal to recognise her as a refugee. Leave  to  appeal  was  granted
      limited to grounds 5,  7  and  8  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which
      suggested that the Adjudicator  erred  in  her  understanding  of  the
      appellant's evidence at paragraphs 30-31  of  the  determination,  and
      that there was no  inconsistency  in  encouraging  people  to  boycott
      rallies in the 2000 elections whilst attending the rallies herself  in
      2002, in particular  one  at  the  Zimbabwe  Ground  at  which  Morgan
      Tsvangarai was speaking. The appellant never attended a  Mugabe  rally
      but only rallies addressed by members of the MDC.

2.    Grounds 7 and 8 deal with the appellant's  citizenship situation.  She
      had joint Zimbabwean  and  South  African  citizenship  and  travelled
      frequently between the two countries.  In November 2000 when she  came
      to the United Kingdom for a visit, she  was  not  intending  to  claim
      asylum, and nor was she when she came  to  the  United  Kingdom  again
      after the elections in March 2002.  She  was  committed  to  political
      change in Zimbabwe and as such had no wish  to  claim  asylum  in  the
      United Kingdom but rather to take part in  MDC  activities  to  effect
      presidential change in Zimbabwe.

3.    In  order  to  continue  taking  part  in  the  political  process  in
      Zimbabwe, the appellant had been obliged to renounce  her  nationality
      of South Africa; she now had no right to reside in  South  Africa.  Mr
      Ahmed contended that in those circumstances, the Adjudicator's comment
      that she  would  not  be  subjected  to  difficulties  as  an  illegal
      immigrant in South Africa was speculative and irrelevant.  By adopting
      the citizenship of Zimbabwe, the appellant did  not  intend  to  align
      herself with the Mugabe regime; her persecutors were the Mugabe regime
      and ZANU-PF, not Zimbabwe as a country.  Those  are  the  points  upon
      which leave to appeal was granted.

4.    At the beginning of the hearing, with the assistance of Mr  Ahmed,  we
      agreed the facts found by the Adjudicator as follows.
    . The appellant's father  was  a  well-known  man  and  the  Adjudicator
      accepted that he had been awarded an OBE for his  services  to  social
      services within Zimbabwe.   He had fallen out with  President  Mugabe.
      Their father had died in 1990.
    . The family had an MDC connection. The appellant herself ran  a  travel
      agency which was for some time located in a building owned by the  MDC
      and she gave them free airline tickets when she could.
    . The appellant was able to obtain a fresh Zimbabwean passport in  2002,
      after surrendering her South African nationality.
    . She came to the United Kingdom  to  await  the  outcome  of  the  2003
      elections.
    . Her mother and daughter remained in Zimbabwe, as her daughter  was  at
      school there, and so did her brother.  On 12 May 2004, the appellant's
      daughter joined her in the United  Kingdom;  her  mother  and  brother
      remained in Zimbabwe.
    . The appellant's sister was married to a South African man and lived in
      South Africa where she was settled, but she was continuing to run  the
      travel agency in Zimbabwe which the sisters had formerly  run  jointly
      although from another building.
    . The appellant was a teacher who was asked to help out  with  the  2000
      elections on a neutral basis, being approached through her  daughter's
      school. She distributed leaflets and was involved in  voter  education
      for the MDC.
    . She allegedly had some difficulty in March 2000  whilst  in  Zimbabwe.
      However, she came to the United Kingdom for a visit in  November  2000
      and returned, and has never been arrested or detained since that date,
      so that the March 2000 problems were not the trigger for her flight.
    . The appellant says she is the most active MDC supporter in the family.

5.    The Adjudicator found that  the  appellant  was  simply  a  low  level
      supporter of the MDC, and that her delay in claiming asylum  (she  did
      not claim until 3 January 2003 after arriving in  the  United  Kingdom
      for the last time in March 2002) was significant in  relation  to  her
      credibility.

6.    The Tribunal asked the appellant's counsel to take us to the  evidence
      of risk on return. He referred us to paragraph   6.1  to  6.3  in  the
      April 2003 Country Assessment which is  the  relevant  assessment  for
      these purposes.

      '6.1 The government human rights record remains  very  poor.  Security
          forces committed several extrajudicial killings and  in  numerous
          other cases  army  and  police  units  participated  or  provided
          transportation  or  other  logistical  supported  to   perpetrate
          political violence and knowingly committed their activities.  The
          Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum an umbrella  group  of  prominent
          domestic human  rights  organisation  reported  that  fifty-eight
          persons were confirmed killed as a result of  political  violence
          during 2002, mostly  perpetrated  by  supporters  of  the  ruling
          party. ZANU-PF supporters committed almost all  of  the  killings
          during the year.  The  majority  of  those  killed  in  political
          violence were MDC activists  or  supporters.  A  number  of  farm
          workers were reportedly killed  in  political  violence,  however
          exact figures are not known. The death of Vice  President  Joshua
          Nkomo in 1999 reopened public debate about  atrocities  committed
          by security forces in Matabeleland in the 1980s.


      6.2 Although the judiciary is generally independent since 2001  it  is
          coming under increasing pressure from the executive. The governed
          often  refuses  to  abide  by  court  decisions  and   frequently
          questions the authority of judges and  threatens  their  removal.
          Press freedom is  restricted  and  journalists  are  intimidated.
          Academic freedom is restricted. The  government  has  exacerbated
          resentment of the white minority.


      6.3 Although the government  permits  local  civic  and  human  rights
          groups  to  operate,  it  monitors  their   activities   closely.
          National human rights groups include the Awami  Trust,  the  AMI,
          the  Catholic  Commission  for  Justice  and  Peace,  the   Legal
          Resources Foundation, Zimbabwe  Lawyers  for  Human  Rights,  the
          Zimbabwe Women Lawyers Association, the  National  Constitutional
          Assembly, the Musasa Project, the Zimbabwean Union of Journalists
          and ZimRights.  The Zimbabwean Human Rights NGO forum  is  taking
          the lead in coordinating reports on human rights  violations  and
          abuses  in  the  period  prior  to   and   following   the   2000
          Parliamentary elections.'

7.    There were no  disappearances  in  the  appellant's  own  family.  The
      appellant also relied on paragraphs 5.63 through to 5.77 in  the  CIPU
      Country Report for April 2004, and on the Home Office  policy  of  not
      returning persons to Zimbabwe against their will.  The  general  human
      rights situation in Zimbabwe was accepted even by the Home  Office  as
      far from satisfactory.

8.    The present CIPU Country Report  at 5.11 to  5.17  (April  2004)  sets
      out the 2004 position of the  Movement  for  Democratic  Change  which
      appears to have fifty MPs and  28  further  candidates,  all  of  whom
      claimed to have experienced human rights abuses within the past  three
      years.  As at November 2000,  the  MDC  had  a  sixteen-member  shadow
      cabinet. Most violations were perpetrated by formal state agents  such
      as the police, CIO and the army. The remaining 50% were attributed  to
      War Veterans, Youth Militias and ZANU-PF  supporters.

9.    The appellant asked us to look at paragraph 29  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination, in which she found the appellant to be a  supporter  or
      member of the MDC at its lowest level, and doubted whether many people
      were aware that she supported it.  The claimant also relied on page 15
      of her bundle, an Amnesty  International  report,  in  particular  the
      headnote for May 2004, indicating that incidents of ill-treatment  and
      torture were reported against supporters of  the  MDC  throughout  the
      year.  Hundreds of people were detained for holding political meetings
      or peaceful political process. Journalists were harassed and  detained
      in a leading private newspaper which shut down.

10.   At pages 16 to 17 of the bundle, Amnesty  International  reports  that
      the police had carried out widespread arrests  of  opposition  members
      and  supporters  following  MDC-led  mass  national  protests;  police
      officers had been implicated in torture,  ill-treatment  and  unlawful
      killings, mostly of MDC  supporters.   Mr  Ahmed  suggested  that  the
      credibility findings were not sustainable and asked  the  Tribunal  to
      allow the appellant's appeal.

11.   For the respondent, Mr Singh relied  upon  the  Adjudicator's  factual
      finding that the appellant was a low level supporter. The  Adjudicator
      had not had the benefit of a Home Office interview  and  had  assessed
      the case, analysing all aspects of the claim including the delay.   It
      was not conceivable  that  the  appellant  would  be  unaware  of  the
      necessary procedures, given that she ran  a  travel  agency,  and  the
      Adjudicator had been fully entitled to reach the conclusions  set  out
      at paragraphs 26-27 and 32-33.  Had the appellant really been in fear,
      she could have used her South African passport to  leave  the  country
      rather than opting to become fully Zimbabwean.    Family  members  did
      not appear to be targeted by reason of  real  or  perceived  political
      opinion.

12.    In  conclusion,   Mr   Singh   suggested   that   the   Adjudicator's
      determination was sustainably reasoned, with clear findings  of  fact;
      the last ill-treatment of the appellant had been related to  the  June
      2000 elections. She had returned willingly  to  Zimbabwe  in  November
      2000 and nothing had happened to her subsequently.

13.   In reply, Mr Ahmed said that he had already covered the  main  points,
      as had the appellant's  representative  before  the  Adjudicator.  The
      appellant had not sought to bolster her claim and had confined  it  to
      her own membership without seeking to exaggerate  the  involvement  of
      other family members.   It  was  not  clear  whether  the  Adjudicator
      accepted her as credible and there was a reasonable  prospect  of  her
      fearing persecution if she were forced to return.  That of  course  is
      not the test. There has to be a real risk or a  reasonable  likelihood
      of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3,  not  a  reasonable
      prospect of her fearing it.

14.   The Tribunal reserved its determination for postal delivery, which  we
      now give.  We have  considered  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  in
      particular the passages which are challenged -

          '29. However, I do not believe the appellant  was  anything  other
              than a supporter/member of the MDC at  its  lowest  level.  I
              also have doubts  there  were  many  people  aware  that  she
              supported the MDC.


          30.  In her statement, when asked with she  did  for  the  MDC  at
              paragraph 5 the appellant refers to distributing leaflets and
              voter education.  She enlarged upon this at paragraphs  7,  9
              and 10. However, when asked about her  activities  in  cross-
              examination the appellant said  "I  was  making  people  feel
              comfortable when they came to vote -  there  was  as  lot  of
              intimidation at the polls".  She went on to confirm that  she
              did not  have  contact  beyond  her  local  ward  other  than
              bankrolling the party.  When  asked  what  this  entailed  it
              transpired the appellant and her sister's travel agency  gave
              away complementary tickets to the MDC. Further, when asked if
              Mr Murowa had a number of helpers the appellant answered that
              she was not sure.  She went on to confirm  that  her  contact
              with the MDC was through him. The appellant then went  on  to
              say that at the 2000 elections she tried to  boycott  rallies
              Mugabe had arranged and so also tied to tell  people  not  to
              go, and that this was in neighbouring constituencies as well.
              She said she attended rallies herself and  mentioned  one  at
              Zimbabwe Grounds.


          31. This is not what the appellant said in her statement. She says
              at paragraph 9 that it was before the 2002 elections that she
              was  trying  to  arrange   rallies   against   Mugabe.   This
              inconsistency leads me to doubt the appellant's credibility.


          32. However, what persuades me the appellant was not known  as  an
              MDC supporter is the evidence she adduced of being  appointed
              as a polling agent for the Presidential elections through her
              daughter's school. When I asked her about this  she  told  me
              the schools were asked to look  for  polling  agents  by  the
              government. The appellant was well known at the school and as
              she said "I was meant to be netural".  I do not  believe  the
              appellant would have been appointed as a polling agent by the
              government, or that her name would have been put  forward  by
              her daughter's school, had she been suspected of being an MDC
              supporter. Further, the appellant's evidence was that she was
              well known at her daughter's school, yet she was perceived as
              being netural.


          33.  Further, I found the appellant's evidence as to what she  did
              as a polling agent to be implausible. She  told  me  she  was
              doing it for MDC members, making them feel  comfortable  when
              they came to vote. When I asked her how she  knew  they  were
              MDC members the appellant told me it was because in the urban
              areas the majority of people were MDC.  This  may  well  have
              been the case but did not  assist  with  the  recognition  of
              them.


          34.  I further found it implausible that despite  the  appellant's
              claim of being detained on one occasion in January  2000  and
              then three more time on the run up to the June 2000 elections
              during which  the  appellant  was  ill-treated,  and  on  two
              occasions, once in January and once in June,  being  made  to
              perform a sexual act, she comes  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
              November 2000, stays for two weeks  does  not  claim  asylum.
              These are the only occasions on which the  appellant  adduces
              evidence of  ill-treatment  of  her  personally  and  despite
              having  the  opportunity  to  seek  international  protection
              shortly afterwards she failed to do so. I find this gives  me
              further doubts about the appellant's credibility.


          35.  Further, the appellant gave evidence to the effect  that  she
              was coming backwards and forwards from South Africa. She  had
              dual citizenship until she renounced this to take  Zimbabwean
              citizenship in 2002. I see no reason why, if she felt she was
              persecuted in Zimbabwe she could not go to South  Africa  and
              live there, as her evidence to me was, her  sister  is  doing
              for much of the time. She was a citizen of South  Africa  and
              in such circumstances I believe she would not be subjected to
              difficulties in that country, as an illegal immigrant there.


          36.  Further, it is not the account of a person who is  persecuted
              to give up their citizenship  of  another  country,  to  take
              formal citizenship of the country  which  they  very  shortly
              thereafter allege is the persecutor. This also makes me doubt
              the veracity of the appellant's claim.


          38.  I believe the appellant was a very  low  level  supporter  of
              MDC. I do not believe she was known  or  perceived  as  such.
              Other than this I do not believe anything the  appellant  has
              told me which material to her asylum claim is. I did not find
              her to be a credible witness.'

  15. The Adjudicator's credibility finding is quite clear. The  only  thing
      that she believed  was  that  the  appellant  was  a  very  low  level
      supporter of the MDC.  The last time the appellant  had  any  personal
      difficulties with the Zimbabwean authorities was in  relation  to  the
      June 2000 elections, and that she was not in so much fear that she did
      not wish to return in November 2000.  The appellant's own evidence  is
      that she was appointed as a  polling  agent  for  the  2003  elections
      through her daughter's school as a neutral person; if she  were  well-
      known as an MDC supporter or member, she would not be selected through
      her daughter's school as neutral in connection with  those  elections.
      That supports the Adjudicator's  findings  that  the  appellant's  MDC
      leanings were unknown to the authorities, and even to  her  daughter's
      school.

  16. The Adjudicator's reasons for finding that the  appellant  was  a  low
      level member are more than  sustained  by  the  evidence  before  her.
      Further, were the appellant in fear, it is not credible that she would
      opt to give up a South African passport (on which presumably she could
      travel, even though she could not reside in South Africa) and restrict
      her  options  by  settling  for  only  a  Zimbabwean  passport.    The
      Adjudicator's finding on that point is sound and sustainable.

  17. We also consider that,  having  regard  to  the  appellant's  previous
      journeys to the United Kingdom, and her business as  a  travel  agent,
      the Adjudicator was entitled to place  weight  on  the  lengthy  delay
      between her last arrival in the United Kingdom in March 2002  and  her
      claiming asylum in January 2003.

  18. In order to oust the Adjudicator's findings  of  fact,  the  appellant
      must satisfy us that they are so perverse or  Wednesbury  unreasonable
      as to amount to an error of  law.   This  Adjudicator's  findings  are
      neither  perverse  nor  unreasonable,  but  soundly   based   in   the
      appellant's own evidence.  For all of the above  reasons  we  consider
      that  the  Adjudicator's   conclusions   are   sustainable   and   the
      determination sound.

  19. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.




                              J.A.J.C. GLEESON
                               VICE PRESIDENT
