
Heard at Field House
On      23 June 2004
Written  12 July 2004              FZ ( Article  8)  Serbia  and  Montenegro
[2004] UKIAT 00204


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL





                                             Date Determination Notified


                                             22 July 2004


                                   Before

                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)
                              Mr J G Macdonald
                                Ms V S Street




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and





                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Ms K Evans , Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr B Walker-Nolan, instructed by Messrs G Singh.



                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


  1. The Respondent is a citizen of  Serbia  and  Montenegro  (Kosovo).  The
     Appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator, Mr M Rothwell, allowing the  Respondent's  appeal  against
     the decision of the Appellant on 26 February 2002 to  refuse  leave  to
     enter or remain on human rights grounds.

  2. The Adjudicator rejected the Article 3 appeal but  allowed  the  appeal
     under Article 8 only on the basis that to return the Respondent and his
     family to Kosovo would be disproportionate under  Article  8(2)  having
     regard to their private and family life.

  3. Permission to appeal was granted to argue that as the  Adjudicator  had
     found that the family would  be  able  to  continue  their  family  and
     private life in Kosovo as a family unit, removal would not involve  any
     interference with it and would  not  be  in  breach  of  Article  8(1).
     Moreover as the Adjudicator had held that there would be no  breach  of
     Article 3 on return, it followed that  any  interference  with  private
     life would not reach the necessary level of severity required to engage
     Article 8, as per the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Ullah.  Since
     the grant of permission, the House of Lords has considered  appeals  in
     Ullah and Doh [2004] UKHL 26 and Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and  delivered
     its judgments in both on 17 June 2004. Also the Tribunal in M (Croatia)
     [2004] UKIAT 00024*  has  considered  the  scope  of  the  role  of  an
     Adjudicator and  the  Tribunal  when  assessing  proportionality  under
     Article 8(2). We shall say more about these cases later but  they  have
     to  be  taken  into  account  by  us  in  our  assessment,   and   both
     Representatives addressed them before us, even though  the  Adjudicator
     could  not  have  been  aware  of  them  at  the  time  he  wrote   his
     determination.

  4. As indicated we are concerned with Article 8 only.  There has  been  no
     cross-appeal by the Respondent in respect of the rejection of the other
     aspects of his claim. In his assessment of Article 8,  the  Adjudicator
     correctly directed himself to the step-by-step approach recommended  by
     the Tribunal in Nhundu & Chiwera 01/TH/00613 and to the guidance of the
     Court of Appeal in Mahmood  [2001]  Imm  AR  229  (CA).   His  relevant
     findings of fact are contained in paragraph 4.6 as follows.
           "I have referred in some detail to the  [Respondent's]  evidence
           about his family.  He has supported his  evidence  by  documents
           that establish a status of these family  members,  two  of  whom
           came to this country with the  [Respondent]  and  his  wife.   I
           accept that the [Respondent] has been in this country since June
           1998 - that is now over five years ago.  I accept  that  he  was
           married before he came and that since he  arrived,  he  and  his
           wife have had two sons, one of whom is  attending  school.   The
           evidence is that he [that son] is developing in  a  conventional
           way,  enjoys  playing  and  speaks  English,  as  I  would  have
           expected.  He and his brother have known no  other  country  and
           they have a close  relationship  with  their  uncles  and  other
           relatives as well as with English friends that the  family  have
           made.  Of course neither the  [Respondent]  nor  his  wife  work
           because they are not entitled to do so, although  I  accept  the
           [Respondent's] evidence that those relatives who now have status
           in this country do work and make a contribution to this country.
            I also accept his evidence that they provide emotional  support
           to him and that his cousin,  Bekim,  in  particular  is  like  a
           brother to him.  I find there is no evidence of the  whereabouts
           of his mother and two brothers whom he left behind in Kosovo.  I
           find there is evidence of his wife's  sisters  and  parents  are
           living in Kosovo, although in accommodation that  is  inadequate
           for them, let alone for anyone else. I accept the [Respondent's]
           evidence that his home was burnt down in Kosovo as well  as  his
           shop.  Thus he has no property or any existing economic  support
           for his return."

  5. In earlier paragraphs of the determination  the  Adjudicator  described
     the extended family of the Respondent.  A cousin, one who travelled  to
     the UK with the Respondent and his wife, was granted asylum in  October
     2001 and has recently obtained British citizenship.  They have  a  very
     close relationship "like brothers" and live  only  five  minutes  drive
     from each other. He  helps  the  Respondent  with  his  boys  and  with
     psychological support in the light of their experiences in Kosovo.  The
     Respondent's wife has an uncle and two brothers with status in the  UK.
     The brothers live just across the road from  the  Respondent  and  have
     recently applied for citizenship.  The Respondent had two brothers  and
     sister who he said had disappeared in Kosovo, but the  Adjudicator  who
     had heard and dismissed his asylum appeal had held this to  be  a  lie.
     The Respondent's wife's two sisters and parents lived in a village  not
     far from Pristina.

  6. On these established facts (which  have  not  been  challenged  in  the
     grounds of  appeal  or  by  Ms  Evans),  the  Adjudicator  reached  the
     following conclusions in paragraph 4.7.
           "It is not claimed that the [Appellant's] decision  is  unlawful,
           or not in accordance with his immigration control powers. So  the
           real question as usual is whether the breach of  his  family  and
           private life would be proportionate.  The [Appellant] says it  is
           because the [Respondent] and his immediate family would  be  able
           to return together to Kosovo."


  7.  Pausing  for  a  moment,  it  emerges  from  this  that  although  the
     Adjudicator directed himself initially to the guidance of the  Tribunal
     in Nhundu & Chiwera, he did not in practice follow  the  step  by  step
     approach he had earlier described.  Specifically  the  Adjudicator  did
     not consider under Article 8(1) whether the removal of the family as  a
     whole constituted interference with their private and family life,  but
     went directly to the question of proportionality.

  8. This is the first challenge to the determination set out in the grounds
     of appeal and upon which Ms Evans expanded before us. She  argued  that
     as the Respondent's nuclear family would  be  returned  together  as  a
     unit, removal could not constitute interference with their family life.
     Mr  Walker-Nolan  on  the  other  hand  argued  that  the  Respondent's
     relationship with his wider family was held by the  Adjudicator  to  be
     special and the removal of the Respondent and his nuclear family  could
     constitute interference with it. He accepted  however  that  the  links
     with the wider family were emotional and to a degree financial, but not
     that  there  was  any  real  evidence  of   dependency,   despite   the
     psychological support described.

  9. With regard to the extent to which wider family members  can  be  taken
     into account when assessing  family  life  under  Article  8  (1),  the
     Tribunal has already established in a number of cases clear  parameters
     to be applied. Thus in S (Afghanistan) [2003] UKIAT 00132 the  Tribunal
     held that  blood  ties  with  a  wider  family  do  not  in  themselves
     constitute family life. In Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698 it held that  links
     between adults siblings will not engage the  protection  of  Article  8
     without evidence of dependency involving  more  than  normal  emotional
     ties. The Adjudicator had no regard  to  this  body  of  jurisprudence.
     There is nothing in the Adjudicator's findings of fact to  suggest  any
     material dependency by  the  Respondent  upon  his  wider  family.  The
     reference  to  psychological  support  comes  nowhere  near  this.  Any
     financial support can continue  after  removal  if  the  parties  wish.
     Accordingly, we conclude, applying the above authorities with which  we
     concur, that removal of the Respondent, his wife and their two children
     together could not constitute  interference  with  their  family  life,
     notwithstanding their separation from  those  members  of  their  wider
     family who are in the UK. The  question  of  proportionality  therefore
     never  arises  in  relation  to  family  life.   In  this  respect  the
     Adjudicator was wrong.

 10. However there is the further question of private life. The  Adjudicator
     in paragraph 4.8 held that "the family would be able to continue  their
     family and private life in Kosovo as a family unit." Paragraph 2 of the
     grounds of appeal argues therefore that  removal  will  not  result  in
     interference with their private life either, and again  proportionality
     does not arise.  The flaw in this argument  however  is  that  "private
     life" has been interpreted in the Strasbourg and UK jurisprudence in  a
     broad way. In Pretty v UK (2002) 35 EHRR1, it was held that it included
     the "a physical and psychological integrity of a person"  and  also  "a
     right to personal development, and the right to establish  and  develop
     relationships with other human beings and the outside world."

 11.  Ms  Evans  conceded  on  the  basis  of  her  interpretation  of   the
     jurisprudence that the Respondent has established private life  in  the
     UK and that removal would interfere with it and  that  accordingly  the
     Adjudicator was right to go on to consider the issue of proportionality
     in relation to interference with the right to private life.  We  should
     say that we have some doubts about whether that  interpretation  is  in
     general terms correct. Not all relatives constitute "family life,"  and
     not all incidents of life constitute "private  life,"  but  that  is  a
     question for another case.

 12. The grounds of appeal then argue that the Adjudicator was in  error  in
     concluding that return would not  be  proportionate  on  the  facts  as
     established. Reliance was placed in the grounds of appeal on the  Court
     of Appeal decision in Ullah, to the effect that  the  situation  facing
     the Respondent and his family in Kosovo was not sufficiently severe  to
     be in breach of Article 3, and could not therefore be  disproportionate
     another Article 8.

 13. However, as both Representatives acknowledged,  this  judgment  of  the
     Court of Appeal has been superseded by the judgments of  the  House  of
     Lords in Ullah [2004] UKHL 26 and in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  It  is  in
     Razgar that the House of Lords considered the specific question  as  to
     whether
          "rights protected by Article 8 can be engaged by the  foreseeable
          consequences for health or welfare of removal from United Kingdom
          pursuant to an immigration decision where such removal  does  not
          violate Article 3".

 14. In the leading judgment, Lord Bingham concluded that  in  principle  it
     could, provided the facts relied upon were sufficiently strong.  He put
     it in this way:
           "9. This judgment establishes, in my opinion quite clearly, that
           reliance may in principle be  placed  on  Article  8  to  resist
           expulsion decisions, even where the main emphasis is not on  the
           severance of family and social  ties  which  the  Applicant  has
           enjoyed in the expelling country but on the consequences for his
           mental  health  of  removal  to  the  receiving  country.    The
           threshold of successful reliance is high, but if the  facts  are
           strong enough Article 8 may in  principle  be  invoked.   It  is
           plain that "private life" is a broad  term  and  the  Court  has
           wisely eschewed any attempt to  define  it  comprehensively.....
           Elusive though the concept  is,  I  think  one  must  understand
           "private life" in Article 8  as  extending  to  those  features,
           which are integral to a person's identity or ability to function
           socially as a person.
           10. I would answer the question of principle  above  by  holding
           that the rights protected by Article 8 can  be  engaged  by  the
           foreseeable consequences  for  health  of  removal  from  United
           Kingdom pursuant to an  immigration  decision  even  where  such
           removal does not violate Article 3, if the facts relied upon  by
           the Appellant are sufficiently strong.  In so answering  I  made
           no reference to "welfare", a matter to  which  no  argument  was
           directed.  It would seem plain that, as with  medical  treatment
           so with welfare, an Applicant could  never  hope  to  resist  an
           expulsion decision without  showing  something  very  much  more
           extreme  than  relative  disadvantage  as  compared   with   the
           expelling state."

 15.  Accordingly,  the  Adjudicator  was  not  constrained   in   assessing
     proportionality under Article 8 merely by the fact that he had rejected
     the Respondent's Article 3 appeal.

 16. However, since the Adjudicator reached his  decision,  there  has  been
     further guidance on the scope of the Adjudicator's and  the  Tribunal's
     role in assessing proportionality. It has not been  overturned  in  any
     superior  court  and  is  therefore  still  binding  authority  on  the
     Tribunal. It is the case of M (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT 00024*. It  states
     as follows:
       18. The starting point should be that if  in  the  circumstances  the
           removal could reasonably be regarded as proportionate, whether or
           not the Secretary of State has actually said so  or  applied  his
           mind to the issue, it is lawful.  The Tribunal  and  Adjudicators
           should  regard  Shala,  Edore  and  Djali  as   providing   clear
           exemplification  of  the   limits   of   what   is   lawful   and
           proportionate.  They should normally  hold  that  a  decision  to
           remove is unlawful only when the disproportion is so  great  that
           no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could   remove   in   those
           circumstances.  However, where the Secretary of State, eg through
           a consistent decision-making  pattern  or  through  decisions  in
           relation to members of the same family, has clearly  shown  where
           within the range of reasonable responses his own assessment would
           lie, it would  be  inappropriate  to  assess  proportionality  by
           reference to a wider range of possible responses than he in  fact
           uses.  It would otherwise have to be a  truly  exceptional  case,
           identified and reasoned, which would justify the conclusion  that
           the removal decision was unlawful by reference to  an  assessment
           that removal was within the range of  reasonable  assessments  of
           proportionality.  We cannot think  of  one  at  present;   it  is
           simply that we cannot rule it out.  This decision is starred  for
           what we say about proportionality."


 17. The Adjudicator in this appeal, when assessing proportionality  clearly
     put himself into the role of the primary decision  maker,  which  is  a
     function reserved to the Secretary of State, who in this appeal is  the
     Appellant.  The Appellant's decision was contained in a letter dated 26
     February 2002, which accompanied the notice of the decision  to  refuse
     leave to enter under Articles 3 and 8 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.
     The Appellant concluded  that  removal  would  be  proportionate.   The
     proper task for the Adjudicator should have been therefore to  consider
     whether the disproportion was so great on the facts as established that
     no reasonable Secretary of State could have reached that decision.  The
     Adjudicator cannot be blamed for this error, because  M  (Croatia)  was
     decided after the promulgation of his determination.  Nevertheless,  as
     both Representatives agreed, his conclusion as  to  proportionality  is
     thereby flawed and must be set aside.

 18. However as there is no dispute  over  the  facts,  we  can  cure  these
     defects by assessing proportionality for ourselves in accordance with M
     (Croatia), which is a starred decision that is binding upon us and upon
     Adjudicators. Both Representatives indicated that that  was  what  they
     wished us to do. Nevertheless, as requested by the Representatives,  we
     note for the record before describing our conclusions, Ms  Evans'  oral
     undertaking before us that irrespective of he outcome  of  this  appeal
     the Appellant will consider the Respondent under  his  current  backlog
     clearance exercise.

 19. We conclude, for  the  reasons  described  below  and  taking  all  the
     relevant evidence into account, that there is no exceptional  or  other
     factor, taken singly or cumulatively arising in this appeal that  would
     take the Appellant's decision outside the realms of reasonableness open
     to him, having regard to the need to balance all the factors in  favour
     of the Respondent against his policy of maintaining a  firm,  fair  and
     consistent immigration system.

 20. The length of time the Respondent has now been here is significant  but
     does not entitle him to remain under any published policy or concession
     of the Appellant. Nor does the fact that both children were born  here,
     qualify them under the Appellant's 7 year policy  concerning  children.
     They are young enough to be able to adapt to life in Kosovo and have no
     special needs. The facts of this appeal reveal no exceptional health or
     welfare issues, either here or in Kosovo. The situation in Kosovo  will
     clearly be materially less good for the Respondent and his family  than
     in the UK  and  there  will  be  relative  disadvantage.  However  many
     Kosovans have returned in these circumstances and  this  difference  is
     not in itself a sufficient basis for allowing the human rights  appeal.
     There are opportunities for housing and employment. The  infrastructure
     is being restored. The Respondent and his nuclear family have at  least
     some relatives in Kosovo, although others are in the UK.  There  is  no
     reason given in the determination  why  the  wider  UK  family,  having
     obtained status here, cannot  visit  the  Respondent  in  Kosovo,  even
     though as Mr Walker-Nolan indicated they would not wish to return there
     to live for economic reasons. The fact that as  ethnic  Albanians  they
     originally obtained refugee status here, does not mean that  under  the
     changed situation in Kosovo they cannot  visit  that  country.  In  any
     event the Respondent will also be able to  maintain  contact  with  his
     relatives in the UK by telephone,  correspondence  and  in  due  course
     perhaps visits here. The Respondent and his family will be also able to
     build a new private life in Kosovo, as the Adjudicator held.  Also,  as
     we have indicated previously, the Appellant and his nuclear family will
     be returned together and there will be no  interference  in  their  own
     family life between themselves.

 21. We conclude that the facts as established do not demonstrate any matter
     whereby the decision reached by the Appellant can be said to be outside
     the range of reasonable decisions open to him. Accordingly his decision
     is proportionate under Article 8(2). The Adjudicator erred  in  law  in
     reaching a contrary conclusion in the process by which he  reached  his
     conclusion.

 22. Therefore, for the reasons given above this appeal is allowed.






                                                             Spencer Batiste

                                                              Vice-President
