
Heard at Field House | |AG (Late Service of  Respondent's Notice) Eritrea
[2004] UKIAT 00134 | |
|On: 6 May 2004             |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination  notified:                                     |
|                                                                  |
|03 June 2004                                                      |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr A Smith                                                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us the  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  R.M.  Ramdas-Harsia  of
counsel, instructed by White Ryland  Solicitors,  and  the  respondent  was
represented by Mr D. Saville, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea.  He was born on 13 March 1972 and so
is now thirty-two years old.  He appeals the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr
P.J. Mulvenna, who in a  determination  promulgated  on  2  September  2003
dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
State that returning him to Eritrea was not contrary to  his  rights  under
the European Convention on Human Rights or the Refugee Convention.

In extreme summary form the Adjudicator accepted that the appellant  was  a
Jehovah's Witness from Eritrea but not that he risked persecution or  other
serious ill treatment in the event of his return to Eritrea.  On  the  face
of it this is a surprising decision.  Jehovah's Witnesses  in  Eritrea  are
often thought to risk persecution.

Before us Mr Saville accepted that it would be difficult for him to  defend
the Adjudicator's conclusion unless the Secretary of State could attack the
Adjudicator's decision that the appellant is a  Jehovah's  Witness  but  no
Respondent's Notice had been served.  Mr Saville had come  to  the  hearing
room prepared to deal with that point.   He  had  prepared  a  respondent's
notice which included the following:

  'At paragraph 22 of the determination,  the  Adjudicator  baldly  accepts
  that "the appellant is a Jehovah's Witness".  He gives no reasons for his
  finding and, in particular, no reasons for  rejecting  the  Secretary  of
  State's challenge to this aspect of the claimant.'

 Mr Ramdas-Harsia equally honestly and  helpfully  accepted  that,  if  the
respondent was allowed to take this point, he could not realistically argue
against the appeal being allowed to the extent that it be  remitted  to  be
decided again.

Mr Saville applied to serve his Respondent's Notice.   He  referred  us  to
paragraph 19 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules  2003.
Paragraph 9(2) is in the following terms:

  'A respondent's notice must be filed -
      (a)   within such period as the Tribunal may direct; or
      (b)   where the Tribunal makes no  such  direction,  within  ten  days
           after the respondent is served with notice  that  the  appellant
           has been granted permission to appeal.'

It was Mr Saville's case that the respondent's notice can be served  as  of
right within ten days of receipt of notice  that  the  appellant  has  been
granted permission to appeal and at any other time  in  accordance  with  a
direction of the Tribunal.

It should be noted that the Procedural Rules do not  require  a  person  to
have permission to serve a Respondent's Notice.  Once it is served  it  can
be argued.  This contrasts with the case of a person seeking permission  to
appeal to the Tribunal.  Such a person must serve grounds of appeal and  if
the  Tribunal  gives  permission  to  appeal  the  Vice  President   giving
permission 'must indicate the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  is
granted'.  An application for  permission  to  appeal  must  be  served  in
accordance with strict time limits (usually ten days after service with the
Adjudicator's determination) but under paragraph  16(2)  the  Tribunal  may
extend the time limits if it  is  'satisfied  that  by  reason  of  special
circumstances it would be unjust not to do so.'  It would be surprising  if
the rules were intended to  provide  for  service  of  an  application  for
permission  to  appeal  at  any  stage  but  gave  no  power  to  permit  a
Respondent's Notice at any stage.  More importantly it is not easy  to  see
why  any  respondent  would  want  a  direction  permitting  service  of  a
Respondent's Notice before the period of 10 days had elapsed.

Perhaps it should perhaps be noted that although  most  appellants  to  the
Immigration Appeal Tribunal are claimants, there are  many  occasions  when
the appellant is the Secretary of  State  and  in  some  circumstances  the
claimant may wish to serve a Respondent's Notice.

We were satisfied after considering the rules that they do not prescribe  a
time limit for the service of a Respondent's Notice.  It  is  open  to  the
Tribunal to give a direction concerning  the  filing  of  the  respondent's
notice at any time before  a  determination  is  finally  promulgated.   Of
course this power must be used in a way that is fair to  both  parties.  It
may very well be unfair to  give  a  direction  permitting  a  Respondent's
Notice where the appellant would genuinely need an adjournment to  consider
the points made and  nothing  in  this  determination  should  be  seen  to
encourage late applications for a direction to serve a Respondent's Notice.

We appreciated that it would be very irritating for  the  appellant  if  we
gave permission to serve a Respondent's Notice.  If we did not he would  be
very likely to win his appeal.  However, we are not engaged in a game.  The
overriding purpose of  the  rules  is  to  'secure  the  just,  timely  and
effective disposal of appeals'  and  we  could  see  no  injustice  to  the
appellant in allowing the respondent, albeit  at  a  very  late  stage,  to
complain that the determination was unsound because  it  gave  no  reasoned
decision on a fundamental matter of dispute.

Mr Ramdas-Harsia could not point to any injustice and it is to  his  credit
that he did not waste our time with worthless submissions.

We directed that the respondent serve a Respondent's Notice immediately  at
the hearing before us.  Mr Saville did as directed.

Once we had done that Mr Ramdas-Harsia accepted  that  the  only  realistic
course was for us to remit the appeal.  The Adjudicator's determination was
unsound because it did not explain his decision that  the  appellant  is  a
Jehovah's Witness.  The whole appeal must be heard again.

In the circumstances we allow the appeal to the extent that it we direct it
to be heard again by an Adjudicator other than Mr P.J.  Mulvenna.



                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President
                                                                 26 May 2004
