
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |AA (Kreish ethnicity, Decree|
|                           |        |4/B/307) Sudan [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00167                       |
|On:  20 May 2004           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|22 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Vice President)                                     |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:      Ms M Canavan of Refugee Legal Centre.
For the  respondent:      Ms  K  Prendergast,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This an appeal by the claimant from  the  determination  of  Mr Boyd
      sitting as an Adjudicator on 5 November 2003.  The appeal is on human
      rights grounds.  The claimant says that as a member of a tribe  which
      will be referred to in this determination as the Kreish, but which is
      also referred to in some of the documentation before us as "Al Krish"
      or "Kerash", he would be at risk of Article 3 harm if he were  to  be
      returned to Sudan.

2.    The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 July 1997 and claimed
      asylum that day.  His asylum claim was refused.  The Adjudicator  who
      heard the asylum claim did not accept that he had been mistreated  or
      tortured as he had said in the past and further did not  accept  that
      he was a member of the SPLM.

3.    The asylum appeal to the  Adjudicator  having  been  dismissed  on  1
      December 2000 the appellant then waited before lodging a human rights
      claim on 31 January 2002.  He claimed that he was  a  member  of  the
      SPLM and the authorities were aware of this and that that placed  him
      at risk on return.   He produced an SPLM membership card,  which  was
      dated 7 October 2003, when he appeared before the Adjudicator in this
      matter, which he had obtained from Uganda.

4.    The Adjudicator followed the findings of the earlier Adjudicator  and
      did not accept that the appellant  was  a  member  of  the  SPLM,  he
      concluded the documentation purporting to show that the claimant  was
      a member of that organisation was highly dubious.

5.    The issue of SPLM  membership  scarcely  featured  in  the  arguments
      before us which centred instead upon whether the  claimant  with  his
      ethnicity would be at real risk on return,  even  though  he  had  no
      political background that  was  likely  to  be  known  about  by  the
      authorities.

6.    Very shortly after this matter was heard before us there were reports
      of a ceasefire between the SPLM and the authorities in Khartoum.   We
      have not been able to take into account any of  the  implications  of
      that ceasefire in this determination, which is based on the  material
      that was placed before us at the hearing.

7.    We will deal first with the claimant's ethnicity.  We have before  us
      an expert report from Peter Verney dated May 2004 which explains  who
      the Kreish are.  They are a large ethnic group from the  province  of
      Bahr l-Ghazal.  They tend to come from the west of that province  and
      are one of the largest of the non-Nilotic groups of southern Sudanese
      tribes.   The town of Raga or Raja, from which the claimant comes, is
      the centre of one of the largest  Kreish  communities.    The  Kreish
      include Muslims and Christians and many  of  them  are  described  as
      relatively well educated.  There is  a  Kreish  community  living  in
      Khartoum.

8.    The situation which would face the claimant if he were to be returned
      to Sudan would be that he would be obviously southern Sudanese by his
      appearance and he would obviously have been away from the country for
      a long time.

9.    We will deal with the second point first for it raises an issue as to
      the existence or the validity of a decree numbered 4/B/307 which,  it
      is asserted, would put this claimant and many others at risk were  he
      to return to Sudan.

10.   We have before us copies  of  the  decree  and  also  material  which
      comments upon it.  The decree  is  dated  28  February  1993  and  is
      addressed to "Heads of Frontiers Officers".  In English it reads,

         "It is hereby decided to detain any Sudanese person returning from
      abroad who has left the Sudan after the Revolution of Salvation - and
      resided abroad for a period of  one  year  or  more.   He  is  to  be
      transferred to the headquarters of the Public Security Department for
      investigation and for carrying out the necessary security measures."

           It is signed by someone described as  the  Head  of  the  Public
      Security Department.

11.   By letter of 5 June 2002 addressed to the Deputy Head of Mission  and
      Consul General of the British Embassy in Khartoum, an advocate, whose
      name  is  not  given,  informed  the  embassy   that   according   to
      investigations which he had made there was no sign that such a decree
      existed and that if it had, it would  have  been  superseded  by  the
      National Security Act 1999.  The letter went on to say that there was
      a general feeling  that  the  Government  of  Sudan  was  encouraging
      refugees to come home as this might work as good publicity  for  them
      abroad.

12.   The Danish Immigration Service carried out a Fact Finding Mission  in
      early 2000 which also concluded at paragraph B1.1 that the decree did
      not exist.  The Fact Finding Mission found,

           "In connection with the  Danish  Immigration  Service's  inquiry
           into the existence and application of a reported Sudanese Decree
           No. 4/B/307 on admission of Sudanese nationals into  Sudan,  the
           Netherlands Embassy in Cairo informed the Danish  Embassy  there
           in writing that there is no Decree or Regulation with the number
           4/B/307 by means of a letter dated 13 January 2000.  The  letter
           also states that Sudanese nationals who  have  been  abroad  for
           more than one year  do  not  have  to  report  to  the  Security
           Service, police or any other investigative agency in  Sudan  for
           an interview.  On the other hand, those who have been abroad for
           more than one year do have to report to the tax  authorities  in
           the Sudan on their return.  This is because  Sudanese  nationals
           abroad are required to pay tax in Sudan  for  the  period  spent
           abroad.  The tax is payable in foreign currency.  If  they  fail
           to do so, they are guilty of tax evasion and will not be able to
           get an exit visa if they want to travel abroad again."


      The report went on to say that according to a representative  of  the
      Sudan Human Rights Organisation in Cairo there was a decree requiring
      Sudanese nationals who have been abroad for a year to be detained but
      that was not  supported  by  any  evidence  that  people  were  being
      detained.  What was pointed out was that  the  security  police  will
      frequently use their own initiative in deciding what the  law  is  or
      what they propose to do.


13.   A more recent Danish Fact Finding Report dated 8-9 August  and  20-23
      November 2001 dealt with this matter as well at paragraph 3.1

           "Waltmans-Molier [Netherlands Embassy]  was  not  aware  of  the
           existence of alleged Sudanese Decree  called  Decree  No.  4B307
           from the head of the General Security Apparatus to Senior Border
           Guards.  However, she knew that it was the practice for Sudanese
           citizens who have been away from the country  for  a  couple  of
           years or more and who are now returning home to be questioned by
           the Sudanese Police on  their  arrival.   Often  this  would  be
           because of a failure to pay tax.   The Netherlands  Embassy  was
           not aware of any examples of people  suffering  any  harm  while
           being  questioned.    Questioning  was  carried   out   by   the
           Immigration Authorities or by  the  Security  Service  and  was,
           according to Waltmans-Molier, quite normal.  She  mentioned  the
           case in which a  Sudanese  women  had  been  returned  from  the
           Netherlands to Khartoum.  The woman claimed to be a member of an
           opposition party but could not give any account of its  ideology
           and had been repeatedly questioned by the Security Service.  The
           woman had complained to the Netherlands Embassy but  the  matter
           was not felt to be serious and the embassy had  not  heard  that
           the woman had come to any harm....


           A well  informed  local  source  in  Cairo  said  that  Sudanese
           citizens in possession of a valid national passport could  enter
           Sudan without any  difficulty.  However,  if  they  only  had  a
           temporary travel document they would be questioned  about  their
           circumstances on arrival in Sudan. This applied  only  to  those
           returning voluntarily to Sudan.  The source had  no  information
           about conditions on entry for Sudanese  citizens  who  had  been
           forcibly repatriated to Sudan.


           Arne Lehne said that Germany had never  had  problems  with  the
           deportation of rejected asylum applicants to Khartoum, either on
           entry or following entry.  In  the  previous  year  a  total  of
           fifteen people had been sent back to Sudan from  Germany.   Only
           in some individual cases had the deportation been followed  up."




      The report goes on to mention that Sudanese citizens who are  staying
      abroad and whose passports had expired could  apply  at  the  nearest
      Sudanese Embassy or to the passport issuing authorities  in  Khartoum
      for a new passport.

14.   These materials have been  supplemented  by  the  CIPU  Report  which
      states at paragraph 6.86 that  according  to  a  letter  the  British
      Embassy in Khartoum was unaware of anything to suggest that returnees
      were regularly being detained  by  the  internal  security  services.
      The Consul General was of the view that if such a policy  existed  it
      would have become apparent to him by the date of  the  letter,  which
      was 10 June 2002.

15.   Drawing the various threads together it seems  to  us  that  if  this
      decree ever existed it is not in force.  If it or its aims were being
      pursued with any sort of rigour at all we cannot  envisage  that  the
      various embassies in Khartoum and Cairo would be  holding  the  views
      that they do about what is actually happening to returnees to  Sudan.



16.   We find it entirely plausible that someone who  has  been  away  from
      Sudan for a long time will be questioned and may be required to  make
      tax payments in  foreign  currency  but  that  could  not  amount  to
      persecution and we see no reason to suppose that this would  place  a
      person at risk of Article 3 harm.

17.   We are further not aware of  any  information  that  shows  that  the
      Sudanese authorities in Khartoum are treating  returning  southerners
      in such a way as to put them at real risk of Article 3 harm.

18.   Further, and of more specific relevance to this particular  case,  we
      are not aware of material that shows that as a member of  the  Kreish
      Tribe this claimant would be any more likely to be in difficulties on
      return than any other obvious southern  Sudanese  with  no  political
      profile.

19.   In short, we consider that there is no  evidence  to  show  that  the
      claimant would be at real risk upon return to Sudan.

20.   The next question to consider is whether, having returned, he will be
      at risk of Article 3 harm because of the  conditions  he  would  face
      thereafter.    On  this  point  we   are   very   grateful   to   the
      representatives of the claimant who provided us at our  request  with
      the Norwegian Refugee Council's profile of internal  displacement  on
      Sudan dated 19 May  2004  which  contains  a  very  large  amount  of
      material relating to the  position  of  displaced  persons  in  Sudan
      gathered over the last two or  three  years.    This  report  is  the
      foundation for much of the material in  the  CIPU  Report  paragraphs
      6.276 to 6.288 on internally displaced persons in Sudan.

21.   The position in the claimant's home area of  Raga  was  very  fraught
      until 2002, according to the report.  The SPLA captured Raga from the
      Sudan Government in about June 2001 and the town  was  recaptured  in
      October of that year.   Between  April  and  May  2002  about  19,500
      internally displaced persons were repatriated back to Raga, according
      to the UNHCR reporting on 25 July 2003. (Page 60  Norwegian  Report).
      It seems that from about the date of the recapture  security  in  the
      Raga area and in Bahr el-Ghazal as a whole was felt to have  improved
      and several thousands were making the journey from Khartoum  back  to
      their homes there.  Indeed by July 2003, 29,400 registered  returnees
      had arrived back in Raga.

22.   It seems to us that the position at present, which certainly  appears
      to be no worse than it was in July 2003, is such  that  the  claimant
      could safely make the journey from Khartoum back to  his  home  area.
      We cannot see from the Norwegian material that it would be  dangerous
      for him to do so in the sense of exposing  him  to  a  real  risk  of
      Article 3 harm.  Nor can we see that for him to be in his  home  area
      would expose him to such risk, because for a period of now nearly two
      years his home area has been under government control and people have
      been going back in significant numbers.

23.   If the position in his home area were considered unsafe, and  we  are
      not of the view that it is, we feel  nonetheless  that  the  claimant
      could be returned without being at risk of Article 3 harm even if  it
      meant he would have to be placed in an internal displacement camp  in
      Khartoum.  Approximately 1.8 million internally displaced persons are
      living around Khartoum and the Norwegian report makes it plain  their
      conditions are difficult.  What the report also makes plain, however,
      is that their conditions cannot be said to be inhumane or  degrading.
       Employment is scarce and there is much poverty but there are  health
      facilities and water facilities for those who live in camps  and  for
      approximately 70% of the IDPs in Khartoum there  is  access  to  some
      form of medical service (see Norwegian Report pages 105  to  108  and
      134 to 136).

24.   We do not consider that  the  existence  of  a  Kreish  community  in
      Khartoum is itself likely to be of much assistance  to  the  claimant
      because that  community  must  already  have  been  overwhelmed  with
      requests for assistance from displaced Kreish coming from the  south.



25.   In light of all the material that has helpfully been provided for  us
      we have come to the conclusions,

           a)    that the claimant could return to Khartoum  without  being
                 at any real risk  of  being  persecuted  or  subjected  to
                 Article 3 harm by the authorities on return;


           b)    that the claimant could go back to his home  area  without
                 being at real risk of harm in doing so; and


           c)    that in any even,t even if  he  stayed  in  Khartoum,  the
                 claimant, whilst suffering difficulties  and  deprivations
                 would not be placed at risk of Article 3 harm by being put
                 in one of  the  camps  for  internally  displaced  persons
                 whilst he waited to return to his home area.


26.   For all  these  reasons  we  consider  that  this  appeal  should  be
      dismissed.




                                                   His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                                              Vice President


