
KH
|Heard at: Field House      |    |                                 |
|On:  15 July 2004          |    |AR (Burundi- spoken              |
|                           |    |language-Kurundi) Burundi [2004] |
|                           |    |UKIAT 00225                      |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|........18th Aug 2004.........                                    |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun (Vice President)                                     |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Vice President)                        |
|Mrs R M Bray                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:      Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer.
The appellant was in attendance but had no legal representation.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent who claims to be a citizen of Burundi was born on   11
      November 1965.   She claims to have entered the  UK  on  19 November
      2000 using papers to which she was not entitled and claimed asylum at
      ASU the same day. On 30 April 2003 the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
      decision to refuse her asylum and to refuse her leave  to  enter  and
      giving directions for her removal to Burundi.

2.    The respondent  claims  that  she  is  a  Burundi  national  of  Hutu
      ethnicity and that she comes from Buyenzi in Bujumbura.    She  fears
      persecution from the Tutsi based  Burundi  Government  and  military.
      She claimed that when she was seven  years  old  she  fled  with  her
      family to a camp in Tanzania.  When the family returned in  1993  she
      was with her husband.  Her parents  were  then  burned  alive  in  an
      attack by Tutsi soldiers.   This  resulted  in  the  respondent,  her
      husband and two children returning to a refugee camp in Tanzania.

3.    In 2000 her husband and family  returned  to  Buyenzi.   Her  husband
      started working as a  driver  transporting  goods  between  Tanzania,
      Uganda and Burundi.  The government suspected  him  of  being  allied
      with rebel groups.  As a result attacks took place on the  respondent
      and her family.  The first attack took place in 2000 when she and her
      husband were badly beaten and she was raped in  front  of  their  two
      children.    She was admitted to hospital.  Her husband was  arrested
      and detained for approximately three months during  which  period  he
      was tortured.  After his release her husband attempted to  recommence
      work  but  could  not  because  of  threatening  letters  from  Tutsi
      soldiers.   Two weeks later Tutsi soldiers attacked the house  again.
       She was raped and beaten and her husband was taken  away.   She  has
      not seen him since and does not know what has happened to  him.   The
      soldiers set fire to the  house.   She  fled  the  house  with  their
      children.  As she was fleeing she lost her eldest child and does  not
      know her whereabouts.  She fled to a nearby  church  where  a  priest
      allowed her and her youngest child to stay  for  three  months.   The
      priest sold her pick-up car and the proceeds  were  used  to  pay  an
      agent.  The agent drove her to Bujumbura Airport where  she  flew  by
      helicopter to Uganda and on to the UK.

4.    In cross-examination she explained that the only language  she  could
      speak  was  Swahili.   The  people  in  the  market  where  she  sold
      vegetables spoke Kiswahili.  She said that about seven soldiers  came
      inside her house the night she fled.   There were others outside.  At
      that time she was only standing about one metre away from the  house.
      Although the soldiers searched for her she was able to escape in  the
      dark.  The helicopter trip from Bujumbura to Entebbe took  "not  many
      hours,  about  thirty  minutes".   The   Adjudicator   accepted   the
      appellant's evidence as credible and found that she is a national  of
      Burundi.  He  accepted  that  she  suffered  persecution  in  Burundi
      because of her ethnicity and because of an imputed political opinion.



5.    The grounds of appeal upon which leave was granted submitted that the
      Adjudicator erred in law by finding that the respondent is a national
      of Burundi.  It was also argued that  the  Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings  were  unreasonable   particularly   in   respect   of   the
      respondent's journey from Bujumbura to Entebbe, which  it  was  said,
      could not have taken thirty minutes as stated by  the  respondent  in
      evidence.  Furthermore the respondent's account of  her  escape  from
      the house was so implausible that  no  reasonable  Adjudicator  would
      have found the account credible.

6.    As already stated above the respondent appeared in Court with her son
      but  without  legal  representation.   We  found  that  she  was  not
      prejudiced in any way  by  lack  of  representation.   The  appellant
      appeared to have a fairly good understanding of the English language,
      which she also spoke fairly well.  When asked, she said that she  had
      acquired her knowledge of the English language since she has been  in
      the UK.  She was able to follow the proceedings and had no difficulty
      finding the citations in the Home Office CIPU Report.

7.    In considering whether the respondent was a national of Burundi,  the
      Adjudicator was referred to the  CIPU  assessment  at  paragraph  2.1
      where it says,

           "The official languages  of  Burundi  are  Kirundi  and  French,
           whilst Swahili is also used in addition to French in  commercial
           circles.  All Burundians know Burundi (in our view  should  read
           Kirundi) but may speak it with regional variations.   Kirundi is
           closely related to Kinyarwanda, the official language of Rwanda.
            Swahili is widely spoken in and around the capital,  Bujumbura,
           and is a first language in certain Muslim neighbourhoods  whilst
           Congo Swahili is spoken in Congolese neighbourhoods."


      The Adjudicator noted that the respondent claims to be from Bujumbura
      where, according to the extract from the CIPU assessment, Swahili  is
      a first language in some areas.   In  the   light  of  the  objective
      evidence before him he found as follows:

           "Bearing in mind the low standard of proof I am  satisfied  that
           the fact that the appellant only speaks Swahili does not bar her
           from being Burundian... I am satisfied  that  it  is  more  than
           reasonably likely that the appellant is a  Burundi  national  as
           she claims."


8.    Miss Brown referred us to paragraph 2.6 of the Burundi Country Report
      April 2004, which she said contains  additional  information  to  the
      information in the CIPU Report that was before the Adjudicator.  That
      paragraph states that the office of the  UN  Commissioner  for  Human
      Rights (OHCHR)  stated  that  Rundi,  or  Kirundi,  is  the  national
      language of Burundi.  It is spoken by the entire  population  of  the
      country.   According to the website of  Citizenship  and  Immigration
      Canada, Burundi has  two  official  languages:  Kirundi  and  French.
      Kirundi is spoken by all Burundians, regardless of ethnic background.

9.    The respondent told the Adjudicator and repeated the same to us  that
      she could not speak Kirundi.  She even told us  that  she  could  not
      understand the language.  The only language she spoke in  the  market
      and in  her  neighbourhood  was  Swahili.     Swahili  was  also  the
      language spoken by her  parents.   It  was  the  language  spoken  by
      Muslims.   Her parents were Muslim.  She herself  was  a  Muslim  but
      converted to Christianity when she married her husband.

10.   In the light of the  objective  evidence  before  us,  which  clearly
      states that Kirundi is an official language, which is spoken  by  all
      Burundians, we find that the appellant's inability to speak  or  even
      understand the language, means that she is not a national of Burundi.
       We take note of the fact that the respondent who  has  been  in  the
      United Kingdom for only three and a half  years  can  understand  and
      speak English rather well. Yet she cannot understand  and  speak  the
      language of the country of her claimed birth, where she had lived and
      worked for  over  seven  years  at  least.   That  is  certainly  not
      credible.  Accordingly we find that the Adjudicator's conclusion that
      the respondent is Burundian is unsustainable  even  on  the  evidence
      that was before him.

11.   We now look at the other credibility  findings  of  the  Adjudicator.
      The appellant told us that she did not know  how  long  it  took  the
      helicopter to fly from Bujumbura to Entebbe.  She also told  us  that
      she did not know the distance she was standing at away from the house
      when she saw the soldiers entering her house.  If that was  the  case
      then she should have said so.  The Adjudicator  was  working  on  the
      evidence given by her.   Miss Brown  submitted  documentary  evidence
      which states that the distance between Bujumbura and Entebbe is three
      hundred and eighteen miles.  We agree with Miss Brown that unless the
      helicopter was travelling at six hundred miles an hour, it could  not
      have covered that  distance  in  half  an  hour.   We  also  find  it
      implausible that the appellant would have  been  standing  one  metre
      away from the soldiers and could have escaped from  them.   We  agree
      with Miss Brown that the Adjudicator's findings with regard to  these
      two issues were wholly unsustainable.   Accordingly, we do not uphold
      the Adjudicator's determination.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.





                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President


