
IN THE IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL  | |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|                  |                |Ethiopia - recent tension in border (CG)|
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|Heard at:         |Field House           |                |                  |
|Heard on:         |20th January 2004     |                |                  |
|Date typed:       |24th February 2004                      DA (Ethnicity -  |
|                  |Eritrean - Country Conditions) Ethiopia CG[2004] UKIAT   |
|                  |00046                                                    |
|Date promulgated: |16th March 2004                                          |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|MS D K GILL (CHAIRMAN)                                                      |
|THE RT HON. COUNTESS OF MAR                                                 |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between:                                                                    |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |



|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                                 |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. W. McCarthy, of Counsel,  instructed  by  Ziadies
                          Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Mrs. A. Holmes, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
                          Officer.

1.1   The Appellant (a national  of  Ethiopia)  has  appealed,  with  leave,
     against the determination  of  Mr.  A  M  Baker,  an  Adjudicator,  who
     (following a hearing on 11th  June  2003  at  Bradford)  dismissed  her
     appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds  against  the  Respondent's
     decision of 22nd October 2001 to give directions for her removal as  an
     illegal entrant.

1.2   The Presenting Officer who appeared before  the  Adjudicator  withdrew
     the certificates with regard to the Appellant's asylum and human rights
     claims.

1.3   We are reporting this decision because we consider the recent  tension
     in the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea and whether, in the light of
     this increased tension, there is a real risk  of  persons  of  Eritrean
     ethnicity being interned and deported to Eritrea (see paragraphs 30  to
     33 below).

2.    Basis  of  claim:  The  Appellant  experienced  problems  in  Ethiopia
     because of her father's ethnicity. In June 1999, she  was  arrested  in
     Addis  Ababa  by  the  Ethiopian  security  forces,  pursuant  to   the
     government's policy of deporting all ethnic Eritreans back to  Eritrea.
     Her father and brother had been  arrested  3  weeks  earlier.  She  was
     detained for almost 2 years, during which time she was forced  to  work
     in slave-like conditions  within  military  wash-houses  and  kitchens.
     However, after being moved to a new location  at  Gondar,  she  escaped
     with 2 others and took refuge in the nearby house of  a  family  friend
     who then contacted her mother to provide funding for  an  agent  to  be
     engaged to enable her (the Appellant) to leave Ethiopia. In July  2001,
     the Appellant left Ethiopia via Sudan en route to the  United  Kingdom.
     She has never been a member of any political organisation.  Before  the
     Adjudicator, she did not pursue her original claim of  being  currently
     stateless (paragraph 13 of the Determination).

3.    The  Adjudicator's  Determination:  The  Adjudicator  considered  that
     there were several  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  account  which  were
     contradictory or incredible. He noted as follows:

      (a)   he did not consider it credible that  the  Appellant  was  never
           threatened with  deportation  nor  that  any  steps  were  taken
           leading  to  deportation,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
           cessation  agreement  ending  deportations  took  place  halfway
           through her allegedly lengthy period of detention.

      (b)   he considered that the Appellant's claim as to  the  reason  for
           her final movement to the camp  at  Gondar  (i.e.  that  it  was
           because of a government decree forbidding the release  of  young
           persons who would be liable to join the Eritrean militia against
           the interests of Ethiopia) "rather odd"  because  the  Appellant
           had            "no            past            military/political
           affiliation/involvement/training" and since her group which  had
           been so transported were all females;

      (c)   he also considered it "equally odd" that,  within  a  few  hours
           only of her arrival at Gondar, and despite  her  having  already
           formed the view that  Major  Mohammed  in  charge  of  the  camp
           treated the women very well, she had been  able  to  assess  the
           security arrangements so as to permit  her  escape  due  to  the
           guard's dinner break on the very  first  evening  of  her  being
           there.

      (d)   he found it wholly incredible that, despite the  fact  that  her
           only visit in the past to this  area  had  been  some  20  years
           previously as a mere 9 year old girl and the fact that  she  was
           in the middle of a forest at night and did not know his address,
           she was able to find the family friend of her  mother  and  seek
           refuge with him along with her co-escapees.

      (e)   the Adjudicator noted that, although the work  required  of  the
           Appellant was arduous, she was never subjected  to  mistreatment
           or violence, save for once having her thumb trapped  in  a  door
           when her cleaning of a uniform  was  deemed  not  to  be  up  to
           standard. He did not consider that this was  consistent  with  a
           period of 2 years' detention without charge  or  deportation  in
           the context of the simultaneous political  developments  in  the
           region.

      Accordingly, the Adjudicator found that:

            ..... if [the Appellant] was indeed initially detained  at  all,
           it was certainly not for the length of  time, or in  the  manner
           claimed and that she most certainly did not eventually escape in
           the manner described.

      The Adjudicator was not persuaded that there was a real  risk  of  the
     Appellant's detention in Ethiopia in the future. He  then  stated:  "As
     such, allied to the lack of credibility in the Appellant",  the  appeal
     must fail.

4.1   The issues before us are:

      Issue 1:   Whether the  Adjudicator  had  made  adequate  findings  of
             fact.

      Issue 2:   Whether the Adjudicator's assessment of the risk on  return
             was safe. In the  grounds  of  application,  it  is  that  the
             Adjudicator had failed to consider the risk on account of  the
             Appellant's Eritrean ethnicity.

4.2   With regard to Issue 2, the grounds of application  refer  to  various
     documents. Since Mr. McCarthy relied on the grounds of application,  it
     is appropriate for us to  refer  to  the  documents  mentioned  in  the
     grounds of application. They are:

      (a)   the UNCHR's letter of December 2002, which refers to  "instances
        where ... Ethiopians with Eritrean links have faced  serious  risks
        from the Ethiopian authorities". Examples  of  such  risks  include
        arbitrary  deprivation  of  their  Ethiopian  nationality,  summary
        expulsion to Eritrea and internment  as  enemy  nationals.  UNHCR's
        general understanding is that, although the situation has improved,
        the threat of deportation remains.

      (b)   the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  for  2003  (page  28  of  the
        Appellant's  bundle)  which  states:  "As  of  October  2002,   the
        Ethiopian Government continued to hold about  1,300  Eritrean  POWs
        despite  its  pledge  to  release  them..."  At  the  hearing,  the
        Adjudicator had indicated that the term  "Prisoner  of  War"  (POW)
        would not cover the Appellant even if her story was believed. It is
        asserted in the grounds  of  application  that  this  is  wrong  by
        definition, because the Appellant was a prisoner for  reasons  only
        of her ethnicity combined by her place of residence during  a  time
        of war and by sole reason of the nature of that war.

      (c)   the  UNHCR's  letter  dated  4th  June  2001  (page  10  of  the
        Appellant's bundle, final  sub-paragraph  of  paragraph  3),  which
        states that  "the  practice  of  deportation  from  both  countries
        persists despite the signing by both States  of  the  Cessation  of
        Hostilities Agreement of 18th  June  2000,  and  the  Comprehensive
        Peace Agreement of 12th December 2000".

      (d)   a January 2003 report (page 19 of the Appellant's bundle,  final
        paragraph), which  states  that:  "despite  all  the  international
        assistance, since the war's end,  they  still  have  no  resolution
        ..... many now have no nationality";

      (e)   the Human Rights  World  Watch  Report  2002  (page  35  of  the
        Appellant's bundle, final paragraph), which states that, even  post
        cease-fire, Eritreans were forcibly expelled from Ethiopia.

      (f)   the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  for  2003  (page  44  of  the
        Appellant's bundle, penultimate paragraph) which  states  that  the
        issue of nationality of those expelled  during  the  war  has  been
        "largely overlooked".  The same report  also  refers  to  arbitrary
        deprivation of nationality in the case  of  Ethiopian  citizens  of
        Eritrean origin (page 94 of the Appellant's bundle).

      (g)   the USSD Report for 2003 (page 126 of  the  Appellant's  bundle,
        penultimate paragraph) which states: "The law requires citizens and
        residents to obtain an exit  visa  before  departing  the  country.
        Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean origin  were  able  to  obtain
        exit visas but often were not permitted to return to the  country".
        The same report also states (page 129 of  the  Appellant's  bundle,
        penultimate paragraph) that "Ethiopians of Eritrean origin were not
        permitted to vote".

      Accordingly, the grounds of application assert  that  the  Adjudicator
     was wrong to state that there was no sufficient evidence  of  a  recent
     nature showing a future risk to the Appellant.  In  any  event,  it  is
     asserted in the grounds that the real question was returnability on the
     hearing at, and not at some notional future date.

4.3   The grounds of application assert that  the  risks  to  the  Appellant
     upon return would be:

      (i)   internment or detention by reasons of her ethnicity;
      (ii)  not being permitted to enter Ethiopia and  Eritrea  due  to  her
             lack of nationality and/or the stance of the authorities;
      (iii) lack of a right to vote.

5.1   At the commencement of the hearing before us, we  asked  Mr.  McCarthy
     to address us on the focus of his submissions - namely, whether he  was
     asserting that the Adjudicator had made inadequate findings of fact  or
     had erred in his assessment of credibility or  whether  he  was  saying
     that the Adjudicator had erred in his assessment of the risk on return.
     Mr. McCarthy informed us that this was essentially  a  matter  for  the
     Tribunal. However,  if  the  Appellant's  accounts  of  her  historical
     experiences n Ethiopia were taken at their highest, then the  Appellant
     fears a real risk of persecution on return to Ethiopia on account of:

      (a)   her Eritrean ethnicity;
      (b)   the fact that the peace process seems to have disintegrated;
      (c)   that, accordingly, she is at risk of being interned or of  being
           deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea.

5.2   In response to our enquiry as to whether the Appellant  was  asserting
     that the Ethiopian authorities would not regard  her  as  an  Ethiopian
     national,  Mr.  McCarthy  submitted  that,  following  the   Tribunal's
     Determination in [2003] UKIAT 00016 L (Ethiopia), it is  a  moot  point
     whether the Appellant is stateless, because, if she is  stateless,  she
     would have to show that she has a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
     the place of her former habitual residence.  When we asked  whether  he
     was relying on the assertion in the grounds that the Appellant would be
     unable to enter Ethiopia, Mr. McCarthy informed is that he was, because
     the objective evidence shows that persons  of  Eritrean  ethnic  origin
     would be sent from Ethiopia to Eritrea. However, when we asked  whether
     he was saying that, if there was a real risk that the  Appellant  would
     be sent to Eritrea from  Ethiopia,  we  would  also  have  to  consider
     whether the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
     Eritrea, Mr. McCarthy submitted that we did not need to  consider  that
     aspect.

6.    Mrs. Holmes informed us that, if the  Appellant  is  unable  to  enter
     Ethiopia, then the Secretary of State would not seek to return  her  to
     Ethiopia. Both parties agreed that, from the  Tribunal's  Determination
     in [2003] UKIAT 00016 L, it was clear that, if the Appellant is  unable
     to enter Ethiopia, then:

      (a)   her asylum claim  had  to  be  determined  on  the  hypothetical
           assumption that she would  be  able  to  enter  Ethiopia.   This
           follows from the Court of Appeal's judgement in Saad, Diriye and
           Osorio [2001] EWCA Civ 2008, [2002] INLR 34;

      (b)   however, her human rights claim could not  succeed,  because  of
           the  Tribunal's   observations   at   paragraphs   63   of   the
           Determination in [2003]  UKIAT  00016L.   In  essence,  this  is
           because, if she is unable to enter  Ethiopia,  then,  given  the
           policy of the Home Office not to return persons who will not  be
           re-admitted, it cannot be said that removal is imminent.

7.    We then asked the parties to address us on  whether  it  was  possible
     for the Tribunal  to determine the appeal, without prejudice to  either
     side, by taking the Appellant's claims about her historical experiences
     in Ethiopia at their highest. Mrs. Holmes was of the view that  it  was
     important for the Appellant's credibility  to  be  assessed  and  clear
     findings of fact to be made. This is because, if the Appellant was  not
     detained in the past for two years, then she had no reason for  fearing
     return to Ethiopia. Mr. McCarthy submitted that, if the  Appellant  was
     detained previously and had escaped, then she may well be identified on
     return to Ethiopia.

8.    After considering the submissions, we informed  the  parties  that  we
     were willing to proceed to hear submissions on the risk on  return,  by
     taking the Appellant's accounts of her alleged experiences in  Ethiopia
     at their highest, provided that this could be done without prejudice to
     either side. Since the Appellant's accounts would  be  taken  at  their
     highest, she would not be prejudiced. However,  if  we  decided,  after
     hearing submissions on the risk on  return  on  this  basis,  that  the
     outcome of the appeal would depend on  an  assessment  of  credibility,
     then we would remit the appeal for  a  fresh  hearing,  so  that  clear
     findings of fact could be made -  in  particular,  as  to  whether  the
     Appellant had been detained for 2 years. The parties  were  content  to
     proceed on this basis.

9.    Mr. McCarthy relied on this grounds of application. He also relied  on
     the documents at pages 144 to 149 of the Appellant's  Tribunal  bundle.
     The  fact  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  would  not  re-admit  the
     Appellant shows the  attitude  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  towards
     persons of Eritrean origin. Following the Tribunal's  Determination  in
     [2003] UKIAT 00016L, we have to assess the Appellant's asylum claim  on
     the hypothetical assumption that she gains entry. If she gains entry to
     Ethiopia, then we have to  consider  the  stance  which  the  Ethiopian
     authorities would have against  her  by  refusing  entry.  It  is  also
     relevant  to  consider  the  recent  documentary  evidence  about   the
     relations between the Ethiopia and Eritrea - for example, page  146  of
     the Appellant's Tribunal bundle refers to the breakdown  of  the  peace
     process. The town of Badme was the original  catalyst  for  the  border
     war. The status of this border town has  become  important  again.  The
     United Nations  has  postponed  indefinitely  the  demarcation  of  the
     disputed border. The word "breakdown" used in  relation  to  the  peace
     process on page 146 is important. The document at page 148  dated  17th
     September 2003 shows that the peace process  has  hit  problems  again,
     with Eritrea digging its heels in and demanding its rights. The  advent
     of the peace process is the event which originally marked  an  "upturn"
     to the returnability issue. The situation now is that, at the  minimum,
     the seeds of unrest have been sown. There is therefore a  risk  of  the
     maltreatment  of  persons  of  Eritrean   origin   by   the   Ethiopian
     authorities. The documents referred to in the  grounds  of  application
     show that, even after the last peace process, Ethiopia was reluctant to
     release POWs. The UNHCR's letter  of  June  2001  referred  to  in  the
     grounds is not inconsistent with the  present  objective  situation  as
     evidenced by pages 144 to 149 of the Appellant's Tribunal bundle.  Page
     146 refers to an armed violent conflict along the border. This document
     states that this sort of incident  happens  periodically.  The  UNHCR's
     letter of December 2002 referred  to  in  the  grounds  of  application
     referred to "instances  where  Ethiopians  with  Eritrean  links  faced
     serious risks". This was in  spite  of  the  peace  process  then.  The
     objective documents show that there  were  problems  even  after  peace
     process had started previously. Even though the objective  evidence  at
     present only indicates that the seeds  of  a  breakdown  in  the  peace
     process have been sown, there is a real risk that the  Appellant  would
     be viewed by the Ethiopian authorities as an enemy national.  The  fact
     that she had been interned previously, taken together with the  present
     objective situation, shows that there is  a  real  risk  of  internment
     again. If we were persuaded that there was a real  risk  of  internment
     again,  then  her  asylum  claim  should  succeed,  in  Mr.  McCarthy's
     submission, because internment would,  in  his  submission,  amount  to
     persecution. She may also be deprived of her nationality.

10.   By way of further clarification, Mr. McCarthy confirmed  that  he  did
     not rely on the assertion  in  the  grounds  of  application  that  the
     Appellant is at risk of persecution on  account  of  her  inability  to
     enter Ethiopia. He confirmed, in response to an enquiry from the bench,
     that the Appellant was not asserting that she  would  not  be  able  to
     obtain a residence permit in Ethiopia. Her case is  put  on  the  basis
     that she would face internment, if returned to Ethiopia.  He  confirmed
     that the issue was not whether the Appellant was a  POW  when  she  was
     previously interned, but that the fact that  she  had  been  previously
     interned increases the  risk  of  internment  now,  given  the  current
     objective evidence. He was not asserting that the Appellant  would  now
     be seen as someone who had previously been held as a POW.

11.   Mrs. Holmes referred us to the CIPU report, paragraphs  6.105,  6.107,
     6.08 and 6.111. The UNHCR letter dated December 2002 referred to in the
     grounds of application (and set  out  at  page  8  of  the  Appellant's
     Tribunal bundle) refers to "instances" and "serious risks". This is not
     helpful because  there  is  no  indication  of  how  many  people  were
     affected.  The  objective  documents  referred  in   the   grounds   of
     application refer to deprivation of nationality  and  deportations  but
     the Appellant was not deported or deprived of her nationality when  she
     was previously held. The grounds of application refer to Ethiopians  of
     Eritrean origin not being permitted to vote. This  is  taken  from  the
     USSD Report for 2002, at page 129 of the Appellant's  Tribunal  bundle.
     Mrs. Holmes asked  us  to  note  that  this  only  states:  "Reportedly
     Ethiopians of Eritrean origin were not allowed to  register  to  vote".
     The word "reportedly" indicates that the author of the  report  is  not
     sure whether this is true or not. With regard to the evidence about the
     border clashes at pages 144 to 149 of the Appellant's Tribunal  bundle,
     there was no evidence as to how these border clashes  impact  upon  the
     wider  population,  especially  those  of  Eritrean  origin  living  in
     Ethiopia. Mrs. Holmes submitted that the fact that  the  Appellant  was
     previously interned does not mean that she would be  at  real  risk  of
     internment now. The objective situation at the time of  her  internment
     was much more serious than it can be said to be now. Furthermore,  when
     she was moved to Gondar, her own evidence indicates that  security  was
     not tight. There were no gates and the fences were low (paragraph 16 of
     the Claimant's statement at page V of the Appellant's  Tribunal  bundle
     refers). This suggests that the Ethiopian authorities were not bothered
     about whether the internees remained or not. Furthermore, according  to
     paragraph 15 of the same statement, the major of the camp had  informed
     the Appellant that the Ethiopian authorities had changed  their  policy
     towards deportation and were no longer sending young people to  Eritrea
     and that that was the reason why the Appellant and the others had  been
     held at the camp for such a long time. In Mrs. Holmes' submission,  the
     security at Gondar was "laughably poor".

12.   In closing, Mr. McCarthy relied on his earlier submissions.

13.   We reserved our determination.

14.   We have decided to dismiss this  appeal,  for  reasons  which  we  now
     give.

15.   With regard to issue 1, we agree with the parties that,  although  the
     Adjudicator made adverse comments about the credibility of core aspects
     of the Appellant's accounts, he did not make a clear finding of fact as
     to the Appellant's claimed detention. This is evident from that part of
     the Determination which  we  have  quoted  at  paragraph  3  above.  We
     therefore cannot be sure that his assessment of the risk on  return  is
     safe. Furthermore, we agree with Mr. McCarthy that the Adjudicator  did
     not consider whether the Appellant is at risk on return on  account  of
     her ethnicity.

16.   Although the Adjudicator has not made adequate and clear  findings  of
     fact, we do not consider it necessary to remit the appeal for  a  fresh
     hearing. This is because, having  heard  submissions  on  the  risk  on
     return and considered the evidence before us, we have decided  that  we
     are able to determine the appeal without prejudice to either  party  by
     taking the Appellant's accounts of her experiences in Ethiopia at their
     highest. This means that we assess the risk on return on the basis that
     the Appellant was previously held in detention  by  way  of  internment
     pending deportation by the Ethiopian authorities for a period of almost
     2 years. Her account is that she escaped from that detention,  although
     it is also relevant to bear in mind that,  according  to  her  account,
     security was very lax at the camp from which she escaped. It cannot  be
     said that the Appellant was ever held as a POW. She was simply held  in
     internment, pending deportation to Eritrea. We also reiterate that  Mr.
     McCarthy made it clear that we did not need to concern  ourselves  with
     whether, if the Appellant is expelled from  Ethiopia  to  Eritrea,  she
     would be at real risk of persecution in Eritrea.

17.   At the hearing before us, Mr. McCarthy's position with regard  to  two
     matters was somewhat different from the position taken in  the  grounds
     of application. This is the reason why we have set out  at  length  the
     contents of the grounds of application and the submissions made  before
     us. Firstly, Mr. McCarthy did not advance the notion which  appears  to
     have been advanced in the grounds that  the  Appellant  had  been  held
     previously as a POW. As paragraph 10 of our Determination  records,  he
     informed us that he was not asserting that the Appellant would  now  be
     seen as someone who had previously been held as a POW.

18.   Secondly, we remark that Mr. McCarthy's position  as  to  whether  the
     Appellant was basing her claim to be at real  risk  of  persecution  on
     return on account of her inability to enter Ethiopia shifted during the
     course of the hearing before us.  When  we  first  enquired  about  his
     position in relation  to  this  (paragraph  5.2  of  our  Determination
     refers), he informed us that he was relying on the Claimant's inability
     to enter Ethiopia because, in his submission,  the  objective  evidence
     shows that persons of Eritrean ethnic  origin  would  be  sent  by  the
     Ethiopian  authorities  to  Eritrea.  At  this  stage,  Mr.  McCarthy's
     submission was that the Appellant's  inability  to  enter  Ethiopia  is
     relevant to determining her asylum claim because:

      (a)   paragraph 62 of the Tribunal's  Determination  in  [2003]  UKIAT
           00016L (Ethiopia) (applying the principles in Saad,  Diriye  and
           Osorio) means that we must hypothetically assume that  she  does
           in fact enter Ethiopia and assess the risk on return after  such
           entry;

      (b)   in assessing the risk on return after entry,  we  must  consider
           the stance which the Ethiopian authorities  might  have  towards
           her, having refused her entry -  i.e.  whether  the  stance  the
           Ethiopian authorities would take against her (having refused her
           entry) is reasonably likely to mean that she would be  interned.
           The fact that she had previously  been  interned  for  nearly  2
           years was also relevant in this regard.

      However, when we later sought to clarify  the  position  further  with
     him (see the first sentence of paragraph 10 above), he  confirmed  that
     he did not rely on the assertion in the grounds of application that the
     Appellant is at risk of persecution on  account  of  her  inability  to
     enter  Ethiopia.   This  appears  to  run  counter   to   his   earlier
     submissions.

19.   We err on the side of caution and consider Mr. McCarthy's  submissions
     as set out in paragraph 9 above and paragraph 18 (a) and (b) above.

20.   In our experience, the claim that a person would not  be  admitted  is
     usually made in cases where the receiving state has refused to re-admit
     individuals or where the Secretary of State is  experiencing  practical
     difficulties (such as  securing  the  necessary  travel  documents)  in
     arranging  removal.  The  Secretary  of  State's  argument  before  the
     Tribunal in [2003] UKIAT 00016 L  was  that,  in  such  cases,  if  the
     claimant is refused entry, this would not lead to  the  claimant  being
     persecuted because,  in  such  event,  the  claimant  would  simply  be
     returned to the United Kingdom. The Tribunal considered that  this  was
     incompatible with the judgement of the Court of Appeal in Saad,  Diriye
     and Osorio and that, even if there are practical obstacles to  removal,
     the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  nevertheless   requires   substantive
     consideration on the hypothetical basis of whether -  if returned  -  a
     claimant would face a real risk of persecution.

21.   In the instant appeal, we are asked to go  one  step  further  -  i.e.
     consider what stance the Ethiopia authorities would  have  towards  the
     Appellant if, having  been  refused  entry,  she  hypothetically  gains
     entry. We are asked to consider whether the Ethiopian authorities would
     have an adverse stance  against  her,  having  refused  her  entry  and
     bearing in mind her previous internment. The  situation  which  we  are
     asked to consider is not reasonably likely to arise.  Firstly,  if  the
     Appellant would not gain entry, the Secretary of State would not remove
     her. Secondly, even if the Secretary of  State  does  remove  her,  she
     would either gain entry or she would not. If she does not  gain  entry,
     she would simply be returned to the United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  the
     hypothetical assumption we are asked to consider (of her having  gained
     entry and the Ethiopian authorities having an  adverse  stance  against
     her on account of refusing her  entry)  is  not  reasonably  likely  to
     occur. We see nothing in the Tribunal's Determination in  [2003]  UKIAT
     00016L or Saad, Diriye and Osorio which requires us to  determine  this
     appeal on this basis. It should be noted that the  Tribunal  in  [2003]
     UKIAT 00016L was careful to say  that,  even  if  there  are  practical
     obstacles  to  removal,  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  nevertheless
     requires substantive consideration on the hypothetical basis of whether
     - if returned - a claimant would face a real risk of  persecution.  The
     hypothetical assumption referred to in that Determination  was  to  the
     claimant being returned by the Secretary  of  State,  and  not  to  the
     claimant gaining entry after refusal.

22.   We therefore  consider  the  risk  on  return  on  the  basis  of  the
     Appellant's own background and the general situation in Ethiopia.

23.   As far as  the  Appellant's  own  background  is  concerned,  she  was
     previously interned for  almost  2  years  and  escaped.  However,  our
     attention has not been drawn to any objective evidence which  indicates
     that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  have  records  of  those  who   were
     previously interned against which they would be able to run  checks  at
     the point of entry. However, in the event that such records  exist  and
     it becomes known to the Ethiopian authorities at the  border  that  the
     Appellant had been previously interned and escaped, it  would  also  be
     known that the only reason she was interned was because she  was  being
     held pending deportation on account of her ethnic origin. It  would  be
     known that she was someone who had no political involvement  whatsoever
     and that she was not someone in whom the Ethiopian authorities had  any
     interest for any reason other than to deport her to Eritrea along  with
     other persons of  Eritrean  origin  and  to  intern  her  pending  such
     deportation. Accordingly, we  are  of  the   view  that,  even  if  the
     Ethiopian authorities are aware at the time of entry that the Appellant
      had been previously interned, there is no real risk  that,  simply  on
     account of her previous internment, she would be interned again pending
     deportation. We are of the view that  whether  she  would  be  interned
     again would depend on the general attitude of the Ethiopian authorities
     towards persons  of  Eritrean  origin.  The  fact  that  she  had  been
     previously  interned  pending  deportation  has  no  bearing  on   this
     question. For the reasons we give in paragraphs 24 to 35 below, we have
     concluded that the objective evidence does not show that  there  is  in
     general terms a real risk that persons  of  Eritrean  origin  would  be
     interned by the Ethiopian authorities or deported to Eritrea.

24.   We have noted that the fourth paragraph of Section  2.d  of  the  USSD
     Report dated March 2003 (page 126 of the Appellant's  Tribunal  bundle)
     states that Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean origin  were  able  to
     obtain exit visas "but often  were  not  permitted  to  return  to  the
     country". However, our attention  has not been drawn to anything  which
     indicates that those persons of Eritrean origin who have  been  allowed
     by the Ethiopian authorities to  re-enter  Ethiopia  were  subsequently
     interned or forcibly expelled to Eritrea or suffered other  persecutory
     ill-treatment at the  hands of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  simply  on
     account of their ethnic origin.

25.   The history of the border war  between  the  two  countries  is  well-
     documented. It is sufficient for us to refer briefly to the background,
     although we make it clear that we have considered all of the  documents
     to which our attention has been drawn.  In  summary,  the  CIPU  Report
     dated October 2003 states:

      Para 4.11  Hostilities between the two  countries  broke  out  in  May
                 1998.

      Para 4.12  The dispute centred on an area of land in the Badme area.

      Para 6.108 Both sides signed the cessation  of  hostilities  agreement
                 in June 2000.

       Para  4.20   On  12th  December  2000,  both   countries   signed   a
                 comprehensive peace agreement ending the  border  conflict.
                 This provides for a permanent end to hostilities, and  also
                 the establishment of two neutral committees - one of  which
                 is to delimit and demarcate the boundary.

      Para 4.21  On 13th April  2002,  the  International  Tribunal  at  The
                 Hague announced  the  long  awaited  border  decision.  The
                 determination gave something to both sides and was welcomed
                 by the two governments. However,  some  confusion  remained
                 over which side of the border lies Badme town,  the  flash-
                 point for the conflict.

      This is a factor which has given rise to the recent  problems  at  the
     border (see paragraph 30 below).

      Para 4.22  In early March 2003, the Border Commission reported to  the
                 United Nations Security Council  that  Ethiopia's  requests
                 for changes to the border ruling in order to  "take  better
                 account of human  and  physical  geography"  threatened  to
                 undermine the peace process as a whole. Despite  Ethiopia's
                 claims that it had been promised that demarcations could be
                 refined,   later   in   March   the   Boundary   Commission
                 categorically ruled Badme to be in Eritrean territory, thus
                 rejecting Ethiopia's territorial claim over the town.

26.   The evidence concerning deportations of  persons  of  Eritrean  origin
     from Ethiopia is, in summary, as follows:

      Para 4.13, CIPU:  Large  numbers  of  Ethiopians  and  Eritreans  were
                  expelled from each other's countries in the  wake  of  the
                  border dispute. Each side accused  the  other  of  illegal
                  deportations,  involving  several  thousand  people,   and
                  mistreatment of those remaining.

      Para 6.105, CIPU By the end of 2000, as many as 75,000  Ethiopians  of
                  Eritrean origin had been compelled to leave Ethiopia,  the
                  majority   were   deported,   although   a   number   left
                  voluntarily.

      Para 4.14, CIPU  The Ethiopian Government  agreed  to  stop  deporting
                  Eritreans and  Ethiopians  of  Eritrean  origin  after  it
                  signed the cessation of hostilities agreement with Eritrea
                  in June 2000.


      USSD Report      The Ethiopian government  stopped  such  deportations
                  after the

      (March 2003)     signing of the June 2000 agreement.

      Para 6.108, CIPU Between the signing  of  the  agreement  in  December
                  2000 and  the  end  of  2002,  the  ICRC  facilitated  the
                  repatriation  of  approximately   1,388   Eritrean   POWs.
                  However, in June 2001, the ICRC refused to assist  in  the
                  repatriation of a group of over 772  civilians,  concerned
                  that they had not expressed their consent.

      We note that this is the only reported incident of the  ICRC  refusing
     to assist in  repatriation  because  of  concerns  that  the  Ethiopian
     government had not obtained the consent of those being repatriated.

      Para 6.111, CIPU Detention and deportation  is  carried  out  only  in
                  conjunction with the ICRC. The ICRC  now  participates  in
                  all repatriations to Eritrea,  and  under  ICRC  auspices,
                  1,188 POWs and 774 civilians were repatriated  to  Eritrea
                  during 2002.

      USSD Report      There were no reports  of  forced  exile  during  the
                  year 2002.
      (March 2003)     (penultimate paragraph of Section 1.d,  on  page  114
                  of the Appellant's Tribunal bundle).

      Para 6.112, CIPU A total of 153 Ethiopian and  75  Eritrean  civilians
                  were repatriated to their respective countries under  ICRC
                  auspices in 2 separate operations on 13th  and  17th  June
                  2003.

27.    In  general  terms,  therefore,  we  gain  the  impression  that  the
     Ethiopian  authorities  are  not  now  pursuing  a  policy  of   forced
     expulsions. As we have stated above, the only  known  instance  of  the
     ICRC  refusing  to  co-operate  in  repatriation   by   the   Ethiopian
     authorities was in June 2001. There have been no such reports since. We
     noted that the UNHCR's letter of December  2002  (referred  to  in  the
     grounds of application) states that there have been

            "instances where ... Ethiopians with Eritrean links  have  faced
           serious risks from  the  Ethiopian  authorities"  which  include
           "arbitrary deprivation of their Ethiopian  nationality,  summary
           expulsion to Eritrea and internment as enemy nationals".

28.   However, as no details are supplied,  we  do  not  consider  that  the
     reference to "instances...... serious risk"  shows  that  the  risk  of
     internment and forced expulsion is such as to reach the low standard of
     a reasonable likelihood. We note that the Human Rights Watch Report for
     2003 (referred to in the grounds) refers to  the  Ethiopian  government
     continuing to hold about 1,300 Eritrean POWs but we also note that  the
     USSD  report  states  that,  on  27th  November  2002,  the   Ethiopian
     government released more than 1,200 Eritrean POWs and that at  the  end
     of 2002, there were  no  more  registered  persons  from  the  conflict
     (fourth paragraph of Section  2.d,  on  page  126  of  the  Appellant's
     Tribunal bundle). We note that the UNHCR letter  dated  4th  June  2001
     (referred to in the grounds) refers to the practice of deportation from
     both countries persisting despite the signing by  both  states  of  the
     cessation of hostilities agreement in June 2000 and the peace agreement
     in December 2000. We make two observations in this connection. Firstly,
     it may be (we are not told) that this relates to the instance  in  June
     2001 when the ICRC refused to co-operate with repatriation. We  do  not
     assume that it does. We simply make the point that we are not told;  it
     would have been helpful to have this information. Secondly, that letter
     was issued in June 2001. The latest information, from the USSD   report
     dated 31st March 2003, is that there were no known  reports  of  forced
     expulsion in 2002. The Human Rights Watch Report 2002 (referred  to  in
     the grounds) refers to Eritreans being forcibly expelled from  Ethiopia
     even post-cease-fire. However, page  35  of  the  Appellant's  Tribunal
     bundle indicates that this is a  reference  to  the  June  2001  forced
     expulsion in which the ICRC refused to  participate.  We  have  already
     dealt with this above.

29.   Accordingly, we have  concluded  that,  during  the  period  from  the
     cessation of hostilities agreement in June 2000  up  until  the  recent
     increase in tension between the two countries (pages 144 to 149 of  the
     Appellant's Tribunal bundle), the evidence falls far short  of  showing
     that there was a real risk of persons of Eritrean origin being interned
     by the Ethiopian authorities or  being  deported  to  Eritrea.  We  now
     consider whether  the  recent  increase  in  tension  between  the  two
     countries increases the risk to the extent that it  can  be  said  that
     there is now a real risk that  persons  of  Eritrean  origin  would  be
     interned by the Ethiopian authorities or deported to Eritrea.

30.   Pages 144 to 149 of the Appellant's Tribunal bundle indicate that,  in
      about September 2003, Ethiopia rejected the decision of  the  Boundary
     Commission that Badme is Eritrean. The indications are  that  this  has
     led to a war  of  words  between  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia.  Eritrea  has
     strongly condemned Ethiopia for its stance and recalled its  ambassador
     (page 144).  At about the end  of  October  2003,  the  United  Nations
     confirmed the indefinite postponement of the demarcation of the  border
     (page 146). The article at page 146  reports  on  one  incident  during
     which an Eritrean militia patrol inside the  demilitarised  zone  which
     runs along the border was reported to have been intercepted by a  group
     of Ethiopians who opened fire on them. One  Eritrean  was  killed.  The
     BBC's reporter in Asmara says  that  this  sort  of  incident  "happens
     periodically". However, he says that what  gives  this  incident  extra
     significance is the increased level of political  tension  between  the
     two countries at present. This article refers to the "breakdown of  the
     peace process".

31.   Mr. McCarthy submitted that the word "breakdown" in  this  article  is
     significant. We do not, however, consider that the evidence is that the
     peace process has "broken down", although  we  accept  that  there  are
     problems with the peace process. There is no indication  that  the  two
     countries have declared that they will no longer abide by the terms  of
     the peace agreement. There  is  no  indication  that  hostilities  have
     broken out between the two countries. It  is  presumptuous  to  suggest
     that, simply because the article on page 146 uses the word "breakdown",
     this means that the peace process has indeed broken down. We take  into
     account the fact that this article states (on page 147)  that  the  two
     countries have warned  in  recent  months  of  the  threat  of  renewed
     hostilities breaking out  and that tensions have  increased.  We  note,
     from the article at page  149,  that  the  United  Nations  Mission  to
     Ethiopia and Eritrea (Unmee) has 4,200  troops  patrolling  the  buffer
     zone across the mountains along the Ethiopia-Eritrea border.

32.   It is also relevant in our view that the incident  mentioned  at  page
     146 happened on or before 3rd November 2003. More that 2 � months  have
     elapsed since. The bundle  before  us  does  not  mention  any  further
     incidents. No doubt, if there had been  any  further  incidents,  there
     would have been reports of those incidents in the  Appellant's  bundle.
     Furthermore, we note that we have not been shown any objective evidence
     of the impact on the wider population  of  Eritrean  origin  living  in
     Ethiopia of the increased tension. Given the  number  of  international
     human rights organisations who are reporting on the  situation  between
     the  two  countries  and  within   each  of  the   countries,   it   is
     inconceivable that, if the recent increased tension has led to  persons
     of Eritrean origin living in Ethiopia experiencing any problems  either
     from the general population or from the  Ethiopian  authorities,  these
     would not have been reported and, if reported, that such reports  would
     not have been included in the Appellant's bundle. We draw the inference
     from the lack of such documentary evidence that the recent increase  in
     tension between the two countries has not given rise to  such  problems
     for persons of Eritrean origin living in Ethiopia.

33.   Accordingly, on the whole of the evidence before us, we do not  accept
     that there is a real risk  of  the  Appellant  being  interned  by  the
     Ethiopian authorities or being deported by them to Eritrea, on  account
     of the  recent increase in tension between the two countries.

34.   This just leaves us to consider  whether,  as  a  person  of  Eritrean
     origin  living  in  Ethiopia,  the  Appellant  would   face   treatment
     sufficiently severe as to amount  to  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
     treatment. We accept  that  she  would  face  discrimination.  In  this
     connection, we noted, for example:

      Para 5.13, CIPU: Ethiopia is deeply divided along ethnic lines.

       Para  6.70,  CIPU:  Ethiopia  has   over   80   ethnic   groups,   or
                  nationalities. Historically, the Amharas and the Tigrayans
                  from the northern highlands have played major roles in the
                  country's life.

      Para 6.107,  CIPU:       In  2001,  approximately  80,000  to  100,000
                  Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean original  resided  in
                  the country.

      USSD Report      All Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean origin  were
                  registered with

      March  2003  the  government  and  held  identity  cards  and  6-month
                  residence permits to gain access to  hospitals  and  other
                  public services.


       Para  6.83,  CIPU:  There  continue  to  be  occasional  reports   of
                  discrimination and exclusion of Eritreans, particularly by
                  kebele  level  officials.  Reports  indicate  that  kebele
                  officials sometimes deny indigent Eritreans access to free
                  medical services.

35.   Whilst we have noted paragraph 6.83 of  the  CIPU  report,  this  only
     refers to "occasional reports" of discrimination and exclusion. We have
     noted that the ninth paragraph of section 3 of the USSD report (on page
     129 of the Appellant's Tribunal bundle) states: "Reportedly  Ethiopians
     of Eritrean origin were not allowed to register to vote". We agree with
     Mrs. Holmes that the way this is phrased indicates that  the  source(s)
     for this information may not be reliable. This is further supported  by
     the fact that this information is not attributed by the USSD report  to
     "credible reports", unlike the information contained in the immediately
     preceding sentence.  On  the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  us,  we
     concluded that the evidence about the situation of persons of  Eritrean
     origin in  Ethiopia  falls  far  short  of  showing  that  they  are  a
     persecuted ethnic group in Ethiopia. Even taking the objective evidence
     relating to the way in which persons of Eritrean origin are treated  in
     Ethiopia by the Ethiopian  authorities  cumulatively  with  the  recent
     increase in tension, we are not persuaded that there  is  a  real  risk
     that persons of Eritrean ethnic origin would face internment or  forced
     deportation to Eritrea.

36.   Considering all of the evidence cumulatively, we are  satisfied  that,
     if the Appellant is returned to Ethiopia, there is no  real  risk  that
     she would  be  interned  in  Ethiopia  or  deported  by  the  Ethiopian
     authorities to Eritrea or suffer persecutory ill-treatment or treatment
     in breach of her rights under Article 3 whilst living in Ethiopia.


      Conclusion:

37.   For all of the above reasons, we are satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
     removal to Ethiopia is not reasonably likely to be  in  breach  of  the
     United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  her
     protected rights under the ECHR. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

      Decision

      The appeal is DISMISSED.






Ms. D. K. GILL
VICE PRESIDENT                               Date: 11th March 2004
