
H-NB-V1

|Heard at Field House       |        |SP (Presevo Valley          |
|                           |        |-Korovilas Report) Serbia   |
|                           |        |and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT |
|                           |        |00206                       |
|On 16 June 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|28 July 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)                                 |
|Dr A U Chaudhry                                                   |
|Mr A F Sheward                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Blum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms P Ramachandran, Home Office Presenting    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  has
    been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against   the
    determination of an Adjudicator (Mr M J Axtell) who, in a determination
    promulgated on 22 August 2003 allowed the Respondent's appeal on asylum
    and human rights grounds.

2.    His Honour Judge N Huskinson in granting permission  considered  that
    grounds 1(b) and paragraph 2 were arguable.  They state as follows:

            "1.  The Adjudicator has erred in law by allowing  this  appeal
             under Article 3 of the ECHR and under the Refugee Convention:

                 (b)   The Adjudicator also records in  paragraph  16  that
                 the Respondent would be singled out when  the  authorities
                 became aware of him and of  his  father's  reputation  and
                 subsequent treatment would be in breach of the  two  above
                 Conventions.  He states that he has taken into account the
                 CIPU report as well as the Respondent's sources.  However,
                 the only source of the Respondent that he quotes  is  that
                 of James Korovilas the "purported" expert of paragraph 15.
                  This report contains only two sources,  the  Council  for
                 the Protection for Human Rights and Freedoms on page 5 and
                 a report by a Serbian journalist beginning at the foot  of
                 page 7.   Otherwise  there  are  neither  quotes  nor  any
                 evidence for the author's conclusions.  Mr Korovilas  says
                 on page 7 that "information about human rights  abuses  in
                 Presheva against ethnic Albanians is hard  to  find".   He
                 does not say whether he has  found  any.   Given  that  Mr
                 Korovilas did not give  evidence  and  therefore  was  not
                 available for cross-examination, it is submitted that  the
                 Adjudicator erred in law by attaching any  weight  to  the
                 report and if he had given the report no weight  he  would
                 have dismissed the appeal.

            2.   The  Adjudicator  erred  by  allowing  this  appeal  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR.   It  is  submitted  that  he  has  not
             carried out a balancing act when considering  proportionality.
             The fact that the Appellant has a job  and  friends  does  not
             outweigh the duty  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  maintain
             immigration control.

                 The Respondent is a waiter.  There is  no  reason  why  he
             could not have a job and friends on return to a country  where
             he has spent most of his life".

3.    The Tribunal had decided to allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

4.    Our starting point is indeed the report of James Korovilas  dated  12
    March 2003, that being the report before the Adjudicator.

5.    Mr Korovilas is a Senior Lecturer in Economics and a Faculty Research
    Fellow at the University of the West of England in Bristol.  He  states
    that he has been actively involved in researching the  developments  in
    Albania and Kosovo since 1996 as his specialist area of study and  that
    he has conducted research in Kosovo and Presheva on  two  occasions  in
    2000, once in 2001, twice in 2002 and once in January 2003.   He  lists
    his publications on Albania and Kosovo at page 2 of his report.

6.    Ms Ramachandran submitted Mr Korovilas seemed to be more an expert on
    economic matters, a matter indeed re-enforced  by  his  e-mail  to  the
    Appellant's representatives of 15 June 2004, that we allowed Mr Blum to
    tender in evidence with the approval of  Ms  Ramachandran.   The  email
    appears to be in  response  to  questions  put  to  him,  of  which  we
    regrettably have no details, in which he seeks to clarify the nature of
    the Forum in Pristina described in his report run by Jetemir Balaj who:

            "has invited me over to Kosovo on many occasions (first time in
        April 2000, last time in Jan 2004) to give lectures and seminars on
        a (sic) various issues relating to post-conflict reconstruction and
        inter-ethnic reconciliation."

7.    It was however noteworthy in this regard, that Mr Blum accepted  that
    Mr Korovilas's expertise appeared to be particularly  grounded  in  the
    economics sphere although he submitted that  as  such,  Mr  Korovilas's
    opinions as they related to  post-conflict  reconstruction  and  inter-
    ethnic reconciliation would be no less valid.

8.    We would agree with Ms  Ramachandran  that  Mr  Korovilas  would  not
    appear within his report of 12 March 2003 "to have used  or  cited  any
    evidence or sources when making his conclusions  in  the  report."   Ms
    Ramachandran further submitted that one of the most  important  aspects
    relating to the current situation within the Presevo Valley,  were  the
    reforms of the  police  force.   However,  although  Mr  Korovilas  had
    attributed some of the reforms to the Covic Plan in stating  there  had
    been improvements in the ethnic composition  of  the  police  and  that
    ethnic Albanians were now reasonably well represented in several  parts
    of the Presheva region, he went on to assert:

            "However, there has been a tendency for the  Serbian  State  to
        only recruit ethnic  Albanians  who  were  supporters  of  the  old
        Milosevic regime and were members of the SPS  (Socialist  Party  of
        Serbia).  The problem here is that these Albanians  are  viewed  by
        the other ethnic Albanians as having collaborated with the  Serbian
        regime and therefore relations between the ethnic  Albanian  police
        and the ethnic Albanian population in Presheva are far  from  good.
        The initiative of creating a multi-ethnic  police  force  has  been
        further hampered by the fact that the police training center  (sic)
        is in a part of central Serbia and ethnic  Albanians  who  are  not
        former SPS members are reluctant to travel  to  this  area.   As  a
        result only a very small number of ethnic Albanians  who  were  not
        SPS members have entered the multi-ethnic police force".

9.    Ms Ramachandran rightly submitted that such observations were  devoid
    of sourcing and "provide no idea as  to  where  these  assertions  come
    from".

10.   Mr Korovilas had continued at page  7  of  his  report  to  state  as
    follows:

            "In my opinion these initiatives were motivated by  the  desire
        to repair Serbia's international image as a  perpetrator  of  human
        rights  abuses  and   ensure   the   re-establishment   of   Serbia
        (Yugoslavia) as an accepted member of the international community."
         "As for the effectiveness of the various measures  implemented  in
        the Presheva regions, there is clear evidence that much work  still
        needs to be done in order to restore the confidence of  the  ethnic
        Albanians who still fear persecution from the Serbian  State.   The
        sensitivity of the current political situation  in  Serbia  ensures
        that any actions against ethnic  Albanians  in  Presheva  would  be
        carried out in an extremely covert manner.   Therefore  information
        about human rights abuses in Presheva against ethnic  Albanians  is
        very hard to find".  (Our emphasis).

11.   Again, as Ms Ramachandran rightly pointed out, Mr Korovilas failed to
    cite the source of his evidence  in  reaching  those  conclusions.   Mr
    Korovilas  had  failed  to  state  whether  he  had  ascertained   such
    information for himself and, if he did, as to how he was able to obtain
    that information.

12.   We agree with Ms Ramachandran that only two  sources  are  identified
    within the report, namely the  Council  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Freedoms in Pristina and that of a Serbian journalist.

13.   Indeed the email to which we have above  referred  of  15  June  2004
    clarifies that the Serbian journalist is one "Fazli Balaj" described by
    Mr Korovilas as "a very good friend of mine and I  stay  at  his  house
    when I am in Kosovo.  Fazli is one of the directors of the  Council  ..
    in Pristina.  Part of my research in Kosovo is focused upon the effects
    of ethnic discrimination in the labour market.  Fazli gives  me  access
    to the records kept by the Council .. which is vital for  my  research.
    This co-operation between us also started in April 2000".

14.   Those then, are the only sources upon which Mr Korovilas  appears  to
    have relied within his report and even then, we note that there  is  no
    indication that  they  were  the  sources  upon  which  Mr  Korovilas's
    observations were based and if so  as  to  which  source  provided  the
    different aspects of the information upon which Mr Korovilas relied.

15.   In terms of the reliability of the report a  further  feature  of  it
    that causes the  Tribunal  some  concern,  relates  to  Mr  Korovilas's
    analysis of the security situation for ethnic Albanians in the Presheva
    region.  In this regard he points out that:

            "The ethnic Albanian population of Presheva  are  resentful  of
        the fact they have been left out of the UN Protectorate  of  Kosovo
        since this leaves them vulnerable to Serbian oppression.  This  had
        led to an increased level of Albanian nationalism in  the  Presheva
        region,  which  in  turn  has  swelled  the  ranks  of   the   pro-
        independent's  paramilitary  movement,  NLA  (National   Liberation
        Army).  The UCPMB has launched a series  of  attacks  upon  Serbian
        police and military units in Presheva which in turn have prompted a
        purging of suspected UCPMB members in the Presheva  region.   These
        actions have resulted in a significant loss of life on  both  sides
        of the conflict,  a  flood  of  refugees  out  of  the  region  and
        ultimately on April 24 2001 to  the  deployment  of  Yugoslav  army
        units with full conflict capabilities within  the  Presheva  region
        buffer zone".

16.   In describing a situation that developed  "ultimately"  on  April  24
    2001, it is a good indication  that  this  entire  passage  relates  to
    events up until  April  2001  in  the  circumstances  of  a  report  Mr
    Korovilas  prepared  in  March  2003.   As  Mr   Ramachandran   rightly
    submitted, the matters referred to in the above  passage  were  clearly
    out of date.

17.   At the outset of the hearing we had drawn to  the  attention  of  the
    parties a decision of the Tribunal in Tahiri [2002] UKIAT  08386  where
    at paragraph 26 the following was stated:

            "In May 2001 the  UCPMB  accepted  an  amnesty  from  the  Serb
        authorities.  The organisation handed over  significant  quantities
        of weapons, disbanded and withdrew from the Presevo area.   By  the
        end of May with the agreement of the  International  Community  and
        ethnic Albanian leaders, the Serb  forces  were  able  to  complete
        their phased return to the GSZ.  On 3 June 2002  the  FRY  assembly
        passed an amnesty law for persons suspected of committing terrorist
        acts in southern Serbia between 1 January 1999 and 31 May 2001".

18.   In terms of the reliability of Mr Korovilas's report and  the  weight
    to be attached to it, the Tribunal cannot but  fail  to  note  that  he
    makes no reference to these  matters  within  his  report.   Indeed,  a
    reader unfamiliar with the  current  situation  would  be  forgiven  on
    reading this report, to assume that the  UCpMB  remain  active  in  the
    region.  We  find  it  extraordinary  in  such  circumstances  that  Mr
    Korovilas who puts himself forward as an expert could  have  failed  to
    demonstrate any awareness of the May 2001 amnesty and the withdrawal of
    the UCPMB from the Preshevo area.

19.   Page 5 of his report clearly relates to events of 2000 and 2001.

20.   As such, it begs the question as to  whether  Mr  Korovilas  actually
    took the trouble to address the Appellant's case or as  to  whether  he
    had simply relied on views  that  he  may  have  expressed  in  earlier
    reports notwithstanding that at the top of his report Mr Korovilas  has
    stated:

            "I have read  your  client's  statement  and  the  Home  Office
        reasons for refusal dated 26 June 2002.

            I understand that your client is an ethnic  Albanian  from  the
        town of Medvegj in the  Presheva  region  of  southern  Serbia.   I
        appreciate that in his statement your client describes  himself  as
        coming from Kosovo.  This is assertion (sic)  that  he  comes  from
        Kosovo  is  simply  a  reference  to  the  view  of  many  Albanian
        nationalists that the Presheva region is a  part  of  Kosovo  which
        fell outside of the UN administered region".

  21. It is at this point, namely the opening of Mr Korovilas's report that
      any  further  reference  to  this  Appellant   and   his   particular
      circumstances end.


  22. It was indeed noteworthy that Mr Blum agreed with  us  and  certainly
      did not challenge, Ms Ramachandran's assertion that  the  report  did
      not actually  address  the  Appellant's  case.   As  Ms  Ramachandran
      rightly submitted if it did:

            "Why at the top of page 6 refer to the UCPMB  when  his  family
        were not linked with them but with the LDK and  KLA  and  there  is
        nothing in the report about that".

23.   The Tribunal having  considered  the  report  cannot  find  a  single
    sentence within it that relates to the particular circumstances of this
    Appellant other than  the  opening  passage  to  which  we  have  above
    referred.

24.   This raises a particular concern, given that  the  Adjudicator  found
    the Appellant's case to be "exceptional".

25.   Indeed, at paragraph 16 of his determination the  Adjudicator  states
    as follows:

            "Whilst noting all that is said in  the  Country  Assessment  I
        regard this Appellant as falling into an exceptional category,  not
        merely because he is an ethnic Albanian brought up a (sic) in still
        (sic) very "sensitive area"  because  of  Albanian  aspiration  but
        because "de facto" the  region  continues  to  be  dominated  by  a
        Serbian administration with Serbian police and security forces  who
        I am satisfied would become aware of the Appellant  on  his  return
        and indeed of his father's reputation and standing in the  LDK/KLA.
        It may be that changes have indeed been put into place and that the
        efforts under the Covic Plan will produce in future  generations  a
        more harmonious mix of Serbs and ethnic  Albanians  such  that  the
        fears entertained by the  likes  of  the  Appellant  would  not  be
        justified.  I do not find having weighed matters carefully  in  the
        balance that that is the situation  at  present.   I  fear  on  the
        Appellant's behalf that he will be singled out and having  come  to
        the attention of the authorities there are substantial grounds  for
        believing that he is at real risk of  either  persecution  or  ill-
        treatment  that  would  breach  the  Article  3  threshold".   (Our
        emphasis).

  26. Indeed, Mr Blum placed particular emphasis on the fact  that  it  was
      the Adjudicator's concern that the Appellant would be  "singled  out"
      upon return because of his father's claimed high profile and standing
      in the LDK/KLA that was central to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  and
      accounted for the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the  Appellant  fell
      into "an exceptional category".


  27. It is therefore in  our  view,  all  the  more  remarkable,  that  Mr
      Korovilas instructed as an expert upon these  matters  to  prepare  a
      case  specific  report  relating  to  this   Appellant's   particular
      circumstances, should have failed  to  even  remotely  address  these
      matters within his report.

28.   We are concerned  that  notwithstanding  Mr  Korovilas's  failure  to
    address the central issues for which his report was  commissioned,  yet
    alone the other aspects of it to which we have above referred, that the
    Adjudicator would appear to attach such weight to it  in  reaching  his
    own conclusions.  Indeed it  is  apparent  from  paragraph  15  of  the
    Adjudicator's determination that he failed to appreciate that  much  of
    the   information   contained    within    Mr    Korovilas's    report,
    (notwithstanding that the Adjudicator recognised  it  was  dated  March
    2003, and that he had  included  the  conclusion,  that  "Mr  Korovilas
    considered that the  evidence  suggested  that  the  situation  in  the
    Presheva region was still not entirely safe for ethnic Albanians")  was
    largely based upon out of date and largely unexplained information.

  28. We note that Mr Korovilas did not attend to give evidence before  the
      Adjudicator so that any  concerns  raised  by  his  report  could  be
      tested.  Indeed, Mr Blum informed us that for reasons of  funding  it
      had not been possible to produce Mr Korovilas to give evidence before
      us.
  29. For the above reasons, we find that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      attach significant weight to Mr Korovilas's report  in  reaching  his
      conclusions on the objective material.

30.   Indeed, the Adjudicator's assessment of the  objective  material  was
    further in our view, rightly challenged by Ms Ramachandran in terms  of
    his failure to take account of the CIPU Country Report  before  him  as
    regards the situation in the Presevo Valley.

   31.Ms Ramachandran was incorrect  in  submitting  that  the  Adjudicator
   having claimed to have considered the report failed to make any  further
   reference to it.  Indeed,  he  made  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
   Presenting Officer had drawn his attention to paragraphs 5.29 to 5.32 of
   the report  (see  paragraph  12).   Further,  at  paragraph  14  of  his
   determination, he had referred to a further passage at paragraph 6.68.


   32.As Mr Blum indeed accepted,  although  the  CIPU  Report  before  the
   Adjudicator was that of April 2003, the Tribunal not least in the  light
   of the starred Tribunal decision of the President in [2004] UKIAT  00032
   D (Croatia) and other cases, were entitled to take the  view  that  once
   permission to appeal was granted and the appeal was before the Tribunal,
   the grounds had to be considered along with any other material  relevant
   to a decision on the appeal and the appeal had to be dealt with  in  the
   light of the current material.  The Tribunal had the  appeal  before  it
   and had to determine it.  It was required to do so in the light  of  the
   current available country material and its own guidance.

33.   However, the hearing before the Adjudicator took  place  on  29  July
    2003 and therefore post-dated by some months the  promulgation  of  the
    decision of the Tribunal in Tahiri (above).

34.   In this regard, as the Tribunal have stated on many occasions,  (see,
    for example, Almalikuyu [2002] UKIAT 00749) it is not the  task  of  an
    Adjudicator when evaluating the objective country materials before  him
    to select out a particular evaluation without placing it side  by  side
    with others in order to make a qualitative assessment and arrive  at  a
    balanced overview of those materials.  Further, it is not without  more
    simply to adopt a contrary view to that taken by the Tribunal  and  the
    Courts.  Whilst Adjudicators are obviously not  bound  by  findings  of
    fact on general country conditions made by either  the  Courts  or  the
    Tribunal  in  other  cases  decided  previously,  neither  should  they
    approach  their  task  as  if  their  assessment  was  the  first  ever
    undertaken  by  a  judicial  decision-maker.   The  extent   to   which
    Adjudicators and the Tribunal function as  "expert"  Tribunals  depends
    very much on them keeping a close track of what assessments  have  been
    made previously  and  why.   Hence  Adjudicators  should  give  careful
    attention to previous Tribunal considerations that have been made as to
    the situation in the particular country.

35.   In Tahiri the Tribunal were further mindful of an earlier decision in
    the case of Zejnullahu [2002] UKIAT 05130 which found:

            "In short we consider the  most  recent  materials  demonstrate
        that there is now a sufficiency of protection for ethnic  Albanians
        in general in the Presevo Valley.  For an asylum claim  brought  by
        an ethnic Albanian from southern Serbia to succeed now, there would
        need to be some exceptional circumstances justifying  treatment  of
        an Appellant as still within a continuing risk category".

  36. In Zejnullahu the Appellant, although he had links  with  the  UCPMB,
      had been arrested and released by the Serbian authorities.  It was on
      that basis that the Tribunal held that the Serbian authorities had no
      interest in him.


  37. We now look at the  Appellant's  case.   It  was  recognised  by  the
      Adjudicator in setting out the Appellant's account in evidence,  that
      this Appellant whilst still a very young man  (indeed  no  more  than
      aged 17 when he left the country), had been a message  deliverer  for
      his father whom he claims was a longstanding and active member of the
      LDK.  Although the Appellant maintained the fear that there would  be
      Serbian interest in him because of inter alia of  his  father's  past
      activities, it is apparent that  the  defining  event  that  led  the
      Appellant to flee was in December  1998  when  the  family  home  was
      surrounded by police and the Appellant, with his father's assistance,
      escaped through a small window and fled to Macedonia.  He later heard
      that his father had been arrested and weapons and ammunition had been
      found in the family home that  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Serbian
      police.



  38. The Adjudicator appears to have failed to take into account the  fact
      that the Appellant left the country, now some six years ago, and  the
      passage of time nor the progress subsequently made  under  the  Covic
      Plan.


  39. Ms Ramachandran further submitted that apparently, there was only one
      brief period of detention, in 1995 when the Appellant  was  aged  14,
      from which the Appellant was released after two  days.   She  rightly
      submitted in such circumstances, that it  was  questionable  that  as
      such, there would be a serious possibility that the  Appellant  would
      now be seen as a serious suspect, let  alone  in  1995  when  he  was
      briefly detained.  In all other respects this Appellant did not  come
      to the attention of the authorities.

  40. We would agree with Ms  Ramachandran's  submission,  that  given  the
      reforms and the passage of time and the improvement in the  political
      situation, the Adjudicator was  wrong,  notwithstanding  the  claimed
      political activities of the Appellant's father, to conclude that this
      was a young man who was now in a vulnerable or  exceptional  category
      such that he would be at real risk on return.

41.   The Appellant had otherwise, never  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities and the reforms that had taken place under the  Covic  Plan
    would mean that the Appellant would now  return  to  a  very  different
    situation on the ground from the one that he left.  He was 17  when  he
    left and was now aged 22.  He was single and in  good  health  and  his
    commendable efforts when he  arrived  in  a  strange  country  to  have
    established an independent life for himself here,  would  hold  him  in
    good stead upon return.  She rightly submitted that he was therefore in
    no different position from anyone else coming from that  region  during
    the conflict.

42.   Indeed, in Tahiri, the Tribunal bore in  mind  the  UNHCR's  detailed
    assessment of the implementation of the Covic  Plan  in  January  2002.
    Significant progress had been made in  many  areas.   In  particular  a
    multi-ethnic police force had been established with  training  provided
    by the OSCE.

43.   The report stated that the positive improvement in the  Presevo  area
    had been held by the international community as a great success for the
    Serb administration and local ethnic Albanian leaders.  Although  there
    had been sporadic  incidents  of  violence  from  the  ethnic  Albanian
    extremists,  the  situation  in  the  Presevo  area  had  continued  to
    stabilise with the gradual implementation of the Covic Plan.   Although
    the Tribunal at that time, were mindful of what they described as  "the
    recent history of the area" that left the potential for a  conflict  to
    flare again, the continuing willingness of all  parties  to  engage  in
    negotiation and the Serb authority's commitment to addressing the needs
    of the local population marked a radical change of  approach  and  gave
    cause for optimism.  There was produced before the Tribunal in  Tahiri,
    a letter from the UNHCR regarding returns via Belgrade.  It stated that
    the Belgrade office of the UNHCR had informed London  that  individuals
    from Presevo who had been returned through Belgrade should not face any
    undue hardships provided that the person concerned  had  the  necessary
    travel documentation and adequate arrangements were made for their safe
    travel to their place of origin.  Security situation reports  indicated
    that there had been a cessation of open conflict and only a few reports
    recorded serious violations by security forces in southern Serbia.

44.   We now have the benefit of the CIPU  Country  Report  of  April  2004
    which records that by the end of 2002  the  Multi-Ethnic  Police  Force
    (MEPF) had been deployed throughout southern Serbia and were trained in
    modern police tactics.  However  a  UN  situation  report  on  southern
    Serbia  of  January  2002  (and  therefore  one   that   predated   the
    Adjudicator's determination) recorded that most  ethnic  Albanians  who
    fled to Kosovo had now returned to their homes and  that  incidents  of
    police harassment of ethnic Albanians in southern Serbia had  decreased
    significantly over 2001.

45.   The US State Department Report for 2003  noted  that  there  were  no
    reports of physical abuse or brutality during 2003.

46.   A Human Rights Watch  Report  of  2003  described  the  situation  in
    Southern Serbia as remaining "a  relative  success  story  on  minority
    rights ...".  There had been sporadic incidents of violence from ethnic
    Albanian extremists.  The conclusion of the International Crisis  Group
    of December 2003 continued by stating "Southern Serbia is dependant  in
    part on the continued goodwill of both the Serbs and Albanians as  well
    as on the continued engagement of the international community".

  47. We are of course mindful of the outbreak of violence that  tragically
      resulted in the deaths of nineteen people in the area in  March  2004
      to which indeed Mr Blum made reference and  referred  to  within  the
      recent April 2004 CIPU report at page 88. Thankfully there have  been
      no significant reports of such further tensions within the area.

48.   We further note that the LDK, of which it is claimed the  Appellant's
    father was  an  active  member,  is  listed  within  the  report  as  a
    recognised legal party in Kosovo and indeed its  Chairman,  Dr  Ibrahim
    Rugova was elected and has indeed been present in  Kosovo  since  early
    2002.

49.   Of particular interest is a passage in the report at paragraph S.6.66
    which includes inter alia the following:

             "Also  according  to  the  (UK)  Foreign  and   Commonwealth's
        chronology of events in or affecting Kosovo assembled in July 2002,
        in  May  2001,  the  UCPMB  accepted  an  amnesty  from  the   Serb
        authorities. Continuing, the report states, the organisation handed
        over significant quantities of weapons, disbanded and withdrew from
        the  Presevo  area.  Also  according  to  the  (UK)   Foreign   and
        Commonwealth's  chronology  of  events  in  or  affecting   Kosovo,
        assembled in July 2002, on 3 June 2002 the  FRY  assembly  formally
        passed  the  amnesty  law  for  persons  suspected  of   committing
        terrorist acts in southern Serbia between 1 January 1999 and 31 May
        2001.  The Humanitarian Law Centre confirmed later in 2002 that the
        amnesty has been implemented correctly". (The emphasis is ours).

50.   This is information that  would  and  should  have  been  within  the
    Adjudicator's knowledge, but to which he failed  to  refer  within  his
    determination.

51.   In this regard, it was  noteworthy  that  Mr  Blum  most  fairly  and
    realistically accepted, that given that the Appellant did not know what
    happened to his father after 1998 or indeed  whether  he  was  dead  or
    alive, the fact that the Appellant's father might have been involved in
    some kind of Amnesty could not be disregarded.  He, however  maintained
    that we could not speculate as to what may have happened,  although  he
    accepted that there was clearly an Amnesty.

  52. The Adjudicator failed to  give  to  give  any  consideration  as  to
      whether the Appellant's father would have benefited from the  Amnesty
      or that in such circumstances it would be difficult to see why  there
      would be any continued interest (if there was interest at all) in the
      Appellant now because of his family association.


  53. Mr Blum had asked  us  to  "trust"  Mr  Korovilas's  report,  but  he
      acknowledged that Mr Korovilas had failed  to  deal  with  risk  upon
      return in relation to the Appellant's particular circumstances and as
      to  whether  he  would  now  be  targeted  because  of  that   family
      relationship.  As such we can but only conclude that for this  reason
      as well  the  others  to  which  we  have  above  referred,  that  Mr
      Korovilas's report  is  not  one  that  we  can  trust  nor,  in  the
      circumstances, a report upon which the Adjudicator should have placed
      any weight.

54.   We have the benefit of Mr Korovilas's further report of 6 June  2004.
    Regrettably it only serves to reinforce our earlier findings as to  the
    reliability  of   Mr   Korovilas's   opinions   in   these   particular
    circumstances.  He claims that the  information  and  opinions  in  his
    latest report are based on several sources, namely:

            "The findings of my research trip to  Kosovo  and  Presheva  in
        July 2003.  Secondly I  have  several  contacts  in  the  UNHCR  in
        Pristina who provide me with up-to-date  information  and  opinions
        and ethnic minorities in the region.  Thirdly, I  have  an  ongoing
        research project with  The  Forum  in  Pristina  which  is  a  well
        respected political NGO currently  funded  by  US  office  and  the
        British office in  Pristina.   The  Forum  also  provides  me  with
        invaluable information on current events in the region.

            I have  also  worked  on  several  projects  with  the  leading
        Albanian civil rights lawyer Fazli Balaj since 1999".

   55.We are  mindful  that  in  his  subsequent  email  Mr  Korovilas  has
   described Mr Balaj as a very good friend of his with whom he has stayed.
   Other than Mr Korovilas's own claim, we have no information to establish
   that Mr Balaj is regarded as a leading Albanian civil rights lawyer.


   56.The recent report appears to cover essentially the  same  information
   as contained in the report of March 2003.  It is again apparent that  Mr
   Korovilas's understanding of the security situation for ethnic Albanians
   is based largely on out of date information. Indeed, even with regard to
   his referral  to  recent  developments,  the  precise  sourcing  of  the
   information is not identified.


   57.Indeed to the extent that Mr Korovilas now  identifies  his  sources,
   they are expressed in somewhat  vague  terms  such  as  "contacts"  with
   members  of  the  UNHCR.   As  with  the  earlier   report,   and   more
   particularly, the information contained within it, is  not  specific  to
   the questions that Mr Korovilas was required  to  address  in  what  was
   supposed to be a case specific report. For example, it does  not  appear
   to take into account, as the current objective  evidence  reveals,  that
   the KLA have been routed, and that to the extent that  they  now  exist,
   they are a disparate entity.

58.   Mr Blum recognised that:

            "If the Tribunal do not accept the evidence of Mr Korovilas but
        prefer the Presevo has advanced and  prefer  the  evidence  in  the
        CIPU, my argument is torn from my feet and I could not  suggest  or
        establish a risk to the Appellant under the Refugee Convention.   I
        simply ask you to prefer the Korovilas reports".

  59. For the reasons given, we attach no  weight  to  the  reports  of  Mr
      Korovilas and prefer the objective material otherwise before us.


60.   We conclude that the Adjudicator was wrong to place reliance upon the
    report of Mr Korovilas before him and failed to take  adequate  account
    of the objective material available to him in wrongly  concluding  that
    the Appellant was in an exceptional category and at continued  risk  on
    return.

61.   We would add in this regard, that although we appreciate the  Presevo
    Valley is a relatively small area, the objective material  reveals  (as
    indeed it did before the Adjudicator) that notwithstanding that a  2002
    Serbian Census of the area demonstrated that in  the  Appellant's  home
    town of Medvedj Albanians were in a minority, it was apparent that they
    were in a clear majority in Presevo and Bujanovac.   It  was  estimated
    there were up to 100,000 ethnic Albanians living in the area who formed
    the majority of the population according to the Humanitarian Law Centre
    in Belgrade.

62.   We therefore conclude that the Appellant has failed  to  establish  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason  and
    that his removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach  of
    its obligations under the Refugee Convention.

63.   We now turn to the Adjudicator's consideration of the Article 8  ECHR
    issues raised  in  this  case.   He  states  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    determination that he has  considered  the  case  of  Mahmood  and  its
    guidelines.  The Adjudicator concluded that he took account of the fact
    that the Appellant had nothing to return to and that  it  was  believed
    that his mother  and  sisters  might  be  in  Macedonia  and  that  the
    Appellant was unaware  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  his  father.   The
    Adjudicator continued:

             "The  more  significant  aspect  however  that  falls  to   be
        considered carefully is the life that this Appellant has  built  up
        in the  United  Kingdom  and  the  achievements  that  by  his  own
        endeavours he has secured over more than four  and  a  half  years.
        Those achievements which I have spelt out earlier  are  impressive:
        he is already a useful citizen and has the potential without  being
        a burden to the state of not only being self-supporting but also  a
        responsible  member;  the  character  references   describing   his
        personal qualities are in themselves impressive of the  society  in
        which he now lives.  He has and  enjoys  a  quality  of  life,  the
        central feature of which is hard work and endeavour to get where he
        has today.  I find it would be disproportionate and unnecessary  in
        the balancing exercise that has to be  undertaken  for  his  to  be
        returned to FRY (Serbia)."

64.   We are satisfied that the Adjudicator's reasoning amounts to an error
    of law.  It would be right to observe that Mr Blum in highlighting  the
    Appellant's   achievements   as   reflected   in   the    Adjudicator's
    determination accepted inter alia, that the Tribunal were bound by  the
    starred Tribunal decision of the Learned  President  sitting  with  two
    Vice Presidents in M (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT  00024  that  in  assessing
    proportionality under Article 8 the issue should  be  assessed  on  the
    basis of whether the Respondent's decision was lawful.  There can be no
    doubt in the circumstances of this  appeal  that  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant would indeed be  lawful  and  one  that  notwithstanding  the
    Appellant's estimable characteristics and talents, would  help  him  to
    adjust to life in Southern Serbia and indeed would  be  of  benefit  to
    that community. We are satisfied that  his  removal  would  involve  no
    breach of the Appellant's human rights and that it is  a  proportionate
    response to the interests of immigration control and falling within the
    range of reasonable conclusions available to the Secretary of State.

65.   For the sake of completeness we make  it  clear  we  find  that  this
    country's obligations under the ECHR would  not  be  breached  by  that
    return.

66.   We therefore reverse the decision of the Adjudicator  and  allow  the
    appeal of the Secretary of State.



                                                               N H GOLDSTEIN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



Approved for electronic distribution.


