
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |                            |
|On 5 April 2004            |        |                            |
|Prepared  5 April 2004     |        |KR (Perceived bias- fair    |
|                           |        |hearing) Iraq [2004] UKIAT  |
|                           |        |00117                       |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|......26th May 2004......                                         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Vice President)                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr A Taylor, of Counsel, instructed by
                       Henry Hyams
For the respondent:          Mr  S  Halliday,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, from the KAA,  appeals  against  the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  C  B  Kealy,  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the decision made on 17 May 2001 giving directions  for
      his removal following the refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  10  December  1999,
      claiming asylum the same day.    The basis of his claim  was  that  he
      was at risk of persecution by members of the Iraqi government security
      forces operating in Northern Iraq.   He also claimed to be at risk  of
      persecution from members of the Islamist Party in Kurdistan because he
      had provided medical treatment for  a  person  who  suffered  injuries
      inflicted by that party.   For the  reasons  which  the  Secretary  of
      State set out in his letter dated 14 March 2001 he was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant was  entitled  to  asylum.   There  was  an  appeal
      against this decision which was dismissed by  an  Adjudicator.    This
      determination was set aside by the Tribunal and  the  appeal  remitted
      for a fresh hearing which took place before Mr Kealy on 7 July 2003.

3.    The appellant's claim can briefly be summarised as follows.   He is  a
      pharmacist by training and occupation.   For several years  he  worked
      for two non-governmental organisations (NGOs) operating  in  the  KAA.
      It was his claim that those who worked for NGOs were routinely pursued
      and harassed even in the KAA by forces loyal to the Ba'ath  regime  in
      Baghdad.  He said that he was specifically targeted in February  1996.
      He and others when travelling were shot at by people  who  might  have
      been Iraqi agents.    There was a further incident in May  1999.  When
      travelling, he was ambushed.  One of his fellow  workers  was  injured
      and a guard killed.

4.    In November 1999 a man who had been shot by Islamists came to him  for
      treatment.  Despite threats from the Islamists the appellant continued
      to treat the injured man.   He received a warning letter and a meeting
      was arranged.   The appellant says that he was taken blindfolded to  a
      house where a high-ranking Islamist accused him of being  a  communist
      and anti-religion.   He threatened to have the appellant  shot  unless
      he stopped treating the injured man  who  was  meant  to  die.     The
      appellant was allowed to go only after agreeing to administer a lethal
      injection.

5.    A few days later a man, whom he recognised as one  of  the  Islamists,
      followed him as he was going home and shot  at  him  as  he  tried  to
      escape.   He managed to reach home  and  tell  his  parents  what  had
      happened.  His father arranged for him to stay elsewhere until he left
      Iraq.    Two days later people shot at the family  house  and  injured
      his mother.  It was his claim that he would be at risk either from the
      Ba'athists or from the Islamists  who  had  their  main  base  in  PUK
      controlled Suleimaniya.   On 22 November 1999  the  appellant  crossed
      into Iran and then travelled  to  Turkey  in  a  group  of  12  people
      accompanied by an agent.   They had a narrow  escape  when  they  were
      fired on at the Turkish border.   He reached Istanbul on  29  November
      1999 and after a few days travelled by lorry to what turned out to  be
      the United Kingdom.

6.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator it  was  conceded  that  in  the
      light of the change of circumstances the appellant no longer  had  any
      fear of persecution from the former regime in Iraq.    It  was  argued
      that he would still be at risk from IMIK.   In evidence a letter dated
      10 November 1999 was produced from the military office  of  IMIK.   It
      urged all members of the military office to arrest the appellant.   On
      receiving this letter the appellant complained to the police.   He was
      then given a document  dated  14  November  1999  which  recorded  his
      complaint.   This document requests officials to arrest the  offenders
      and bring them to justice.    No one  was  arrested.    The  appellant
      accused the PUK and its police of insincerity because they were funded
      from Iran and were on good terms with IMIK.    He gave  oral  evidence
      about the occasion when he was shot at on the way home.   He said that
      he sensed that he was being followed and quickened his pace.   The man
      then shouted his name and he turned round.   He saw that the  man  was
      armed and he ran.    The man shot at him and missed.    The  appellant
      panicked and ran home.    He did not go directly but lurked nearby  in
      case he had been followed.  Once he realised that it was safe he  then
      returned home.   He recognised the man who shot at him as one  of  the
      people who had taken him to the IMIK base.  During  his  evidence  the
      appellant was referred to a letter from Better Service  for  Kurdistan
      (BSK) certifying that the appellant had worked as a driver  from  "may
      1998 to may 1999".  The Adjudicator is said to have commented that the
      document had been typed by an amateur.

7.     In  her  submissions  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that   the
      appellant's evidence was not credible.   He had described  being  shot
      at on four occasions but had never been personally injured despite  on
      his account being the intended target on each occasion, a result which
      smacked of Hollywood.    If he had truly considered himself to  be  at
      risk from the Iraqis he would hardly have exposed himself to the  risk
      of arrest at checkpoints having recently worked with an NGO, nor would
      he have been simply released if the Iraqis had any interest in him  as
      an individual.   Mr Moralli who appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant
      before the Adjudicator submitted that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
      credible.  He referred to the BSK letter which he submitted should  be
      accepted on its own terms.   It contained typing errors but they might
      just as well be those made by typists whose  first  language  was  not
      English.

8.    The Adjudicator has set out his conclusions  in  paragraph  9  of  his
      determination.   In the light of the  concession  that  there  was  no
      longer any fear from the former regime, he considered  the  risk  from
      IMIK.  He commented that the first thing which  emerged  with  clarity
      was that before the claim that he provided medical assistance  to  the
      victim of an IMIK shooting, the appellant had not been of any interest
      to the Islamists.   As a person with access to the intended victim, it
      was just possible that the Islamists tried to persuade  the  appellant
      to finish the task for them and at that time  they  were  sufficiently
      angry with his failure to comply to  try  to  kill  or  frighten  him.
      The Adjudicator was inclined to accept the police report as a  genuine
      document. It recorded the second of the two named  incidents  but  not
      the first.    It made no reference to the deliberate attempt to  shoot
      the appellant in the street, an incident which must  have  been  known
      about when the report was made.

  9.  That made the Adjudicator less inclined to believe that that  incident
      had happened.   He commented that the evidence was further weakened by
      the astonishing  failure  of  the  would-be  assassin  to  follow  the
      appellant home.  They must have already known where he  lived  because
      they had already been there and they were able  to  shoot  it  up  and
      throw a grenade only a few days later.   He did not believe this  part
      of the appellant's story.   He also did not  believe  that  there  had
      ever been an IMIK document in the form produced in evidence.   He  did
      however accept as possibly true the claim that Islamists had  shot  up
      his home  and  injured  his  mother.   The  appellant  may  have  been
      genuinely afraid at that time and decided to leave for that reason.

10.   However,  it was apparent from his own evidence and the  PUK  document
      that the PUK police were  receptive  to  his  complaints  against  the
      Islamists.   The objective evidence supported  that  conclusion.    It
      was the Adjudicator's view that when the appellant  left  the  KAA  in
      1999 there was a sufficiency  of  protection  provided  by  the  local
      police.  There was no evidence  that  the  situation  had  got  worse:
      quite the contrary.  It was the Adjudicator's view that  there  was  a
      fully functioning police and judicial system in each of the KAA  areas
      which was capable of providing effective protection.    For  a  person
      who feared an Islamist group in 1999 there  seemed  on  the  available
      evidence to be no reason to believe that in 2003  he  would  have  any
      continuing reason to fear that group or its members.

11.   The Islamists had fragmented in 2001  and  while  there  may  well  be
      surviving splinters still in  the  KAA,  those  splinter  groups  were
      engaged in other matters than the disobedience of a minor pharmacist 4
      year previously.    The ability and desirability of the  KDP  and  the
      PUK to  eliminate  Islamist  splinter  groups  and  afford  protection
      against them must be even stronger than in 1999.    For these  reasons
      the Adjudicator dismissed the appeal on both asylum and  human  rights
      grounds.

12.   The Tribunal have set these matters out at length  so  the  complaints
      made about the Adjudicator in the grounds of appeal  can  be  seen  in
      context.    Following the hearing Mr Moralli  wrote  a  note  for  his
      instructing solicitors expressing  the  view  that  the  Adjudicator's
      approach to the case had been "presumptuous" and that if he  dismissed
      the appeal, his findings would be unsafe because of his approach.   He
      identified two particular issues.   During  examination  in  chief  Mr
      Moralli directed the appellant's attention to the letter from the BSK.
        He had intended to ask the appellant to clarify the  source  of  the
      document when the Adjudicator commented that  the  document  had  been
      "typed by an amateur" as the dates May 1998 - May 1999 had been  spelt
      with a small "m".  Mr Morralli says that he  responded  by  indicating
      that this was no reason to dismiss the  document  or  its  legitimacy.
      He addressed this issue in his closing submissions.   The second issue
      raised is that during closing submissions the Presenting Officer  said
      that it was not credible that the appellant had been shot at  on  four
      separate occasions and each time it was others who were injured and he
      had escaped. The Adjudicator had intervened saying and suggesting that
      this was akin to a Hollywood movie.   The  Presenting  Officer  agreed
      with that and adopted the Adjudicator's comments.   In his submissions
      Mr Moralli had addressed the  unfairness  of  such  a  conclusion  and
      pointed out that on the first two shooting incidents the appellant had
      never claimed that he was targeted personally.    The Adjudicator then
      pointed out that it was not the Presenting  Officer  but  he  who  had
      described  the  version  of  events  as  a  Hollywood  movie.    These
      criticisms re-appear in the grounds of appeal to support a  contention
      that the appellant did not have a fair and impartial hearing.

13.   At the hearing before the Tribunal Mr Taylor did not  seek  to  pursue
      any argument based on the comment about  whether  or  not  the  letter
      produced from BSK had been typed by an amateur.    He  restricted  his
      submissions to the comment about whether the appellant's  account  was
      akin to a Hollywood movie.    He argued that  the  issue  was  whether
      this comment encapsulated the respondent's submission  or  whether  it
      indicated the direction  in  which  the  Adjudicator's  thoughts  were
      moving.   He conceded that he could not suggest  that  an  Adjudicator
      should be prevented from raising  issues  which  concerned  him.    He
      argued that this comment indicated that the Adjudicator  regarded  the
      appeal as a foregone conclusion.   He pushed this  submission  to  its
      logical conclusion by arguing that the Adjudicator's analysis  of  the
      evidence in paragraph 9 was not an accurate  reflection  of  what  the
      Adjudicator believed but was written in such a way as to fend off  any
      criticism of his comments made during the hearing.

14.   Mr Halliday submitted that it  was  entirely  speculative  to  suggest
      that  the  determination  was  worded  in  a  way   to   redress   the
      Adjudicator's  comments  during  the  hearing.    An  Adjudicator  was
      entitled to raise matters which concerned him.   It may be that it was
      unfortunate to use language such as akin  to  a  Hollywood  movie  but
      there was no reason to believe that there had been  any  injustice  or
      partiality.  Both  the  appellant's  counsel  and  the  appellant  had
      commented on this issue.   There was no substance in  the  grounds  of
      appeal.

15.   Two criticisms are made of the Adjudicator in the grounds  of  appeal.
       The first is that he questioned the document  produced  from  BSK  by
      saying that it had been typed by an amateur because May was spelt with
      a small "m".  Mr Taylor rightly did not seek to pursue this criticism.
        It is far better for the Adjudicator to raise matters which  concern
      him such as the typing of the document so that they can  be  addressed
      in evidence.

16.   The second issue is that the appellant did not  have  a  fair  hearing
      because during the Presenting Officer's  submissions  the  Adjudicator
      intervened suggesting that the event described by the  appellant  were
      akin to a Hollywood movie.   According to the grounds, the  Presenting
      Officer agreed and adopted the suggestion as part and  parcel  of  her
      closing submissions.   Accordingly to ground 2.2 Mr Moralli  addressed
      the unfairness of such a conclusion in his closing submissions.

17.   The Adjudicator has been  asked  to  comment  on  this  ground.    His
      comments read as follows:

      "The point which Miss Birtles was making during  the  submissions  was
      that the appellant had managed to emerge unscathed  from  the  various
      determined attacks on him, a situation which I likened to a  Hollywood
      movie, thinking of a particular situation usually  in  western,  where
      the hero escapes a volley of hostile fire and  then  kills  his  enemy
      with one shot from a pistol at improbable range, but James Bond  would
      have done as well.   It struck me as a useful one  line  encapsulation
      of Miss Birtles' general credibility submission on  the  point.    The
      appellant had obviously picked up the point when he  had  referred  at
      the end to not acting like Rambo and Mr Moralli made  the  same  point
      perfectly properly during his closing submissions.  My comment was not
      intended to belittle the appellant's evidence  but  to  summarise  the
      submission being made at the time."

18.   The Adjudicator went on to comment on the assertion that his  approach
      to the appeal was presumptuous as follows:

      "To suggest that my approach to the appeal  was  thereby  presumptuous
      making proceedings unfair is of course a matter for the  Tribunal  and
      not for me.  I accepted some parts of the appellant's evidence but not
      others as can be seen from section 9 of the determination."

19.   The Tribunal also has the Adjudicator's record  of  proceedings  which
      in the submissions made by the Presenting  Officer  the  following  is
      recorded:

      "Credibility?  - Shot at times X 4 but never injured - others  injured
      but not at App who was the actual target (Hollywood!)".

20.   Mr Moralli made submissions that the account given  by  the  appellant
      was credible.   It is clear from the record of  proceedings  that  the
      Adjudicator gave the appellant an opportunity  to  comment  after  his
      representative's submissions.   He is recorded as saying "not act like
      Rambo - many soldiers cause wars".

21.    The  issue  for  the  Tribunal  is  whether  the  comment  about  the
      appellant's account being akin to a Hollywood movie indicates that the
      Adjudicator prejudged the appellant's credibility or in some other way
      indicates that the appellant did not have a  fair  hearing  before  an
      independent Tribunal.

22.   In T (Algeria) [2003] UKIAT 00128 the Tribunal  considered  the  issue
      of bias. The Tribunal wrote as follows in paragraphs 7-9:

      "Since the Tribunal decision  in  MNM,  the  issue  of  the  test  for
      determining apparent bias has been the subject of consideration by the
      House of Lords in Porter and Another v Magill  [2001]  UKHL  67.   The
      test for apparent bias had been formulated by Lord Goff  of  Chieveley
      in R v Gough [1993] AC646 in the following terms:


           "...having ascertained the  relevant  circumstances,  the  court
           should ask itself whether, having regard to those circumstances,
           there was a real danger of bias on  the  part  of  the  relevant
           member of the Tribunal in question, in the sense that  he  might
           unfairly regard (or have  unfairly  regarded)  with  favour,  or
           disfavour, the case of a party to the issue under  consideration
           by him ..."


      That formulation of the relevant test was reconsidered in the light of
      Strasbourg jurisprudence by the Court of Appeal in Re Medicaments  and
      Related Classes of Goods (No 2) [2001] 1WLR 700,  who  summarised  the
      Court's conclusions as follows:


           "When the Strasbourg jurisprudence is  taken  into  account,  we
           believe that a modest adjustment of the test in  R  v  Gough  is
           called for, which makes it plain  that  it  is,  in  effect,  no
           different from the test applied in most of the Commonwealth  and
           in  Scotland.   The  Court  must   first   ascertain   all   the
           circumstances which have a bearing on the  suggestion  that  the
           judge was biased.  It must then ask whether those  circumstances
           would lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude  that
           there was a real possibility, or a real danger,  the  two  being
           the same, that the Tribunal was biased."


      That formulation was approved by the House  of  Lords  in  Porter  and
      Another v Magill save  for  deletion  of  the  reference  to  "a  real
      danger".  In the leading judgment given by Lord Bingham  of  Cornhill,
      he said in this respect:


           "Those words no longer serve a useful purpose here, and they are
           not used in the jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court.   The
           question is  whether  the  fair-minded  and  informed  observer,
           having considered the facts, would conclude  that  there  was  a
           real possibility that the Tribunal was biased."


23.   In our  judgment  there  was  nothing  objectionable  at  all  in  the
      Adjudicator's   comment   made   during   the   Presenting   Officer's
      submissions.   The Adjudicator said that he regarded the comment as  a
      useful one line encapsulation of the general  credibility  submission.
      Even if, as Mr Taylor argues, it indicated the way  the  Adjudicator's
      mind was going, there can still by no objection to this comment.    An
      Adjudicator can hardly be faulted for raising an issue which  concerns
      him - not  least  as  in  the  present  appeal  both  the  appellant's
      representative  and  the  appellant  himself  had  an  opportunity  of
      commenting on the point.

24.   The Tribunal have no hesitation in rejecting the submission  that  the
      Adjudicator had prejudged the issue of credibility and  then  set  out
      his conclusions in such a way as  to  deflect  that  criticism.    His
      conclusions on the appellant's  evidence  indicate  that  he  had  not
      prejudged the credibility of the account as  a  whole.    He  accepted
      that it was just possible that the  appellant  had  been  required  by
      Islamists to finish off the task of killing their  victim  which  they
      had failed to achieve.    He accepted that the  police  report  was  a
      genuine document.  On the basis of that evidence he  was  entitled  to
      find that the second of the two incidents which the appellant  claimed
      had taken place had happened whereas the first had not.   In so far as
      the IMIK document was concerned the Adjudicator was entitled  to  find
      it  an  unreliable  document.    In  our  judgment  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusions indicate a careful and cautious approach to the assessment
      of the  appellant's  account.    His  findings  and  conclusions  were
      properly based on the evidence for the reasons he gave.    He accepted
      that the appellant may well have been genuinely in fear when  he  left
      Iraq but nonetheless  he  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  a
      sufficiency of protection at that time but also that at  the  date  of
      hearing he would have no  continuing  reason  to  fear  the  surviving
      splinter groups of IMIK.

25.   In summary there is  no  proper  basis  for  the  assertion  that  the
      appellant did not receive a fair hearing from the  Adjudicator.    The
      Adjudicator's comments when read in context do not  indicate  anything
      other than an attempt to highlight and identify the issues.    A  fair
      minded and informed observer would not have concluded that there was a
      real possibility of bias.  It  seems  to  us  to  be  verging  on  the
      vexatious to suggest that the Adjudicator's comments indicate that the
      appellant did not have a fair hearing  or  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      prejudged the appeal.

26.   This appeal is dismissed.



                                                   H J E Latter
                                                   Vice President
