
WN (Surendran;  credibility;  new evidence) Democratic Republic of Congo
                                                 [2004]  UKIAT 00213     | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 16th April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                             4th August 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice President)
                                Mr D C Walker

Between:





                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms R Chapman, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr C Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R  A
     Prickett, promulgated on 22nd July  2003.   In  his  determination  he
     dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  against  the
     decision of the SSHD of 17th February 2003.

  2. The Appellant is a 35 year old  man,  a  national  of  the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo, who arrived in the United Kingdom on  17th  October
     2002 and claimed asylum about two weeks later.  The basis of his claim
     was that he was of mixed ethnicity  with  a  Congolese  mother  and  a
     Rwandese father.  He claimed that he was unable to  obtain  a  job  in
     Kinshasa for a number of  years.  In  August  1998,  the  war  in  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo began.   The  Congolese  began  targeting
     those with Rwandan parents or roots.  He said that a crowd of 30 or 40
     people had come to his house one day, two had entered and had begun to
     question  the  Appellant's  sister  while  the  people  outside   were
     threatening to burn all Rwandese Tutsi.  He said he fled  through  the
     back door and went some 40-50 metres to the  neighbour's  house  where
     the Congolese neighbours, who had been good friends, took pity on  him
     and let him stay for the night.  The  neighbours  told  him  that  his
     sister had been burnt alive and they gave him  money  to  buy  a  boat
     ticket for the long journey to Bumba, where he immediately  went.   He
     met somebody who let him stay and grow food, but he also said that  he
     was in hiding there.  While he was  there,  a  boy  who  knew  him  in
     Kinshasa saw him and told the Bumba community that the  Appellant  was
     Rwandan and that he had fled because the army had killed  his  sister.
     The boy had approached him asking him what he was doing in Bumba as  a
     Rwandan, so the Appellant next day left Bumba in fear of his life  and
     went to Kisangani.  This was on 11th May 2002, so he had been in Bumba
     for nearly four years.

  3. On the morning that he arrived in Kisangani he bumped into four  young
     people from Kinshasa who knew him very well.  They returned  with  the
     Congolese police, said that he was Rwandan and then  the  police  beat
     and tortured him.  He was put in a  deserted  house  and  a  few  days
     later, the Appellant was able to escape, because the  guards  deserted
     the prison and left the  doors  open  as  they  fled  during  fighting
     between Rwandan and Ugandan soldiers.

  4. The Appellant then found a priest who was also fleeing the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo and together they went to Tanzania  from  where  the
     two flew to London in October 2002.  They had stayed some five  months
     in Tanzania.  The priest then left the Appellant  with  the  Congolese
     community in London.

  5. At his  screening  interview  he  was  interviewed  through  a  French
     interpreter; the form said that he would prefer to be  interviewed  in
     French.  At the asylum interview the  Appellant  said  that  he  would
     prefer to  be  interviewed  in  Lingala,  but  understood  the  French
     interpreter.  He was asked some questions at  interview  at  which  he
     explained that he had had no problems in Kinshasa before the  day  his
     house was attacked.  He did not  know  the  name  of  the  priest  who
     assisted him but the priest had organised everything and prepared  the
     documents enabling the Appellant to flee;  the priest had received  no
     money for organising the flight.  The  priest  had  prepared  all  the
     documents and showed them to the authorities on arrival.

  6. The Secretary of State's refusal letter said that he did not find  the
     Appellant's account plausible or accept that he had  moved  to  either
     Bumba or Kisangani or fled from the country in the way described.   He
     noted that he had spent  five  months  in  Tanzania  without  claiming
     asylum and considered that even if the claim was true and that he  was
     of mixed ethnicity, he had not explained how he could be identified as
     a Tutsi or of Tutsi ancestry.

  7. Before the Adjudicator's  hearing,  the  Appellant  submitted  several
     bundles of  new  documents.   These  included  his  parents'  marriage
     certificate and his own birth certificate which had been sent  to  him
     by his uncle.  He explained in his witness statement that after he had
     gone into hiding in Bumba in August 1998, he  had  maintained  contact
     with his wife and she was to come and stay with him for a month  every
     three months; that was the explanation as to how  the  three  children
     were  born  while  he  was  in  Bumba.   The  Appellant  said  to  the
     Adjudicator that he had met his wife by chance in Bumba in  1999  when
     she had come to Bumba as part of her trading work.  He had  previously
     lost contact with her.  They were not living together at the  time  of
     the attack in 1998 because they could not afford to do so.

  8. But he also produced an article in a newspaper "La Reference" of  18th
     December 2002, a DRC newspaper which mentioned the  incident  of  26th
     August 1998, gave the Appellant's  name  as  a  collaborator  for  the
     Rwandan secret services and the Appellant said that  the  account  had
     been given to the newspaper by the priest who had helped  him  escape.
     The copy of the newspaper had been  sent  by  his  uncle.   There  was
     further background material.

  9. The Adjudicator records that he told  the  Appellant's  representative
     that he considered credibility to be the main  issue  in  the  appeal.
     The  Secretary  of  State  was  not  represented.   Accordingly,   the
     Adjudicator  records  that  he  reminded  himself  of  the   Surendran
     guidelines and says  (paragraph  23)  that  he  told  the  Appellant's
     representative that as credibility had been raised as an issue, he was
     required to deal with that.

 10. The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  credible,
     rejected his account and  said  that  he  was  not  satisfied  to  the
     required standard of proof that the Appellant was part Tutsi or in one
     of the categories of persons identified by the UNHCR as being at  risk
     of persecution on return.  Accordingly, he dismissed the  appeal.   He
     set out at some length why he reached that view.

 11. The Adjudicator referred to the argument that he should disregard  the
     contents of the asylum interview because that had  been  conducted  in
     French, whereas the  Appellant  would  have  preferred  to  have  been
     interviewed  in  Lingala  but  none  was  available.  The  Adjudicator
     correctly dismissed that contention.  The Appellant had agreed  to  be
     interviewed in French, said that he understood the questions  and  the
     interpreter, said that he was happy with the conduct of the interview,
     and answered all the questions.  There is no record that he asked  for
     questions to be repeated or appeared not to understand them.   He  had
     also been interviewed in French at the screening interview,  at  which
     he had said that he wanted to be interviewed in French.   A  complaint
     was made about that  conclusion  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal.  It does not appear  to  have  been  pursued  in  the  later
     application for Statutory Review.  There is nothing in it.

 12. The Adjudicator said that he found all the  events  described  by  the
     Appellant to be implausible.  As to the attack on 26th August 1998, he
     thought it implausible that the Appellant would be able to escape from
     the back door and enter the house next door some  40-50  metres  away.
     He expressed his conclusion in the form of a question,  "Why  did  the
     crowd not ensure, and it was a large crowd, that no  one  could  leave
     the house through the back door?  Why did the crowd not see him as  he
     covered this distance?  Why  did  the  Appellant  not  leave  Kinshasa
     immediately or go to hide in an area well away from  where  the  crowd
     was?"  He thought it highly unlikely that someone  would  seek  refuge
     from a murderous crowd in the neighbour's house,  spending  the  night
     there.  He queried why the Appellant  did  not  consider  leaving  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo at that stage.

 13. The Adjudicator then refers to the Appellant's journey  to  Bumba  and
     points out that he says nothing in the SEF about  where  his  pregnant
     wife was at that stage.  He queried why he had left  her  in  Kinshasa
     and made no attempt to see whether she was safe before  he  left.   He
     did not accept that she would be safe as a Congolese, because she  was
     married to the Appellant and  the  child,  when  born,  would  on  the
     Appellant's story be part Tutsi.  He found  it  implausible  that  the
     Appellant, having gone to Bumba, would have no problems there for four
     years until he was seen by a boy who knew him from Kinshasa  and  told
     the Bumba community that he was Rwandan.  The Appellant had said  that
     he was in hiding in Bumba for four years, but that was not  consistent
     with his having a small garden from which to  feed  himself  from  the
     food he grew there.

 14. The Adjudicator pointed out that it was only in his witness  statement
     that he referred to seeing his wife in Bumba, saying that she used  to
     come and stay for a month about every three months.  He said that  the
     Appellant had told him that the first time this had  happened  was  in
     1999, but that was  inconsistent  with  the  dates  of  birth  of  the
     children.  He found it implausible that he should have met his wife by
     chance on a street in Bumba when she was visiting as a trader; it  was
     a large town.  He also did not understand how the Appellant  was  able
     to meet his wife in the street if he  was  in  hiding.   He  expressed
     himself by asking questions, "Why was this meeting by chance?  Why  if
     the Appellant knew that his wife came to Bumba to  trade  did  he  not
     contact her in Kinshasa and tell her where he was  hiding?"   He  also
     found it implausible that the Appellant had lived for  four  years  in
     Bumba without problems but then was recognised by a boy  whom  he  had
     known in Kinshasa, and then decided to leave Bumba in fear of his life
     the following day.  In his SEF statement at interview he said that  he
     had decided he could earn a better living in Kisangani  and  would  go
     there for work.  The Adjudicator asks "Did  the  Appellant  decide  to
     leave Bumba because he was in fear of  his  life  or  because  he  was
     looking for  work?"   He  also  asked  "if  it  was  apparent  to  the
     population in Bumba that the  Appellant  was  part  Tutsi  because  of
     facial and other characteristics then why  did  he  have  no  problems
     there for almost four years and why did he suddenly  decide  to  leave
     after a boy had accused him of being Tutsi?"

 15. The Adjudicator then referred to the evidence that  the  Appellant  in
     Kisangani bumped into four young people Kinshasa who know him well. He
     referred to a series of remarkable  coincidences;  the  Appellant  had
     bumped into his wife by chance in Bumba,  bumped  into  the  boy  from
     Kinshasa in Bumba and bumped into four people  from  Kinshasa  on  the
     very morning he arrives in Kisangani.  The  Adjudicator  then  queried
     why the Appellant had made no mention of sexual abuse by the police in
     any of his earlier accounts of what they did to him in Kisangani.  The
     evidence about how many had done that was very vague.

 16. He referred to the escape and the Appellant's going to the priest  who
     organised his travel to Tanzania and then to  London:   the  Appellant
     said that he did not know the priest's name, notwithstanding that they
     had stayed together in Tanzania for five months.  The Adjudicator said
     "Why if the Appellant stayed with the priest for so long does  he  not
     know his name?"  In his witness statement he does give the name of the
     priest, a  change  of  account.   The  Appellant  said  that  all  the
     documents had been got together to go to Tanzania in  one  day.   "The
     priest like the Appellant was fleeing so how was he  able  to  prepare
     forged travel documents for the  Appellant  in  one  day?"  asked  the
     Adjudicator.

 17. The Adjudicator  concluded  that  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  the
     Appellant would be able to go through  immigration  control  with  the
     priest showing the false documents without  being  questioned  by  the
     immigration officer.  He queried the delay in claiming asylum  in  the
     United Kingdom.  He also found it highly  unlikely  that  the  priest,
     whose name the Appellant at interview did not know,  would  have  been
     able financially to help the Appellant by paying for both  flights  to
     London, the travel to Tanzania, and to provide him with accommodation.
      It also was strange that the priest had  not  subsequently  contacted
     someone in whom he had shown such interest.

 18. The Adjudicator accepted that there were parts of what  the  Appellant
     had said which were consistent with troubles in Democratic Republic of
     Congo in 1998 and 2002, but he found it implausible  that  whilst  the
     Congolese police and military  were  planning  for  a  mutiny  against
     Rwandan elements within RCD/Goma in Kisangani, they  should  have  had
     time to concern themselves with the Appellant.   He  queried  why  the
     soldiers or police or population had not killed the Appellant  in  May
     2002 if Rwandans were being killed as the  objective  evidence  showed
     several had been.  He  also  found  the  Appellant  unable  to  answer
     questions  when  giving  evidence  and  was  vague  and  evasive  when
     questioned about a number of incidents.

 19. The Adjudicator also found that the further documents which  had  been
     produced did not support but rather further  damaged  the  Appellant's
     credibility.  The new documents were not  produced  until  the  appeal
     hearing before the Adjudicator.  He had said at interview that he  had
     had no contact with his family in the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
     since he left and indeed, that he had no information since August 1998
     about his family;  that latter is obviously incorrect in the light  of
     his later  statement.   But  as  he  received  a  copy  of  his  birth
     certificate and his parents' marriage certificate from  his  uncle  in
     the Democratic Republic of Congo, it was obvious that there  was  some
     means of contact.  The Adjudicator said that he did not understand how
     the Appellant was able to contact the uncle as soon as his application
     was refused so that the uncle could send documents to him  if  he  had
     had no contact with the family in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

 20. The newspaper article was rejected along with the certificates as  not
     being genuine.  There were  a  number  of  factors  in  the  newspaper
     article which led to that conclusion.  There were differences  between
     what the Appellant had said and what was set out in the  article.   It
     did not refer to the Appellant's sister being burnt alive  but  rather
     to her being raped.   The  Appellant  said  that  the  source  of  the
     information was the priest who helped  him  escape.   The  Adjudicator
     could not understand why so many inaccurate details had been  supplied
     to a newspaper by the priest which made life, it was  said,  difficult
     for the Appellant should he be returned,  nor  could  the  Adjudicator
     understand why the newspaper in 18th December  2002  should  carry  an
     article about an event four years  before;   "why  has  the  Appellant
     never before said that the police and the  DRC  believe  that  he  was
     working for the Rwandan cause?"  There is no obvious reason why,  four
     years after the event, somebody who had lived a  seemingly  uneventful
     life in Kinshasa for so many years should suddenly have been suspected
     of being a traitor, and having been  suspected  of  being  a  traitor,
     should have an article written  about  him  four  years  later.   This
     latter point is an additional one not  made  by  the  Adjudicator  but
     which we consider does not assist the Appellant's credibility.

 21. The Adjudicator then referred to the UNHCR letter  of  16th  May  2003
     concerning  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  asylum  seekers  with   a
     political or military profile or background and to  a  recent  serious
     deterioration in the situation in the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.
     He also referred to the CIPU Report of April 2003 and concluded in the
     light of that that the Appellant had not shown  that  he  was  in  the
     category of those  identified  by  the  UNHCR  of  being  at  risk  of
     persecution on return and did not find him to be part Tutsi.

 22. As we have said, the grounds upon which permission to  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal was sought referred to the  unfair  reliance,  it  was  said,
     placed upon the Claimant's record at interview;  we  have  dealt  with
     that.    It  then  contended  that  the  determination  breached   the
     Surendran guidelines referred to in the starred determination MNM, 1st
     November 2000:  the Adjudicator had set out several questions  in  his
     determination relating to the plausibility of the  Claimant's  account
     which, it was said, had not been directly put to  the  Appellant.   It
     was said that the Adjudicator was unclear as to whether he was  saying
     that the information supplied to the newspaper was  false  or  whether
     the article itself was a forgery.  The Appellant sought permission  at
     that stage to produce the report of an expert produced for the case of
     the Claimant's niece, which said that the newspaper article and report
     was genuine.  The Adjudicator was said not to have provided any proper
     reasons for  rejecting  the  birth  and  marriage  certificates.   The
     Appellant sought permission to produce another UNHCR letter, submitted
     in the Claimant's niece's appeal, which advised against the return  of
     those of mixed ethnicity.  These grounds of appeal were rejected in  a
     considered   determination   which   said   that   the   Adjudicator's
     determination was full and fair, and leave to appeal  was  accordingly
     refused.

 23. The more elaborate grounds for statutory review  which,  as  with  the
     grounds of appeal, were not prepared by the advocate who had  appeared
     before the Adjudicator, again made assertions about what  had  or  had
     not happened before the Adjudicator in terms of  questions  raised  in
     the determination,  which  it  was  said  had  not  been  put  to  the
     Appellant, in breach of the Surendran guidelines.  It was said  to  be
     clear that the Adjudicator's  negative  findings  in  respect  of  the
     credibility and plausibility  of  the  Claimant's  account  went  well
     beyond the Secretary of State's refusal letter.  It  was  said  to  be
     entirely unclear from the determination whether the specific points of
     concern had been put to the Claimant's representative in order to give
     him the  opportunity  to  make  detailed  submissions  on  them.   The
     decision  of  the  Vice-President  to  refuse  leave  to  appeal   was
     criticised because it failed to deal with  evidence  only  before  the
     Vice-President "in order to refute the Adjudicator's finding ...  that
     the newspaper article was not genuine."   The  grounds  for  Statutory
     Review also referred to a letter from UNHCR dated 10th  December  2002
     which referred to persons of Tutsi or ethnically  mixed  Tutsi  origin
     who were known to have been the targets of human rights  abuses.   The
     Vice-President was criticised for making no reference to this letter.

 24. Richards J said on the application  for  Statutory  Review,  which  he
     granted, that it was arguable that the  adverse  credibility  findings
     were based on matters that went beyond the decision  letter  and  were
     not put to the Applicant at the hearing.  He also said that the  grant
     of leave to  appeal  would  enable  the  Tribunal  to  consider  fresh
     evidence concerning the treatment of failed asylum  seekers  on  their
     return to the Democratic Republic  of  Congo.   Where  an  appeal  was
     justified on other grounds, the evidence should  be  considered,  even
     though by  itself  it  was  unlikely  that  evidence  not  before  the
     Adjudicator could ground an error of law.

Allegations as to what happened before the Adjudicator

 25. We turn first to the contention that points  were  relied  on  by  the
     Adjudicator in his adverse findings, which had not  been  put  to  the
     Appellant by the Adjudicator and did not arise out of the Secretary of
     State's refusal letter.  Neither in the generality nor in  the  detail
     is that submission justified.  There are a  number  of  matters  which
     need to be stated clearly in respect  of  it.   First,  there  was  no
     evidence before the Vice-President nor before Richards J, which showed
     that the  Adjudicator  had  in  fact  decided  the  credibility  issue
     adversely to the Appellant without giving him a chance  to  deal  with
     those  issues.   No  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant  or  the
     representative identified  what  had  or  had  not  been  put  to  the
     Appellant during the course of the hearing, nor was there any evidence
     which compared the Secretary of State's refusal letter and the  points
     taken by the Adjudicator; nor was there any  evidence  which  compared
     the witness statement from the Appellant, which the Secretary of State
     would not have had, with the points taken by the Adjudicator.   If  it
     is to be said that an Adjudicator has been  unfair  in  the  questions
     which he has asked or has not asked  that,  or  some  events  occurred
     before the Adjudicator which warrant an appeal on the ground of  error
     of law, or it is necessary that there be  evidence  of  what  happened
     before the Adjudicator.  In this case, the  advocate  who  signed  the
     grounds of appeal was not the advocate before  the  Adjudicator.   The
     advocate who signed the  grounds  of  statutory  review  was  not  the
     advocate who had signed the grounds of appeal or had  appeared  before
     the Adjudicator.  There was simply no evidence at all as to  what  had
     happened.  At the stage where an application for leave  to  appeal  is
     made it may sometimes be that a detailed ground of appeal signed by an
     advocate or representative who has been present will suffice.  By  the
     time the matter is dealt with at  substantive  appeal,  however,  more
     than that will certainly be required.  We  take  the  view  here  that
     there  is  no  evidence  which  suggests  that  any  issue  which  the
     Adjudicator relied on in rejecting the Appellant's credibility had not
     fairly  been  raised  by  the  Adjudicator.   Allegations  about  what
     happened in front of the Adjudicator are made far too  often  with  no
     supporting evidence.  Credence should not be given to allegations  not
     supported by evidence.

The necessity to put points

 26. Second, two decisions, Koca Outer House 22nd November 2002, paragraphs
     34-36, per Lord Carloway (IAS Update 2004 vol 7 no 4) and  Maheshwaran
     v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 173, paragraphs 4 and 5, are  important.   They
     have been reported fairly recently.  In the first, Lord Carloway dealt
     with a late change in a Turkish claim to alleged membership of  HADEP.
     The Secretary of State was not represented; the Appellant knowing that
     credibility was in issue did not  deal  with  that  discrepancy.   The
     Adjudicator did not ask about it in the course of his questions though
     he later  relied  on  it  as  a  factor  adverse  to  the  Appellant's
     credibility.  Lord Carloway said,  refusing  judicial  review  of  the
     refusal of the Tribunal to grant leave of appeal, that it was not  for
     the Adjudicator to assume "the role of contradictor" in the absence of
     a party.  The Appellant had been given an opportunity in evidence  and
     submissions to deal with the general  issue  as  to  credibility.   He
     said:

           "[34] What seems to be being suggested is that, where  there  is
                 no  contradictor,  an  adjudicator  must  nevertheless   go
                 further and  scrutinise  the  paperwork  in  advance  of  a
                 hearing in a manner which will enable him to compose a list
                 of  potential  problem  areas  which  might  influence  his
                 ultimate  decision  on  credibility.   He  must,   it   was
                 maintained, then put each of these in turn to the claimant.
                  There are several problems with this approach.   First  it
                 would put an adjudicator in the  position  of  looking  for
                 defects in a claimant's case before he has heard  what  the
                 claimant has to say about it.  Such an approach may not  be
                 conducive to arriving at a balanced decision.  Secondly, it
                 would thrust the adjudicator into the role  of  inquisitor.
                 Thirdly, the resultant 'cross-examination' would be  likely
                 to be rightly criticised as displaying  the  very  type  of
                 bias that was perceived by the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
                 in MNM (supra).  Although an adjudicator may, when  reading
                 the papers in advance,  be  concerned  about  a  particular
                 matter and thereafter ask about it at the  hearing,  it  is
                 going much too far to say that he must look for all matters
                 which might later concern  him  and  must  also  put  these
                 matters to  the  claimant  or  his  representative  at  the
                 hearing.  In looking at the fairness of  the  hearing,  the
                 Adjudicator took an entirely reasonable approach in  asking
                 the  petitioner  to  address  the  matter  of  credibility.
                 Having heard all that was to be said, it  was  for  her  to
                 resolve the issue  on  all  the  material  which  had  been
                 presented to  her.   As  Guideline  4  itself  echoes,  the
                 adjudicator is entitled to form a view  on  credibility  on
                 the basis of that material whether or not the claimant  has
                 addressed the issue and whether or not the adjudicator  has
                 expressed a particular concern.


           [35]  The HADEP discrepancy was created by the petitioner in the
                 Witness Statement.  If there was an obligation upon  anyone
                 to put it to the petitioner then that must have  rested  on
                 his representative,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  onus  of
                 establishing the case lay upon the petitioner.  However, in
                 so saying, I am in no way  holding  the  representative  at
                 fault for not  doing  so.   Quite  the  contrary.   He  had
                 certain material before him, and must be presumed  to  have
                 been aware of the content of the SEF and Interview records.
                  He  then  assisted  in  the  composition  of  the  Witness
                 Statement which contained the  inconsistent  material.   It
                 was a matter for him to decide whether or not to  draw  the
                 Adjudicator's attention to the inconsistency and  then  try
                 to remedy it or to ignore it in the hope that it might  not
                 be regarded as significant.  That is a matter  of  judgment
                 for one side or another to take in an adversarial  context.
                 What the petitioner seeks to do here, to an extent,  is  to
                 have a further opportunity to address the Adjudicator on  a
                 discrepancy which he himself  created  but  which  he  also
                 accepts he did not deal with or explain adequately  at  the
                 appropriate time.


           [36]  For these reasons, I hold that  there  was  no  obligation
                 upon the Adjudicator to put the HADEP  discrepancy  to  the
                 petitioner  either  at  the   stage   of   examination   or
                 submission.  Its full significance may not have  even  have
                 been recognised by her at that time but whether that is  so
                 or not, it remains the case that a court or tribunal is not
                 obliged to reveal what it  might  be  thinking  during  the
                 course of a hearing so that  parties  can  make  additional
                 comments on that thinking.  Nor is it bound to disclose, in
                 advance of  the  announcement  of  its  decision,  how  its
                 reasoning process is developing with a  view  to  affording
                 parties yet another chance to address that.  A fair hearing
                 having  occurred  and  parties  having   been   given   the
                 opportunity to state their cases,  the  court  or  tribunal
                 must then embark upon the decision making task.   In  doing
                 so it can use any or all the material  before  it  but,  of
                 course, only that material and without taking into  account
                 any additional facts or points of law not raised before it.
                  If any new facts or points of  law  emerge,  for  whatever
                 reason, then it may be necessary to hear  further  argument
                 but that was not the case here."

     He also pointed out that there was no evidence that the Appellant  had
     an answer to the discrepancy, let alone a persuasive one.


 27. In Maheshwaran, Schiemann LJ  (specifically  disapproving  the  rather
     wider statement by Turner J in Gunn (unreported CO/4630/97), which  is
     so often cited by claimants in this context) rejected  the  submission
     that where credibility was in issue,  the  Adjudicator  was  bound  to
     accept as fact a point not challenged by the SSHD  or  raised  by  the
     Adjudicator.  He said:

           "4.   Undoubtedly failure to put to  a  party  to  litigation  a
                 point which is decided against him can  be  grossly  unfair
                 and lead to injustice.  He must have a  proper  opportunity
                 to deal with the point.  Adjudicators  must  bear  this  in
                 mind.  Where a point is expressly conceded by one party  it
                 will usually be unfair to decide the case against the other
                 party on the basis that the concession  was  wrongly  made,
                 unless the tribunal indicates that it  is  minded  to  take
                 that course.  Cases can occur when  fairness  will  require
                 the  reopening  of  an  appeal  because   some   point   of
                 significance -  perhaps  arising  out  of  a  post  hearing
                 decision of the higher courts - requires it.  However, such
                 cases will be rare.


           5.    Where much depends on the credibility of a party and  when
                 that party makes several inconsistent statements which  are
                 before the decision maker,  that  party  manifestly  has  a
                 forensic  problem.   Some  will  choose  to  confront   the
                 inconsistencies straight on and make evidential or forensic
                 submissions on them.  Others will hope  that  'least  said,
                 soonest mended' and consider that forensic concentration on
                 the point will only make matters worse and that it would be
                 better to try and switch the tribunal's attention  to  some
                 other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly it is  open  to  the
                 tribunal expressly to put a particular inconsistency  to  a
                 witness because it considers that the witness  may  not  be
                 alerted to the point or because it fears that it  may  have
                 perceived something as inconsistent with an earlier  answer
                 which in truth is not inconsistent.  Fairness may  in  some
                 circumstances require this to be done but this will not  be
                 the usual case.  Usually the tribunal, particularly if  the
                 part is represented, will remain silent  and  see  how  the
                 case unfolds."

 28. These show that neither in Scotland nor in England  and  Wales  is  it
     thought in the higher  courts  that  every  point  which  concerns  an
     Adjudicator when dealing with the credibility of an Appellant needs to
     be raised explicitly with the Appellant in order for  him  to  pass  a
     comment upon it.  There may be tactical reasons why an  Appellant  and
     his advocate decide not to grapple with what might be thought to be  a
     problem; they may hope that the Adjudicator  will  not  see  it  as  a
     significant point or indeed may not spot it at all;  but it is for  an
     Appellant  whose  credibility  is  challenged  as   this   Appellant's
     credibility most emphatically was,  and  challenged  in  almost  every
     possible respect, to put forward all the evidence he can and  to  deal
     with the discrepancies which arise.  Even where the Secretary of State
     is not represented, the Appellant cannot assume that points which  are
     not put by the Adjudicator to him for his comment are points which are
     to be regarded as accepted, especially if they are obvious  points  of
     contradiction or implausibility which he has failed to  grapple  with.
     It is not necessary for a fair hearing that  every  point  of  concern
     which  an  Adjudicator  has,  be  put  expressly  to  a  party,  where
     credibility is plainly at issue.  As we have said elsewhere, it  is  a
     matter of judgment whether to omit to do so is unfair or whether to do
     so risks appearing to be unfair as a  form  of  cross-examination.  On
     balance, the Adjudicator's major points of  concern  are  better  put,
     especially if they are not obvious.  The questions should be  focussed
     but open, not leading, expressed in a neutral way and manner, and  not
     at too great a length or in too great a number.  But, whether  or  not
     that is done, it is for the Claimant to make his case.

Surendran guidelines

 29. Third, it is necessary to say something here about the significance of
     the Surendran guidelines.  Too often there  have  been  challenges  to
     Adjudicators' conduct of  a  hearing,  both  during  the  hearing  and
     subsequently on appeal  to  us  and  indeed  as  here,  on  a  further
     application for statutory review,  based  upon  asserted  breaches  of
     these guidelines.  The guidelines are guidelines and  guidance;   they
     are not rules of law.  They are not  a  strait-jacket.   They  do  not
     represent black and white answers to  all  the  situations,  many  and
     varied as they are, which arise before an Adjudicator where  the  Home
     Office Presenting Officer is not present.  The object behind  them  is
     to provide guidance as to how to ensure a  fair  hearing  and  how  to
     avoid circumstances  arising  in  which  a  fair-minded  and  informed
     observer would conclude that there was a real possibility  or  a  real
     danger that the Adjudicator was biased;  Porter v Magill  [2001]  UKHL
     67, [2002] 2WLR 37.

 30. The real test to be applied, however, is whether the hearing was  fair
     or unfair and  whether  a  fair-minded  and  informed  observer  would
     conclude that there was a real possibility that  the  Adjudicator  was
     biased.   In  each  case  where  there  is  non-compliance  with   the
     guidelines, it remains for the  person  asserting  the  unfairness  or
     apparent unfairness to show that the actual or apparent unfairness was
     present.  It is not sufficient merely to assert  that  the  guidelines
     were not complied with.  It is not by itself an error of  law  not  to
     comply with the guidelines.  The point rather is that compliance  with
     the guidelines will make it very difficult, if not impossible, for  an
     Appellant to show that the Adjudicator acted,  or  could  properly  be
     thought to have acted, unfairly.  If they are not  complied  with,  it
     plainly assists an argument as to actual or apparent unfairness.   But
     it is not conclusive as to it at all.  The statement in MNM  paragraph
     19 that they must be  observed  was  never  intended  to  elevate  the
     guidelines into a distinct set of rules which had to be complied with,
     regardless of  the  underlying  effect  of  any  non-compliance.   The
     Surendran guidelines  should  never  be  the  means,  and  were  never
     intended to be the means, whereby the proper and fair conduct  of  the
     hearing by the Adjudicator and the proper raising  of  issues  by  the
     Adjudicator should be prevented.

 31. The guidelines now need to be read in the light of the  two  decisions
     in Koca and Maheshwaran where, as here, credibility  is  generally  at
     issue.  The obligation is on the Appellant to deal with obvious points
     which relate to his credibility without  necessarily  being  asked  to
     comment on them by the Adjudicator.  The Appellant cannot expect to be
     able to make tactical decisions as to whether he should deal  with  an
     issue or ignore it, later to complain successfully if  an  Adjudicator
     has not raised it with him.  An Appellant cannot  simply  say  that  a
     question was not put and therefore it was unfair for an  inference  to
     be drawn adversely to him on that point,  where  his  credibility  has
     been put at issue and the issue dealt with by the Adjudicator  in  the
     determination goes to credibility.  Whether it is  unfair  depends  on
     the circumstances in the case.

 32. Guideline four is clearly sound;  there remains, in the light of those
     two decisions, an obligation on the Appellant  to  address  issues  of
     credibility raised in the letter of refusal.  But it  is  clearly  not
     inappropriate for the issue of concern to be raised  in  questions  by
     the Adjudicator.  It may be more useful for  the  Adjudicator  to  put
     those questions than to ask the representative to do so.  This can all
     be seen as "clarification", for that emphasises that the task  is  not
     one of cross-examination and is subject to the caveats as  to  timing,
     manner, length and content which we deal with later.

 33. Where guideline five applies because no matters  of  credibility  have
     been raised in the refusal letter, and there is no new material before
     the Adjudicator, the Adjudicator should raise any issues which concern
     him, as guideline five says.  But as with guideline four, it is proper
     for the issue to be raised by  the  Adjudicator  himself  directly  in
     questions of a witness, subject to the  same  caveats  as  to  timing,
     content, manner and length.  The Adjudicator must here  be  especially
     careful not to invent his own theory of the case and  must  deal  with
     what are significant problems, not minor points of  detail.   In  this
     situation, it is much less likely that an  Appellant  would  be  aware
     that his credibility was under consideration if  it  were  not  raised
     with him, and it is unlikely to be fair for the issue to be raised  in
     the determination for the first time.  This is rather  different  from
     Koca and Maheshwaran.

 34. Guideline five also needs to cover the  position  where  no  issue  of
     credibility has been raised in the Refusal Letter and yet  it  may  be
     obvious that further  material  provided  to  the  Adjudicator  raises
     issues of credibility.  Issues of credibility which arise from the new
     material should be raised or put by the Adjudicator to  the  Appellant
     so that he may answer it, but it does not mean that  the  hearing  has
     been unfair, where that is not done.  That depends on  the  degree  to
     which the issue  of  credibility  was  one  which  an  advocate  ought
     properly to have realised needed to be  dealt  with  on  the  material
     which he was presenting to  the  Adjudicator,  in  the  light  of  the
     Secretary of State's decision.  Obvious points are:  why the  material
     had not been mentioned before; why there were  contradictions  between
     that and what had been said before;  and how obvious  implausibilities
     or improbabilities in it are to be  answered.   For  an  unrepresented
     Appellant, the Adjudicator is likely to have  to  draw  his  attention
     explicitly to the point, in order fairly to be able to rely on it.

 35. Guideline six does not confine the Adjudicator  to  questions  arising
     out of the Secretary of State's material.  But as it is the  Secretary
     of State's material which an Appellant usually seeks to answer,  often
     with further evidence, it is right for Adjudicators to  put  questions
     on it and on the further evidence as the total case put forward by the
     Appellant emerges.

 36. As to guideline seven,  clarification  goes  beyond  checking  whether
     something has been understood or for confirmation of a  fact.   It  is
     legitimate for an Adjudicator to raise the questions relevant  to  the
     Secretary of State's decision letter or later material  to  which  the
     Adjudicator considers he needs  answers  if  he  is  to  deal  fairly,
     adequately and intelligibly with the material upon which he  is  being
     asked to adjudicate.  He is not obliged to be the silent recipient  of
     whatever an Appellant puts forward.  If obvious points are  not  dealt
     with, the Adjudicator can deal with them in his determination  and  it
     is generally better that he should do so having  given  the  Appellant
     the chance to answer them.

 37. The last sentence  of  guideline  seven  can  be  misleading.   It  is
     designed to prevent cross  examination  or  the  appearance  of  cross
     examination, rather than to prevent a question being asked if it was a
     question which the Home Office Presenting Officer could have put if he
     had been present.  The risk of cross-examining or appearing to  cross-
     examine can be avoided by an  Adjudicator  in  the  manner,  style  or
     length of questions, which he asks.  Generally, questions  other  than
     those designed to clarify what was said or intended  to  be  said  are
     better left until after the  conclusion  of  evidence  where  no  Home
     Office Presenting Officer is present and (after re-examination where a
     Home Office Presenting Officer is present but see  K  (C�te  D'Ivoire)
     [2004] UKIAT 00061.

 38. Questions should not be asked in a hostile tone.  They should  not  be
     leading questions which suggest  the  answer  which  is  desired,  nor
     should they disguise what is the point of concern so as to appear like
     to a trap or a  closing  of  the  net.   They  should  be  open  ended
     questions, neutrally phrased.  They can be persisted in, in  order  to
     obtain an answer;  but they should not be persisted in for longer than
     is necessary for the Adjudicator to be clear  that  the  question  was
     understood, or to establish why it  was  not  being  answered,  or  to
     pursue so far as necessary the detail underlying vague answers.   This
     will be a matter for the judgment of Adjudicators and  it  should  not
     usually take more than a few questions for an Adjudicator to establish
     the position to his own satisfaction.  An advocate  should  always  be
     given the chance to ask questions arising out of what the  Adjudicator
     has asked, which will enable him to  follow  up,  if  he  wishes,  the
     answers given thus far.  The Adjudicator can properly put, without  it
     becoming  a  cross-examination,  questions  which   trouble   him   or
     inferences from answers given which he might wish to draw adversely to
     a party.  These questions should not be disproportionate in length  to
     the evidence given as to the complexity of the case, and,  we  repeat,
     an Adjudicator should be careful to avoid developing his own theory of
     the case.

 39. There is a tension, reflected in the guidelines, between  fairness  in
     enabling a party to know the points on which  an  Adjudicator  may  be
     minded to reach  conclusions  adverse  to  him  where  they  have  not
     directly otherwise been raised, and fairness in  the  Adjudicator  not
     appearing to be  partisan,  asking  questions  that  no-one  else  has
     thought it necessary to ask.  This has proved troublesome on a  number
     of occasions.

 40. The tension should be resolved, so far as practicable, by  recognising
     the following:

               1) It is not necessary for obvious points on credibility  to
                  be put, where credibility is generally at  issue  in  the
                  light of the refusal letter or obviously at  issue  as  a
                  result of later evidence.
               2) Where the point is important  to  the  decision  but  not
                  obvious or where the issue of credibility  has  not  been
                  raised or does not obviously arise on  new  material,  or
                  where an Appellant  is  unrepresented,  it  is  generally
                  better for the Adjudicator to raise the point  if  it  is
                  not otherwise raised.  He can do so by direct questioning
                  of a witness in an appropriate manner.
               3) We have set out the way in which such questions should be
                  asked.
               4) There is no hard and fast rule embodied in (1)  and  (2).
                  It is a question in each case for a judgment as  to  what
                  is fair and properly perceived as fair.

      The Surendran guidelines and MNM should be read with what we have  set
      out above.

The circumstances of this case

 41. Turning to the particulars of this case, it is quite  clear  from  the
     Adjudicator's analysis of the Appellant's evidence that the  questions
     which he asks in so many paragraphs are a mere stylistic  device.   It
     may be unwise to use it in the light of the Surendran guidelines,  but
     phrased differently they could all be expressed as sound  reasons  for
     not accepting what the Appellant said.  The allegation here  that  the
     points were not raised by the Secretary of State in his refusal letter
     are for the most part unfounded, and at  times  irrelevant  where  the
     points  arose  out  of  subsequent  evidence,   and   throughout   are
     misconceived:  they are all obvious points,  relevant  to  credibility
     which was the central issue, which  the  Appellant  and  his  advocate
     could and should have dealt with, whether or not  specifically  raised
     in detail by the Adjudicator.

 42. The problem that the mob in August 1998 were looking to kill  Rwandans
     but did not cover the back door or notice him covering 40 to 50 metres
     to the neighbours' house, is apparent from paragraph 8 of the  refusal
     letter.  His failure to  mention  his  wife's  whereabouts  until  his
     witness statement is an evident problem which to deal with;  paragraph
     9 of the refusal letter.  Her relations with him in Bumba arises  from
     paragraphs 9 and 10.  The contradiction  between  his  alleged  racial
     characteristics and the need to flee Bumba just because he met someone
     from Kinshasa who threatened to reveal his ethnicity is  evident  from
     paragraph 12.  It is an obvious question why  he  did  not  leave  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo in 1998;  he should have dealt with it  -
     it is no answer to say that he left Kinshasa for the long  journey  to
     Bumba given the known proximity of Kinshasa to the border, over  which
     so many flee.  His hiding and yet meeting both his  wife  and  someone
     from Kinshasa willing  to  denounce  him  because  of  his  ethnicity,
     constitute contradictions which obviously require explanation  whether
     or not the Adjudicator asks questions.  The sequence  of  coincidences
     of meeting his wife, and someone from Kinshasa in Bumba, and four from
     Kinshasa as soon as he  arrived  in  Kisangani  who  were  willing  to
     denounce  him  (where  it  would  apparently  not  have  been  obvious
     otherwise what his ethnicity was) requires careful justification to be
     credible.  The late mention of  sexual  abuse  requires  an  evidenced
     answer, not an advocate's response, as to why it  was  so  late.   The
     departures from the Democratic Republic of Congo and Tanzania  are  so
     obviously questionable that the Appellant should have sought  to  deal
     with them so far as possible.

 43. In reality there was nothing remotely  unfair  or  in  breach  of  the
     Surendran guidelines in the way in which the Adjudicator  reached  his
     decision.  Assuming, without any evidence, that he did not  put  those
     questions to the Appellant, he did not need to do so.   The  Appellant
     and his representative should have realised that they were all obvious
     points which required to be dealt with. Had the Adjudicator  expressly
     raised those issues with the Appellant, significant in  number  though
     they would have been, there would have been no breach of the Surendran
     guidelines.

 44. He may have felt inhibited  by  the  guidelines  or  by  the  possible
     reaction of representatives from putting those questions,  if  he  did
     not do so.  He should have felt no such inhibition, if he did.  In the
     light of what we have said, we hope that Adjudicators  will  not  feel
     such inhibitions, subject to what we say about the  manner,  style  or
     length of such questions.  On the other hand, the fact that he may not
     have put such questions would not mean that the hearing was unfair  in
     the light of the obvious  questions  which  the  Appellant's  evidence
     raised.

Fresh evidence

 45. The next points related to the submission to the Tribunal  of  further
     evidence, and of yet more on Statutory Review.  We have considered the
     circumstances in which such evidence should be received in a number of
     occasions.  This evidence fails to meet the relevant tests.

 46. Ms Chapman referred to the expert's report on  the  newspaper  and  on
     ethnicity in the Appellant's niece's claim.  This was dated 10th  July
     2003 and was produced eight days after his appeal was heard.  There is
     no satisfactory reason why it should not have been sought and obtained
     earlier.  The expert, Dr Pullen, who was an  academic  in  development
     and post-conflict reconstruction with a  particular  interest  in  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo, regards the article as having  "all  the
     hallmarks of authenticity";  he does not explain what  they  are.   He
     does not deal with the obvious  problems,  no  doubt  because  he  was
     unaware of them, to which the Adjudicator draws attention -  the  four
     year gap, the source and yet the inaccuracy of the information.

 47. On ethnicity, if the Appellant were of mixed ethnicity, he would  have
     inherited his father's Rwandese ethnicity, according to Dr Pullen.  He
     says that in urban areas there  are  many  mixed  ethnicity  families,
     fully accepted socially, particularly among the middle  classes  -  in
     normal times.  But now, Rwandese ethnicity had become threatening  and
     remained a "powerful vector of violence in Kinshasa".

 48. This was however a desk-top report without  interviews,  and  none  of
     course with this Appellant.  (The niece according to  the  expert  had
     Congolese ethnicity).  So it does not grapple with  the  Adjudicator's
     concern about the absence of evidence as to relevant physical features
     from an expert, in view of his rejection of  the  reliability  of  the
     Appellant himself.  The Adjudicator's conclusion (paragraph 57) is not
     seriously undermined.

 49. The new evidence also included a UNHCR letter of 10th  December  2002.
     This was obviously available and if relevant should have  been  placed
     before the Adjudicator.  It was complained on  statutory  review  that
     the Vice-President refusing leave to appeal had not specifically dealt
     with this "new" evidence.  It plainly fails to meet the test in Ladd v
     Marshall, and no explanation for  its  not  being  placed  before  the
     Adjudicator was given.  What was sought to be gained from this  letter
     were the general remarks made in  another  case  to  the  effect  that
     persons from rebel-held territories arriving in Kinshasa especially if
     of Rwandese origin are at risk sometimes of  persecution.   Ethnically
     mixed Tutsis were equally  known  to  be  among  those  targeted  with
     extreme human rights abuses, detained or sometimes killed.  It is only
     relevant if the Appellant  is  of  mixed  Tutsi  ethnicity  which  the
     Adjudicator has not accepted, for sound reasons.

 50. The Adjudicator however also considered the UNHCR letter of  16th  May
     2003 which did not say that those of mixed  Tutsi  ethnicity  were  at
     risk, and the CIPU Report of April 2003 which said that there had been
     a significant decrease in 2002 in  serious  abuses  against  Tutsi  or
     mixed ethnicity Tutsis although discrimination continued.

 51. If the Appellant is  not  of  mixed  ethnicity  there  is  no  reason,
     following the decision of the Tribunal in VL (DRC) (CG)  [2004]  UKIAT
     00007, not to return him.  We heard argument about  the  treatment  of
     failed asylum-seekers in the case heard immediately before  this  one.
     We agreed to give this Appellant the benefit of any relevant  decision
     in that case;  Ms Chapman had nothing to add to the arguments.  In the
     event, we considered that there was no breach of Article 3 in the lack
     of enquiries or investigations about those returnees, and there is  no
     argument which this Appellant can advance based  on  that;   RK  (DRC)
     (Obligation to investigate) [2004] UKIAT 00129.

 52. Although VL left open as a possible risk category those  who  were  of
     mixed Tutsi ethnicity, we would add that on the material before us  at
     present, those persons would not appear  to  be  at  a  real  risk  of
     persecution or breach of Article 3 on return.  Paragraph  6.3  of  the
     CIPU Report of October 2003 may be over-optimistic in suggesting  that
     the Government protected  Tutsis  at  risk  in  government  controlled
     territory but in paragraph  6.58,  echoing  the  US  State  Department
     Reports, says:

           "Since the start of the conflict between the  rebel  forces  and
           the Government in 1998, Tutsis have been  subjected  to  serious
           human  rights  abuses,  both  in  Kinshasa  and  elsewhere,   by
           government security forces and by some citizens for perceived or
           potential disloyalty to the regime.   In  August  and  September
           1998, an undetermined number of people who were not  Tutsis  but
           looked like Tutsis were subjected to indiscriminate human  right
           abuses simply because  of  their  appearance.   The  Tutsis  are
           recognised by other  Congolese  by  their  great  height,  their
           pointed noses and their oval faces.  Despite  being  subject  to
           human rights abuses by the  security  forces  and  the  civilian
           population since 1998, the Government has allowed  international
           agencies to resettle thousands of  Tutsis  in  other  countries.
           Human  rights  abuses  committed  against  Tutsis  significantly
           decreased during 2002 but human rights  groups  have  complained
           that discrimination against persons perceived  to  be  of  Tutsi
           ethnicity and their supporters continued in that year."

 53. In December 2002, the UNHCR letter refers to what was happened to some
     ethnically mixed Tutsis but is vague as to its frequency or  location,
     refers to no special risk  on  return  or  that  they  should  not  be
     returned to Kinshasa.  Dr Mullen's report  is  suggestive  of  greater
     problems  but  we  would  not  have  regarded  it  as  sufficient   to
     demonstrate a real risk for this  Appellant  even  were  he  of  mixed
     ethnicity.  That would still not make anything else which he has  said
     true.

 54. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we  say  about  the
     Surendran guidelines, and should be read with MNM.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


