
ar
  MS (Student - ECO Assessment of Language Ability) India [2004] UKIAT 00246

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                                Date of Hearing: 1 July 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           09 September 2004

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                        Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes
                              Mrs M E McGregor




                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives: Ms R.  Brown,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
appellant; Mr J. Bird of IAS (London) for the respondent ("claimant")



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi, appeals against the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mr R.A. Cox, allowing the  appeal  of
      the claimant,  a   citizen  of  India,  against  a  decision  dated  6
      September  2002, refusing him entry clearance as a student to study on
      a GNVQ Foundation  in ICT Course  for  one  year  at  City  College  ,
      Birmingham.

   2. The Entry Clearance Officer's reasons  for  refusing  entry  clearance
      were  that  the  claimant   conducted   his   interview   through   an
      interpreter; that he had not studied in any capacity since 1996;  that
      in contrast to the previous application he had made in August 2002, he
      had  made no mention of English Studies; and that he himself  had  not
      looked for a course of study in India or in the UK (his aunt had found
      the  proposed course for him  here). The ECO also counted against  him
      his reply to a question as to what he would  do  at  the  end  of  the
      course.  His reply was that he would  "come  back  and  if  I  get  an
      opportunity to work overseas I will".

3.    It was not in dispute that the claimant  had  been  accepted  by  City
      College on the nominated course and that this course was still open to
      this claimant. It was further accepted that there was no issue  as  to
      the ability of  the  claimant  to  satisfy  all  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 57(i)-(vi) except for 57(ii)(b) and (iv).

4.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator  oral evidence was given by  the
      claimant's sponsor, Dr M.Y. Saigol.

5.    The Adjudicator  found  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  credible  and
      compelling. In regard to the  point  taken  by  the  ECO  against  the
      claimant concerning ability to  speak  English,  the  Adjudicator  was
      satisfied that despite choosing to conduct the  interview  through  an
      interpreter, this claimant's command of written and spoken English was
      adequate to enable  him  to  do  the  specified  course,  particularly
      bearing in mind that the college was willing to supply assistance with
      language difficulties. The Adjudicator was further satisfied that  the
      claimant had gained the equivalent of A levels in 1996.  He viewed the
      failure of the claimant to  engage  in  further  study  thereafter  as
      adequately  explained  by  the  sponsor's  evidence   concerning   the
      claimant's poor rural background.

6.    The grounds of  appeal  were  essentially  twofold.  Firstly,  it  was
      argued that the Adjudicator should  have  regarded  the  ECO  as  best
      placed to assess the claimant's language abilities.   Second,  it  was
      submitted that the Adjudicator unduly speculated when  assessing  that
      the claimant had the ability to write fluently in English.

7.    The difficulty with the first ground of appeal is that the  record  of
      interview does not show that any attempt was made by the ECO  to  test
      the claimant's ability to speak  or  write  English.   In  general  we
      consider an ECO is well placed to test  ability  to  speak  and  write
      English sufficient  to undertake UK  studies. ECOs may  lack  specific
      expertise in assessing linguistic skills  for  academic  purposes  and
      this lack may be relevant in borderline cases, but through their  work
      in processing student applications ECOs  can in general be expected to
      be familiar with the practical learning industry  standards  that  are
      applied. However, if an ECO regards ability to speak or write  English
      as an issue in any particular case, we consider that it  is  incumbent
      on him or her to alert the  claimant  to  this  fact.  In  this  case,
      despite the claimant choosing to  conduct  the  interview  through  an
      interpreter, the ECO gave him no inkling  that  this  would  be  taken
      against him, nor was anything said to make clear to the claimant  that
      he needed to demonstrate his fluency in English. The  failure  of  the
      ECO to test the claimant properly as to his command of English greatly
      reduced the weight that could be attached to his assessment.  In  such
      circumstances we consider that the  Adjudicator  was  quite  entitled,
      having seen and heard the sponsor, to prefer the sponsor's  assessment
      that the claimant had adequate command of written and spoken  English.
      The sponsor who had been found wholly credible, had met  the  claimant
      on two occasions.

8.    Turning to the second main ground of appeal, we do not find  that  the
      Adjudicator's  assessment  of  either  the  ability   issue   or   the
      intentionality issue was unduly speculative.  The  sponsor  had  given
      relevant evidence concerning these  matters  and,  in  the  particular
      circumstances of this case, the Adjudicator  was  fully  justified  in
      treating such evidence as weighty.

9.    There was no basis either for disbelieving the evidence given  by  the
      sponsor, who had taken a close interest in the claimant's  application
      throughout, concerning the fact that  the  claimant   had  written  an
      essay in English as part of the admissions procedure required by  City
      College.  The Adjudicator was also quite right to treat as a  relevant
      consideration, in assessing ability to do the course in question, that
      City College confirmed in a letter dated 5 September  2003  that  ESOL
      support would be provided if required. Whilst there  was  no  specific
      mention of this in earlier City College correspondence, there  was  no
      reason to believe that  ESOL support was not a  regular  component  of
      its courses.

10.   Although intention to  depart  was  not  as  such  challenged  in  the
      grounds, we would for completeness record our  finding  that  we  also
      consider the Adjudicator  gave entirely sound reasons  for  concluding
      that the claimant met  this  requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Partly in view of  the  pro-active  role  played  by  the  sponsor  in
      encouraging the claimant to pursue further  studies,  the  Adjudicator
      was quite entitled to conclude that the claimant  had no intention  of
      remaining in the UK  after completion of his  studies.   It  was  also
      open to him to  assess  that  the  claimant's  remark  about  pursuing
      opportunities to work overseas  if  they  arose,  did  not  betray  an
      intention to depart upon completion of the studies for  which  he  had
      applied on this occasion.

11.   For the above reasons we consider that the Adjudicator did not err  in
      concluding that the claimant met the requirements of paragraph  57  in
      full. In particular, it was open to the  Adjudicator,  on  the  fuller
      evidence he had before him, to be  satisfied  that  the  claimant  had
      shown that he was able and intended to follow his nominated course and
      that he intended to leave the UK at the end of his studies.

12.   The Adjudicator directed that entry clearance   be  issued  forthwith.
      In the light of our dismissal of the ECO appeal, we would expect entry
      clearance to be  granted forthwith. However, in view of the elapse  of
      time it would be prudent for  the  claimant  to  produce  to  the  ECO
      evidence to confirm that the course in question  remains open  to  him
      in the current or coming academic year.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      1


