
  AE (Bimaal clan  - sufficiency of protection) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00281
                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 20 September 2004
                                   Determination prepared: 20 September 2004
                                Date Determination notified:  5 October 2004

                                   Before:

                      Mr Andrew Jordan (Vice President)
                       Mr J. Perkins (Vice President)
                                Mrs M.L. Roe

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:           Mr P. Douglass, Counsel instructed by Pearson
                       & Winston, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms T. Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer


  1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Somalia  who  appeals  against  the
     determination of an adjudicator, Mr D. M. Wynn-Simpson, promulgated on
     7 October 2003 in which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
     the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse both her  asylum  and
     human rights claims.

  2. The appellant was born on 10 December 1974.  She is 29 years old.  She
     arrived in United Kingdom on a date that has proved to be incapable of
     verifying and claimed asylum on 23 December 2002.   The  Secretary  of
     State refused the application on 18 February 2003 and gave  directions
     for the appellant's removal to Somalia.  This gave rise to a right  of
     appeal under section 69 (5) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.
     In due course, the appellant appealed.

  3. In a statement prepared by the  appellant  and  forming  part  of  her
     application, she stated that  she  was  from  the  Bimaal  clan.   The
     spelling of this clan varies  from  source  to  source.   It  is  also
     referred to as "Biyomal", "Biyamal", "Bimal",  "Biimaal",  "Biyamaal".
     For the purposes of this determination, it is not necessary to specify
     the sub-clan.  The appellant claimed that it was a minority clan,  who
     do not have warlords and militia to protect them and  live  mainly  in
     the Lower Shabelle area.  Although she was born in Marka,  her  family
     moved to Mogadishu where she lived in the Wardhigley area of the town.
      The family owned a substantial  property  consisting  of  residential
     accommodation above and seven shops beneath, including a pharmacy  and
     a restaurant.

  4. It was the appellant's case that, after the commencement of the  civil
     war in  1998,  the  Hawiye  militia  took  control  of  the  property,
     permitting the family to occupy only  two  rooms  that  requiring  the
     appellant's husband to work  in  a  pharmacy  whilst  her  father  and
     brother worked in the  restaurant.   In  1996,  she  stated  that  her
     husband was forced to join the militia but eventually made his way  to
     Kenya where he divorced the appellant.  She lost contact with him.

  5. On 20 September 2002, the claimant  asserted  that  an  incident  took
     place in which militia murdered her father and brother.   Towards  the
     end of September, the remnant of the family moved to a relative of the
     appellant's mother, who lived in Medina, another  part  of  Mogadishu,
     where in November 2002,  the  claimant  married  for  a  second  time.
     Shortly thereafter, arrangements were made for the appellant to  leave
     Somalia.  She left her children with her mother.

  6. At the  hearing  before  the  adjudicator,  it  was  accepted  by  the
     Secretary of State that the appellant was a member of the Bimaal clan.
      In paragraph 9 of the determination, the adjudicator set out in brief
     form what we have set out above.  In  paragraph  10,  the  adjudicator
     stated:

           "It will be seen from these rather brief findings of fact that I
           have difficulty  in  accepting,  even  at  the  appropriate  low
           standard of  proof,  what  the  appellant  has  said  about  her
           family's  detention  in  the  house  for  12   years   and   the
           circumstances in which  he  was  able  to  escape,  leading  her
           children with her mother.  The  appellant's  answers  in  cross-
           examination did not satisfy me  that  she  was  telling  me  the
           truth, and that together with the issues raised in  the  refusal
           letter which led the respondent  to  disbelieve  the  appellant,
           lead me to the conclusion that her claim is not credible."


  7. Although the adjudicator refers to making brief findings of  fact,  it
     is apparent that he made no such findings.  In  rejecting  her  claim,
     the adjudicator gave no reasons and  it  is  common  ground  that  his
     determination is flawed as a result.  The adjudicator did not set  out
     what answers in cross-examination failed to satisfy him or  why.   Nor
     did the adjudicator identified the specific  matters  in  the  refusal
     letter with which he agreed and  which  caused  him  to  draw  adverse
     inferences.

  8. The adjudicator, however,  was  bound  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
     concession that the appellant was a member of the  Bimaal  clan.   The
     adjudicator was referred to the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  Iimi
     [2002] UKIAT 05558 (Mr A. R. Mackey, Vice  President)  and  considered
     the single sentence in the Report on Minority  Groups  to  the  effect
     that the Bimaal had the benefit of protection from the Dir clan.   The
     adjudicator reasoned:

           "The other issue that I have to address is that related  to  the
           [Bimaal] clan, and in this respect I have  regard  both  to  the
           Tribunal determination in Iimi  and  to  the  joint  report  and
           schedule of clan is produced by the respondent which  have  both
           shown the [Bimaal] is being a  sub  clan  of  the  Dir.   It  is
           significant that the appellant and her family have been able  to
           live in worked in the Mogadishu area for some 12 years whilst it
           was under the control of  the  Hawiye  militia.   The  objective
           material against suggests that  members  of  the  Dir  clan  and
           presumably the [Bimall] sub clan are not  targeted  specifically
           by the home we a militia although there  may  of  course  be  at
           risk, as of all members of the population, have been caught  out
           in fighting between rival militias.  It is that this reason that
           I do not accept that the appellant as a member of  the  [Bimaal]
           sub clan would be at any greater risk  if  returned  to  Somalia
           than that faced at the population as a whole."

  9. On the basis of this conclusion, the adjudicator dismissed the appeal.

 10. The starting-point for our consideration is the Joint British,  Danish
     and Dutch Fact Finding Mission to Nairobi, Kenya 17-24 September  2000
     in which there is a reference to the Bimaal clan forming a sub-clan of
     the Dir.  In paragraph 17, it is said:

           "Wayne Long [chief security  officer  UNDP  Somalia]  emphasised
           that minorities can rarely challenge the dominant  Somalia  clan
           militias  on  a  military  basis,  as  they  have  no   military
           capability of their own.  One exception to this is  the  Bimaal,
           who he described as a neo-Somali group, part  of  the  Dir  clan
           family but of mixed Arab ancestry, who have no organised militia
           but are able to assemble small armed groups to  challenge  Haber
           Gedir dominance."


 11. At this point, it is appropriate to make two points.  First,  Mr  Long
     as the chief  security  officer  of  the  United  Nations  Development
     Programme would be expected to have a considerable  amount  of  first-
     hand experience in Somalia but is not a country expert in the academic
     sense.  Second, the passage that  we  have  set  out  above  does  not
     establish that the Bimaal are able to organise militia of  their  own.
     Instead, it suggests the challenge that they offer to  the  domination
     of the Haber Gedir militia is limited to the activity of  small  armed
     groups.

 12. This passage in the Fact Finding Mission report of September 2000  was
     considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  Iimi.    In  paragraph  19  of  the
     determination, the Tribunal stated:

           "..   The  additional  objective  information   indicates   that
           the[Bimaal] minority tribe or sub-clan are group who  are  based
           in Mogadishu and southern parts of Somalia.  They are stated  to
           have some defensive capability in  the  form  of  armed  groups.
           However the objective information does not state  where  or  how
           protection from those groups could be accessed.  It does however
           state that the protection is required from  one  of  the  larger
           clan is of the Haber Gedir.  This sub-clan  is  led  by  General
           Aideed and appears to control most of southern Mogadishu."

     The Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal, having found  that  there
     was no adequacy of protection.


 13. Although in the  instant  appeal,  the  adjudicator  relied  upon  the
     determination in Iimi to support his conclusion that the appellant was
     not  at  risk,  it  is  not  altogether  clear  how  he  reached  that
     conclusion, given that the Tribunal allowed the appeal in Iimi because
     the appellant was a Bimaal.  Furthermore, whilst it is  apparent  that
     the Fact Finding Mission  recorded  Mr  Long's  information  that  the
     Bimaal were able to  assemble  small  armed  groups,  the  adjudicator
     appears to have treated that as providing an  adequacy  of  protection
     without considering what practical assistance such small armed  groups
     would afford the Bimaal community.

 14. For the purposes of this appeal, we were referred to the Operation all
     Guidance Notes on Somalia, version  6,  of  May  2004.   At  paragraph
     2.1.4.5, the Middle/Lower Shabelle area was described in these terms:

           "Tensions  between  competing  faction  led  by  Musa  Sude  and
           Mohammed Dhere led to fierce clashes around Jowhar in July 2003,
           although calm was restored by  early  September  2003.   Overall
           Jowhar stabilised through the course of 2003.  Though the  Lower
           Shabelle has no single authority it is fairly quiet apart from a
           few land disputes.  The new strong man Indha-Adde,  who  belongs
           to the Haber Gedir..has taken over  control  of  Merka  and  the
           uppermost part of the region."


 15.  It seems to us that this suggests that control of this area rests  in
     the hands of the Haber Gedir.

 16.  After  the  adjudicator  reached  his  determination,  the  appellant
     belatedly sought expert advice.  In a report dated 30 January 2004, Dr
     Virginia  Luling  made  a  number  of  significant  points  about  the
     protection needs of the Bimaal.  Although she accepted the Bimaal  are
     a section of the Dir clan-family or group of clans, most  of  the  Dir
     live in the extreme north of  Somalia  territory,  in  Somaliland  and
     Djibouti. In contrast, the Bimaal are separated from them, and live in
     the south.  Most Bimaal live in  the  Lower  Shabelle  region  in  and
     around the city of Marka, and others around Jamame in the Middle Jubba
     and Lower Jubba regions.  She went on to say:

           "The Bimaal of the south definitely do  not  see  themselves  as
           belonging to the same clan  as  the  other  Dir  (the  Iise  and
           Gadabursi) of the north.  They have been separated from them for
           at least two centuries, they speak a different Dir, and  so  far
           as I know that  are  no  effective  tights  between  them.   The
           connection is a theoretical one, known to elders  but  not  have
           much practical relevance.  I say this from my general  knowledge
           of southern Somali society, and from conversations  that  I  had
           with Bimaal in Marka in 1996."


 17. She concluded by saying that she had never  have  heard  of  any  help
     given by the Dir to the Bimaal and that the Iise  and  Gadabursi  have
     quite different interests in the politics of Djibouti and  Somaliland.
     On page 2 of her first report, Dr Luling stated that the Bimaal do not
     have a clan militia.  As a result the  Bimaal  are  in  a  subordinate
     position under the control of the Hawiye and Darod groups.

 18. For the purposes of the hearing today, Dr Luling also  provided  a  us
     with an additional report.  It is regrettable  that  this  report  was
     dated 19 September 2004, the day before the hearing but Ms  Hart,  who
     appeared on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  did  not  seek  an
     adjournment to deal with the additional material, although we got  the
     matter back to enable her to take instructions from sources within the
     Home Office.   The  second  report  of  Dr  Luling  focuses  upon  the
     existence of Bimaal militia which she had  said  the  Bimaal  have  no
     access to.  She referred to paragraph 17 of the Fact  Finding  Mission
     of September 2000 and a comment by Mr Long that the Bimaal are able to
     assemble small armed groups to challenge Haber Gedir  dominance.   She
     referred to  a  report  written  by  Professor  K.   Menkhaus  of  the
     Department  of  Political  Science,  Davidson  College,  prepared  for
     WriteNet in November 2000 in which he said:

           "The security situation has  not  improved  in  Merka,  where  a
           complex power struggle pits the  Haber  Gedir-dominated  shari'a
           administration against the Bimaal clan  and  a  new  front,  the
           Bimaal Resistance Movement.  The Bimaal regard the  Haber  Gedir
           as occupiers, and his part of  their  effort  to  discredit  the
           shari'a administration attacked international  agency  compounds
           earlier  this  summer.   The  Haber  Gedir  have  responded   by
           allegedly inciting local into clan fights in a divide  and  rule
           tactic."


 19.  Dr Luling states:

           "The name  'Bimaal  Resistance  Movement'  shows  how  they  see
           themselves and indicates the sort of activity of a engaging: hit-
           and-run raids designed to destabilise the occupying force.  This
           does  not  amount  to  providing  protection  to  their   fellow
           townspeople.  The situation in the Marka area has not materially
           altered since this report."

 20. In her evidence to us, Dr Luling repeated the point made in her  first
     report that although,  historically,  the  Bimaal  are  one  of  these
     several groups into which the Dir are divided, the Dir  of  north  and
     Somalia are separated from the Bimaal in the  south  by  a  about  the
     thousand miles.  The Bimaal  live  in  and  around  Marka  and  around
     Kismayo in two separate communities or groups.  She was  not  able  to
     provided information about the situation in and around Kismayo but was
     able to speak of the Bimaal who live in and around Marka.  In the pre-
     colonial period, the Bimaal were the dominant clan but, as a result of
     clan movements, they do not now have the sheer weight  of  numbers  of
     former times.  She was not able to estimate the numbers of the  Bimaal
     but estimated it was a few thousands to tens of  thousands.   She  did
     not know if, numerically, the Bimaal are in the majority in Marka  but
     was satisfied they are a significant  minority.   They  could  not  be
     classified as tiny in numbers.  Nevertheless, there are no areas where
     they have any form of control.  She conceded that it was an  oversight
     on her part to say the Bimaal have no  militia.   She  explained  that
     this had entered her report because, on a  day-to-day  basis,  reports
     from the area do not speak of a Bimaal militia.  She repeated that the
     only material is now some four years old and appears to speak of  "hit
     and run" militia.

 21. Dr Luling spoke of the risk  faced  by  the  appellant  on  return  to
     Mogadishu.  It was her view that Mogadishu is controlled by the Hawiye
     militia (of which the Haber Gedir is part).  She expressed no surprise
     that there were Bimaal in Mogadishu  much  considered  their  security
     situation would be very uncertain.   The  Bimaal  are  not  native  to
     Mogadishu, unlike the Benadiri, and had moved into  the  city  usually
     for business purposes.  Like the Benadiri,  she  considered  that  the
     Bimaal in Mogadishu are likely to have developed mechanisms to protect
     themselves either by paying protection money or  marrying  a  daughter
     into a dominant clan.  In this way,  personal  alliances  were  forged
     with the majority clans but she described such an arrangement  as  "an
     unequal alliance".

 22. In the course of cross-examination, Dr Luling conceded that the Bimaal
     are rooted in Somalia and would therefore be regarded differently from
     those clan is coming initially  from  outside  Somalia.   We  do  not,
     however,  consider  that  this  provides  any  significantly   greater
     protection for them.  Indeed, the  evidence  suggests  that  they  are
     subjected to the same type of treatment as some other minority groups.
     Whilst accepting that it was her phrase to describe the activities  of
     the Bimaal Resistance Movement as in the nature of "hit and run",  she
     considered this was an appropriate gloss on the background material to
     which we have referred.  It was her view that the Resistance  Movement
     was likely to be a group of younger men taking the  opportunity,  when
     circumstances permitted, to attack the Hawiye or civilian targets.  It
     was her view, however, that the occasional blowing up of a  storehouse
     was not the same as offering  effective  protection.   In  particular,
     their motives were unlikely to be the provision  of  security  to  the
     ordinary Bimaal community.

 23. Mr Douglass, who appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Ms Hart each
     accepted that the findings of the  adjudicator  were  inadequate.   In
     particular, there were no proper findings in relation to the  specific
     incidents that formed the subject I  can  matter  of  the  appellant's
     claim.  Accordingly, we were invited to approach  the  appeal  on  the
     basis of the objective evidence alone and it was only if the objective
     evidence failed to provide a resolution to the issues raised  in  this
     appeal, that we should remit it.

 24. In our judgment, the material that we have  set  out  above  does  not
     establish that the Bimaal are able to draw upon  effective  protection
     in Mogadishu or in Marka.  Whilst we  accept  that  in  the  north  of
     Somalia, the various groups that make  up  the  Dir  afford  effective
     protection to clan members, the Dir offer no protection to the  Bimaal
     in southern Somalia.  Whatever the numerical position of the Bimaal in
     Marka and the surrounding area may be, the area is under  the  control
     of the Haber Gedir and, in particular, the  local  warlords  in  power
     from time to time.  The  Bimaal  in  this  area  do  not  control  any
     territory and there are no safe havens.  Whilst the objective material
     indicates that small groups of armed men from  the  Bimaal  clan  were
     able, at least in the year 2000, to mount operations against the Haber
     Gedir,  there  is  a  paucity  of  current   information   about   the
     effectiveness of this action.  It is at least possible  that  whatever
     effect they had in 2000 has not been repeated if  only  because  there
     are no continuing reports of the Movement's  more  recent  activities.
     In any event, we are content to describe their activities  as  in  the
     nature  of  "hit  and  run"  raids,  possibly  carried  out  by  small
     independent groups of individuals.  In our judgment, this  falls  well
     short of establishing these groups provide  effective  protection  for
     the Bimaal as a whole.   Indeed,  the  background  material  fails  to
     establish that the purpose of these groups is to offer protection.

 25. The adjudicator considered that the risk faced by the claimant was  no
     greater than the risk faced by any other Somali nationals as a  result
     of the general level  of  insecurity  within  the  country.   For  the
     reasons that we have given, we do  not  consider  that  conclusion  is
     sustainable.  We are satisfied that the Bimaal in Mogadishu  or  Marka
     are not able to look for protection to their own militia or to  engage
     the support of the Dir from northern Somalia.  The passage relied upon
     in the Fact Finding Mission  recording  Wayne  Long's  view  that  the
     Bimaal have any military capability of their own with which  they  are
     able to assemble small armed groups to challenge Heber Gedir dominance
     does  not,  in  our  judgment,  establish  there  is  an  adequacy  of
     protection.  This was also the conclusion reached by the  Tribunal  in
     Iimi and we have not been presented with any material that establishes
     the situation has changed in any, or  any  significant,  extent  since
     2002.

 26. For these reasons, we consider that the appellant has established  the
     adjudicator's assessment of the risk faced by her  was  based  upon  a
     misreading of the background  material.   Accordingly,  we  allow  her
     appeal.

Decision: the appellant's appeal is allowed.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT
                                        Approved for electronic distribution
