
                         EA (Immigration -  Rule 48(5)) Ghana [2004] UKIAT
00227


                        IMMIGRATION  APPEAL  TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing:  9 August  2004
                                                Date Signed:  9 August  2004

                                 Date Determination Notified: 18 August 2004




                                   Before:




                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice-President)

                               Mr G F Sandall


                                Mr S S Percy



Between



            Appellant

                                     and

                                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA

      Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For the Appellant:      Mr A McGregor, instructed by Messrs Afrifa & Co.
For the Respondent:   Ms T Hart, Presenting Officer.

1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana ,  appeals,  with  permission,  against
   the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr S  M  Southgate,  dismissing  her
   appeal against the decision of the Respondent  on  19  February  2002  to
   refuse entry clearance as a spouse of a person who is present and settled
   in the United Kingdom.

2. The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal  for  three  reasons,  after  having
   accepted that there was a subsisting marriage between the  Appellant  and
   her husband, the sponsor.  First, he was not satisfied  on  the  evidence
   before him that the Appellant had the  intention  of  living  permanently
   with the sponsor. Second, he was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had
   adequate accommodation for himself and the Appellant in property which he
   owned or occupied exclusively, and  without  recourse  to  public  funds.
   Third, he was not satisfied that the Appellant and the sponsor  would  be
   able to maintain themselves adequately without recourse to public funds.

3. The grounds of  appeal,  as  advanced  by  Mr  McGregor  before  us,  are
   essentially on a narrow basis. The Adjudicator recorded in paragraphs 3.1
   to  3.2  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  before  him,  the
   Appellant's representative sought to file further evidence in support  of
   the appeal.  This evidence  contained  amongst  other  things  a  witness
   statement from the sponsor.  However standard directions had  been  given
   to the effect that all documents to be relied upon at the hearing had  to
   be filed with the Tribunal in triplicate at least  fourteen  days  before
   the hearing. The Appellant's solicitors had confirmed in  their  form  of
   reply of 25 June 2003 that they were ready to proceed  in  all  respects.
   The hearing took place on 28 August 2003.  The Adjudicator  referred  the
   Appellant's representative to the breach of directions and to Rule  48(5)
   of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003, and invited
   him to make submissions as to  why  there  were  any  good  reasons   for
   admitting the new evidence. The case was put to the back of the  list  to
   give  the  Appellant's  representative  time  to  take  instructions  and
   prepare. When the hearing resumed later that day there was a letter  from
   the Appellant's solicitors, Messrs Afrifa & Co confirming that the senior
   partner took full responsibility for not complying  with  directions,  as
   "the file had gone to sleep". He asked  the  Adjudicator  to  accept  the
   bundle and not punish the Appellant for  his  mistake.   The  Adjudicator
   concluded that there had been some eighteen months since the Respondent's
   decision, to prepare for the appeal and there was no  good  reason  given
   for the breach of directions.   He  therefore  refused  to  admit  afresh
   evidence and proceeded to determine the appeal on the evidence available.

4. Mr McGregor has argued that this decision amounts to  an  error  in  law,
   which requires the remittal of the appeal to be heard afresh  by  another
   Adjudicator. Ms Hart disagreed. It is with this issue that we are  mainly
   concerned in this appeal, though an Article 8  point  was  also  made  to
   which we shall refer later.

5. Rule 48(5) of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003
   states as follows.
           "An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not consider  any  evidence
           which is not filed or served in accordance with time limits  set
           out in these Rules or directions given  under  rule  38,  unless
           satisfied that there are good reasons to do so."

6. We note at this point that under Rule 48(5) an Adjudicator does not  have
   an unfettered discretion to admit new evidence.  He  is  prohibited  from
   considering any evidence not filed in accordance  with  the  time  limits
   set, unless he is satisfied that there are good reasons  to  do  so.  The
   Adjudicator cited this Rule in the determination and so clearly  directed
   himself to the appropriate framework within which he  had  to  make  this
   decision. It is also clear from the determination  that  he  invited  the
   Appellant's representative to address him on  the  relevant  issues.   He
   gave time to enable this to be done.  The only argument eventually raised
   by the Appellant's representative in response as to why  there  was  good
   reason to admit the late evidence was that there was  a  solicitor  error
   for which the Appellant should not suffer.

7. Mr McGregor then directed us to a recent  case  of  the  Tribunal  in  MD
   (Good reasons to consider) Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00197.  He  acknowledged
   that the facts were materially different.  That was an asylum  appeal  in
   which  the  Adjudicator  had  refused  to  receive  a  witness  statement
   presented on the morning of the hearing, in  breach  of  directions,  and
   consequently refused to allow the claimant to  give  oral  evidence.   He
   therefore determined the appeal without a hearing.  That  Tribunal  noted
   that the directions given in that appeal for the filing of documents were
   the standard directions, as they are in the appeal before  us,  and  they
   went on to offer some guidance on Rule 48(5) in the following terms.
           10. The Adjudicator may well  have  appreciated  that  the  Rule
           prohibited the consideration of evidence served  late  but  that
           prohibition is subject to the  qualification  "unless  satisfied
           that there are good reasons to do so". There is nothing  in  the
           determination to suggest that the  Adjudicator  asked  if  there
           were good reasons why he should receive the evidence.   That  is
           not the same thing as asking if there were good reasons why  the
           evidence had been served late.  We have to say that the  grounds
           of appeal suggest to us very strongly that there  were  no  good
           reasons for the evidence being served late.  If as is suggested,
           the  Appellant  had  difficulty  maintaining  contact  with  his
           solicitors, or them with him, then it is a difficulty that could
           have been remedied  by  telephone  calls,  letters,  travelling,
           using local agents, or instructing a different firm.
           11. Although it may be easy for an Adjudicator,  faced  with  an
           Appellant who has failed to comply with directions and  who  has
           not disclosed his case, to forget how important his decision may
           be, it is incumbent  on  him  to  remember  his  duty.   Rule  4
           provides "the overriding objective of these Rules is  to  secure
           the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals".  In a  case
           considering the proper application of paragraph 45(2) Barnes V-P
           said
                 "Adjudicators  should  be  conscious  that  part  of  their
                 overriding duty is to ensure a just disposal.  Partly  this
                 is because a just disposal will be a final disposal; partly
                 because there is a duty on immigration  judiciary  to  give
                 the  most  anxious  consideration  to  applications   which
                 involve a claim that their makers fear  persecution  for  a
                 Convention reason if returned  to  their  own  country  or,
                 since the introduction of the Human Rights Act  1998,  that
                 they will suffer inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to
                 Article 3."
           12. The Procedure Rules provided for  the  oral  hearing  of  an
           appeal.  The Appellant wanted to give evidence  and  produced  a
           witness statement, albeit late.  Adjudicators  have  a  duty  to
           apply the most  anxious  scrutiny  and  the  high  standards  of
           fairness to the Appellant's case.
           13. One of the problems of the late disclosure  of  evidence  is
           that it can cause unfairness to the Secretary of  State  who  is
           expected to respond to a case that he has not considered.   This
           does not mean that it will always be right to  exclude  evidence
           that is served late.  Often late service of  evidence  will  not
           really cause any difficulty  to  the  other  side,  usually  the
           Secretary of State.  Often a witness  statement  simply  repeats
           points that have been made  previously  but  puts  them  into  a
           better order or makes points that might be dealt with better  in
           cross-examination in any event.  Where this Adjudicator  in  our
           view was clearly  wrong  is  that  he  decided  to  exclude  the
           evidence  upon  which  the  Appellant  wanted  to  rely  without
           inquiring  if  there  were  any  "good  reasons"  to  admit  the
           evidence, including if  admitting  it  would  cause  any  unfair
           problems to the Secretary of State.
           14. Faced with an application of this kind it is clear that  the
           Adjudicator should have reminded himself of the requirements  of
           Rule 48(5) and addressed his mind  specifically  to  the  points
           raised there and particularly, if  he  decided  to  exclude  the
           evidence, explain carefully why he was not satisfied that  there
           were good reasons to consider it.
           15. We do not intend to make an exclusive list of "good reasons"
           but the Adjudicator should have inquired into  the  significance
           of the evidence, the reason for  the  late  submission  and  any
           problems that late service would cause to the other side.  "Good
           reasons" must mean more than  that  the  evidence  is  relevant.
           Adjudicators  never  have  to  consider  evidence  that  is  not
           relevant at all.  However "good reasons" could include the  fact
           that the evidence is highly pertinent; that it  could  not  have
           been served in accordance with directions; that the  other  side
           had notice of the failure of the evidence and  that  considering
           it    causes    no    unfair    difficulty    to    the    other
           side"................

8. Mr McGregor has argued  that  the  Adjudicator  did  not  undertake  such
   inquiry and that this general guidance is as  applicable  to  immigration
   appeals as to asylum appeals, both of which covered by the same Procedure
   Rules.  Ms Hart has argued that the Adjudicator's decision  was  properly
   open to him and does not reveal any arguable error of law, which  is  the
   only basis upon which the Tribunal  can  intervene.  We  have  considered
   their detailed submissions.

9. We begin by observing that Rule 48(5) plainly applies to both asylum  and
   immigration appeals. However there are material differences  inherent  in
   different types of application, and those differences impinge  upon  what
   may constitute "good reasons" in any particular case. The Tribunal in  MD
   Pakistan was dealing with an asylum appeal in which the  claimant's  case
   was not apparent from  the  case  file.  The  consequences  of  this  are
   highlighted in the quotation from the determination of Barnes V-P,  where
   he describes the  particular  dangers  faced  in  deciding  such  appeals
   without hearing the evidence as a whole. A failed asylum  seeker  may  be
   returned to a country where he will face death or torture.  To  have  the
   right in those circumstances to sue his solicitors for negligence  is  of
   little benefit or comfort to him. Also the proper  determination  of  the
   issues arising in an asylum appeal is a final determination. There is  no
   ability in reality to repeat the application on the same basis of  claim.
   Furthermore in asylum appeals it may be very difficult to get evidence in
   the time available. Additionally, although the burden of proof is on  the
   claimant, the standard of proof is much lower than in immigration appeals
   to reflect these difficulties. All this is why the  concept  of  "anxious
   scrutiny"  exists  and  is  so  important  in  asylum  appeals  and   why
   Adjudicators should, as indicated in MD Pakistan be very cautious  indeed
   in reaching decisions that do not take into account all  the  substantive
   evidence and submissions.

10. The position in immigration appeals against refusal of  entry  clearance
   is however materially different. Whilst applicants  will  be  anxious  to
   secure expeditious entry clearance, life and death issues do not normally
   arise if they fail. The applicant is normally out of  country.  There  is
   generally plenty of time  after  the  Respondent's  decision  to  provide
   evidence before an appeal hearing and there should be  no  difficulty  in
   providing it. An unsuccessful claim  can  be  repeated  so  often  as  is
   wished, if better evidence becomes  available.   A  claim  of  negligence
   against an incompetent solicitor is a viable proposition if loss has been
   incurred thereby.   The  Respondent  in  immigration  appeals  for  entry
   clearance is generally an Entry Clearance Officer, stationed abroad.   It
   is less easy for a Presenting Officer to get immediate instructions.  The
   acceptance of late evidence, if it is of any material  significance,  may
   well require an adjournment in fairness to the  Respondent  with  further
   consequent delay. Most of all, the imperative of "anxious scrutiny"  does
   not apply in immigration appeals and this is relevant when assessing  the
   "overriding objective" in Rule 4, where the factors to  be  balanced  are
   "the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals and  applications  in
   the interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the  wider  public
   interest". Thus whilst Rule 48(5)  applies  equally  to  immigration  and
   asylum appeals, what would  constitute  "good  reasons"  for  failing  to
   comply with directions may be very different in each, and it may well  be
   much easier to establish them  in  asylum  appeals  than  in  immigration
   appeals.

11. Within this context, we have assessed what the Adjudicator actually  did
   in this appeal.  First we note that he correctly directed himself to  the
   terms of Rule 48(5) as recommended by the Tribunal in MD  Pakistan.  Next
   he  invited  the  Appellant's  representative  to  make   all   necessary
   submissions relating to the admission of the  late  evidence  under  Rule
   48(5) and put the hearing to the back  of  his  list  to  give  time  for
   preparation.  When the case resumed, he carefully considered the  reasons
   advanced. He gave his reasons for rejecting them as being "good  reasons"
   under Rule 48(5). All this is in line with  the  guidance  given  by  the
   Tribunal in MD Pakistan. The Adjudicator is not required to guess what is
   in mind of the Appellant's representative once he has invited him to make
   full submissions.  He should deal properly with the submissions that  are
   made and this he has done.  He then went on to deal with  the  appeal  on
   the basis of the available evidence. Another material difference from  MD
   Pakistan is that in this appeal, the nature of the application was  fully
   described  on  the  case  file  together  with  the  supporting  evidence
   submitted to the Respondent and the notes of the  Appellant's  interview.
   We cannot see any error in the Adjudicator's approach to the  application
   of Rule 48(5) in the context of  this  appeal.   Having  had  her  appeal
   dismissed  on  the  evidence  available,  the  Appellant  now   has   the
   opportunity to make a further application to  the  Respondent  if  better
   evidence can be offered.

12. The grounds of appeal also argue that the appeal engages Article  8  and
   the Adjudicator did not deal with it in the determination.  That no doubt
   is because no Article 8 claim was raised in the grounds of appeal to  the
   Adjudicator, or subsequently to him. The decision by the Appellant not to
   raise Article 8 (if indeed any thought was given to this  matter  by  her
   solicitors) may well reflect the decision of the Tribunal in M  (Croatia)
   [2004] UKIAT 00024*  that  the  test  is  whether  the  decision  of  the
   Respondent under appeal was lawfully open to him.  On  the  Adjudicator's
   sustainable findings of fact, the decision plainly was lawfully  open  to
   the Respondent,  as  the  application  does  not  satisfy  three  of  the
   requirements of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,  and  no  exceptional
   circumstances have been advanced. There could be no successful Article  8
   appeal on the facts of this case

13. For the reasons given above this appeal is dismissed.


                                                             Spencer Batiste
                                                            (Vice President)

                                        Approved for electronic transmission

