
H-BR-V4

|                           |        |MA (Procedure Rules 48 (5)  |
|                           |        |and 48 (6)) Pakistan [2004] |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00330                 |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 22 October 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|31 December 2004                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice President)                                     |
|Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Vice President)                              |
|Mr C H Bennett                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant appeals to the Tribunal  with  permission  against  the
    Determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D C Gerrey, in which  he  dismissed
    his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 26 August  2003
    issuing directions for his removal from the United Kingdom and refusing
    asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 22 October 2004.  Mr  S  Khan  of
    Khan and Partners appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  and  Mr  S
    Underwood appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    The Appellant's claim is set out in his SEF, which  he  confirmed  to
    the Adjudicator was completed on the basis of his own instructions  and
    he confirmed that he was happy with the contents.  When  asked  why  he
    was applying for asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  he  referred  to  two
    kidnappers by name and a terrorist group belonging to the  Taliban  and
    the MMP who demanded money of him and when he refused they attacked him
    with guns and he was admitted to hospital on 28 January 1990.  He  said
    that they were influential people and that they had registered a murder
    case against him and he was  arrested  by  the  police  but  the  court
    released him on bail in 1990 and they went to the  High  Court  against
    this decision and they attacked him again in 1997.  When asked who  was
    responsible for ill-treating him he referred to the Taliban,  the  MMA,
    the army, the Dubango group and the Dolat group.   When  asked  why  he
    believed this treatment occurred he said that they kidnapped people for
    money and "share each other."  He said that they had  tried  to  kidnap
    his sons and attacked his house twice, in 1990 an 1997.  He  said  that
    they were supported by the MMA and the army  and  his  life  was  under
    threat so he decided to leave the country.  He had moved to Lahore  and
    when they came to Lahore he moved to Karachi but they were always after
    him.  He referred to having been involved with the Awami National Party
    and that he had attended a lot of meetings and rallies.

4.    At C5  he  gave  further  details.   He  referred  to  the  Pakistani
    military, the MMA, the Taliban and the Dolat group and  Dubango  groups
    as being those whom he feared.  He said that the Dolat  group  and  the
    Dubango group kidnapped people and were terrorists and had come to  his
    house in Peshawar and asked for money and he had refused and  they  had
    opened fire on him.  After his release from hospital he was arrested by
    the police on a false murder case and  released  on  bail  after  three
    months.  He said that he was attacked again  in  1997  and  injured  by
    bullets and he told the police but  they  did  not  register  his  case
    because the other party were influential and supported by the military,
    the MMA Government and the fundamentalist groups.  He  said  that  they
    went in  the  High  Court  against  the  District  Court  decision  and
    threatened him that he would receive a life sentence  from  this  court
    and if not that they would kill him and he had decided to leave because
    his life was under threat.

5.    The Appellant told the Adjudicator that  at  interview  some  matters
    were left out.  He said that he had  affiliations  with  the  political
    party and there were many things which he had not  mentioned  and  they
    were not mentioned because he was not familiar with the procedure.   He
    said he had handed over documents but not all of them because  he  only
    had those which had been provided at the time.

6.    At the hearing before  the  Adjudicator,  the  Appellant  when  asked
    whether he could return to Pakistan  said  that  there  was  an  appeal
    against him pending in the High Court and he had been declared to be an
    absconder.  He claimed that the MMA, the party opposed to him,  was  in
    collusion with the present government and it would  be  very  difficult
    for him to return to Pakistan.  It was put to him that he  had  already
    been acquitted once in a court of law and he said that was  because  he
    was supported by his own party and now the government was no longer his
    party if they could not support him.

7.    The  Adjudicator  considered  the  evidence  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was involved in a dispute with the two terrorist groups  over
    money and that he was involved in a shooting  incident  on  28  January
    1990 as a result of which both he and his attackers lodged  FIRs.   His
    attackers made a complaint of murder as a result of which the Appellant
    stood trial but was acquitted in a judgment delivered on 30 June  1997.
    The Adjudicator accepted that there was evidence to  confirm  that  the
    Appellant was indeed shot and injured on that occasion and again in  an
    incident on 1 January 1997 in respect of which he registered  a  second
    FIR.  He considered that this was no worse than an attempt to  frighten
    the Appellant.

8.    The Adjudicator noted that, the Appellant  having  left  Peshawar  in
    December 1998, the first adverse attention thereafter from his  enemies
    was in September 2000 when there was an attempt to abduct his  children
    in Lahore which was prevented by students and police.  Although he said
    that he was traced to Karachi by his enemies some time in 2002, he gave
    no detail of any specific  incident.   He  also  gave  no  evidence  of
    incidents concerning his claimed fear of the Pakistan military and  the
    Taliban and only by inference suggested that the MMA  were  behind  the
    activities of the two terrorist groups.  There  was  minimal  objective
    evidence concerning the MMA and certainly no evidence  to  support  his
    assertion that they actively or passively supported  terrorist  groups.
    The Adjudicator found it surprising that  if  the  Appellant's  enemies
    were able to track him down on two occasions the authorities  were  not
    able to do so and enforce the warrant.  This suggested that they had no
    particular  interest  in  enforcing  the  warrant.    The   Adjudicator
    considered that there was little evidence of a claim to be at  risk  on
    political grounds and that the only adverse attention he  had  suffered
    was from members of two terrorist groups.  He did not accept  that  the
    adverse attention  which  the  Appellant  had  suffered  from  criminal
    elements was politically motivated.  He was satisfied that  the  police
    offered and afforded protection with regard to the criminal  charge  in
    that they accepted the FIR  in  respect  of  the  second  shooting  and
    prevented the abduction of the Appellant's children in September  2000.
    This satisfied him that there was a sufficiency of protection available
    for the Appellant against any criminal activities  by  his  enemies  in
    Pakistan.  He did not accept that there was a  serious  possibility  of
    him facing an unfair trial procedure should he face  a  further  trial,
    and taking into account  the  objective  evidence  it  indicated  quite
    clearly that the higher  levels  of  the  judiciary  were  regarded  as
    independent and above corruption.

9.    It is clear from paragraph 6 of the hearing that the Appellant sought
    to rely upon a newspaper cutting but it had  not  been  served  on  the
    Respondent and the  Adjudicator  excluded  it,  having  regard  to  the
    provisions  of  Rule  48(6)  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2003.  It is also recorded at paragraph 8 that  there
    was what is described  as  a  heated  exchange  between  Mr  Khan,  who
    appeared for the  Appellant  below,  as  he  did  before  us  with  the
    interpreter as to whether the latter was  correctly  interpreting  what
    the Appellant said.  The Adjudicator indicated that he was not prepared
    to allow unseemly exchanges to take place and mentioned that he had had
    experience of this particular interpreter in a number of appeals.

10.   In the grounds of appeal it is contended that the interpretation  was
    flawed in that the interpreter  was  not  translating  the  Appellant's
    statement word by word and this was contrary to Section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act.  It is also submitted that the Adjudicator was in error  in
    refusing to accept the documentation put in at the hearing.  It is said
    that the human rights findings are flawed and that there is a real risk
    of persecution on return.

11.   The Vice-President who considered the  application  focused  on  Rule
    48(6) which is couched in absolute terms.  He  questioned  whether  the
    Adjudicator might not have considered the  documentary  material  under
    Rule 48(5) rather than under Rule 48(6) and questioned whether it could
    not be said that in any event under Rule 48(6) the  material  was  made
    available to the Respondent in the sense that it was there for  him  to
    take account of had he provided a Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing
    which he did not.

12.   At the hearing before us Mr Khan contended first of  all  that  there
    was a problem with the interpreter who had not interpreted the  answers
    properly and had tried to simplify them.  He contended that  there  was
    more that the Appellant wanted to say but he did not get the chance  to
    say it.  With regard to the Appellant's wife's evidence the Adjudicator
    had simply noted that she had confirmed her statement at  paragraph  11
    of the Determination whereas she had said more than that.

13.   As regards the documents tendered at the hearing these were  the  two
    newspaper cuttings and the court notice which had been attached to  the
    grounds of appeal and were in the bundle.   He  referred  also  to  the
    expert report which had been put in.  He contended that  the  Pakistani
    judiciary are not independent of the Executive and they  would  try  to
    please the government so there was  every  chance  that  the  Appellant
    might not get a fair trial in the High Court.  He would not be able  to
    present any witness and it was all in the discretion of the  Judge  and
    the parties' submissions.

14.   According to the new statement from the  Appellant  he  had  had  the
    documentation two days before the hearing but it had not  been  put  in
    until the day of the hearing.  He contended that the Adjudicator should
    have adjourned the hearing in order to give a  proper  opportunity  for
    the case to be presented.  Alternatively, Rule 48(5) should  have  been
    employed.  The Appellant had not been given the opportunity to  explain
    all his claim in detail due to the problems with the interpreter.

15.   In his submissions Mr Underwood referred us to a Determination of the
    Tribunal in AK [2004] UKIAT 00103.  This assisted the Appellant, but he
    argued that the Adjudicator had concluded in  the  alternative  to  his
    other findings at paragraph 25 that even  if  the  appeal  against  the
    Appellant's acquittal was still outstanding he had not  shown  that  he
    would not receive a fair trial if the appeal ever came to court.  There
    was therefore no material difference.  If there was another  trial,  on
    the Adjudicator's findings that would be fair.

16.   With regard to the issue of the conduct of the hearing, Mr  Underwood
    contended  that  nothing  had  essentially   been   missed   from   the
    Adjudicator's consideration.  It was for the Appellant to put his  case
    in statements before it came to the appeal stage and  the  hearing  was
    too late to raise such matters.  It was clear that the  issues  of  the
    MMA and the Taliban were not the main basis of his claim.   There  were
    cursory references only to these at D9 and D19.  The expert report  had
    only been put in in June 2004.  This was a case to which  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in CA applied, but the report would not make any
    difference anyway, and in any event there was no error of  law.   There
    would not be a flagrant denial of the Appellant's Article 6 rights.

17.   By way of reply Mr Khan contended that the Determination was  not  in
    accordance with the Rules.  The  Adjudicator  had  not  considered  the
    Appellant's objections made during the hearing.  The case had not  been
    done properly by the previous representatives.

18.   We consider first the issue involving concerns about the  interpreter
    at the hearing.  We have noted above what the Adjudicator  had  to  say
    about this.  The Appellant has put  in  a  witness  statement  dated  6
    September 2004.  At paragraph 6 he states  that  he  remembers  vividly
    that on numerous occasions, questions were put to him again  and  again
    and he found that the interpreter was unable to translate those answers
    properly and that this was pointed out by  his  representative  to  the
    Adjudicator who had not only ignored his objection but asked him not to
    say anything in the future.  He states that the proceedings went  ahead
    but  with  difficulty  as  the  interpreter  was  unable  to  translate
    accurately what he was saying.

19.   The Appellant did not go into any detail as to what  aspects  of  his
    claim were not put forward as a  consequence  of  deficiencies  in  the
    interpreter if such there were.  It may be that it is to  be  found  in
    paragraph 8 where he reiterates his claim that he is a  member  of  the
    Awami National Party and because of his association with it he has been
    targeted and harassed by the MMA and civil  and  military  agencies  of
    Pakistan.  The difficulty with this is that it does not sit  well  with
    what he stated in the SEF and at interview.  As we have noted above, he
    is recorded by the Adjudicator at paragraph 7 of the  Determination  as
    stating that the SEF was completed on the basis of his own instructions
    and he was happy with the contents.  There is no challenge to that.  In
    the SEF at question 1 when he was asked to explain why he was  applying
    for asylum he referred specifically to the two terrorist  groups  which
    he said belonged to the Taliban and the MMP and who had demanded  money
    from him and when he refused they attacked him with guns.   When  asked
    why he believed this treatment occurred he said  it  was  because  they
    kidnap people for money and shared each other (we  take  that  to  mean
    that they share the money out).  He listed the Taliban,  the  MMA,  the
    army and the  two  terrorist  groups  as  the  people  he  regarded  as
    responsible for his treatment, but he clearly expressed the motive  for
    this as being money.  This can be seen again at C5 where he  refers  to
    the terrorist groups coming to his house and  asking  for  money  which
    caused them to open fire on him and led to the  ongoing  problems.   He
    states that the other party were influential as they were supported  by
    the military, the MMA Government and  the  fundamentalist  groups.   No
    evidence appears to have been provided at  any  stage  to  substantiate
    that contention.

20.   Nor do we  see  anything  in  the  Appellant's  wife's  statement  to
    indicate what evidence she was unable to put forward  that  might  have
    made any material difference.  She said that she did not understand the
    language of the interpreter at the hearing although she  belongs  to  a
    Pashto speaking family and cannot speak any other language.   There  is
    no detail given as to any matters that she was not able to put  forward
    which she would now like to be considered.

21.   We accept that there were perceived problems with the interpreter  at
    the hearing.  We have not had the  benefit  of  a  statement  from  the
    interpreter and therefore we do not think it is right for us to come to
    any concluded view on this point.  We can say no more than  that  there
    were difficulties as the matter is  recorded  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    Adjudicator's Determination.  We do not however consider  that  it  has
    been shown that  any  problems  that  there  may  have  been  with  the
    interpreter have in any sense damaged the Appellant's ability  or  that
    of anybody else to give evidence on his behalf and clarify  the  issues
    before the Adjudicator.  The Appellant has had the opportunity  as  has
    his wife in their most recent statements to indicate what matters  were
    mistranslated or not properly put forward.  They have not done  so  and
    as a consequence  we  consider  that  the  Adjudicator's  Determination
    cannot be said to be flawed in this regard.

22.   We turn to  the  question  of  the  Adjudicator's  refusal  to  admit
    documentary evidence at the hearing.  The reference at paragraph  6  is
    to a newspaper cutting, although  we  are  told  that  there  were  two
    newspaper cuttings  and  also  what  is  described  as  a  proclamation
    requiring attendance of the accused at the Peshawar High  Court,  which
    is dated 23 April 2003.  As Mr Underwood suggested, this appears to  be
    a  continuation  of  earlier  documents   requiring   the   Appellant's
    attendance at the court.

23.   Mr Underwood very properly put before us  the  Determination  of  the
    Tribunal in AK which deals  with  Rule  48(5)  in  which  we  find  the
    following at paragraph 13.

      "Whilst there may be individual cases in which it would be right  for
       an  Adjudicator  to  exclude  material,  or  potentially   material,
       evidence on which a party (normally the Appellant) wishes to rely by
       reason of the failure by that party to find or serve the evidence in
       time, nevertheless as a general principle, the requirement to ensure
       that justice is done in appeals requiring the most anxious  scrutiny
       will in most cases outweigh the understandable desire on the part of
       the Immigration Appellate Authority to ensure  that  its  directions
       and the provisions of the  Procedure  Rules  are  not  flouted  with
       impunity."

24.   There is also reference at paragraph 11 to the qualification  in  the
    closing words of the sub-paragraph as  relating  to  good  reasons  for
    considering the evidence and not good reasons as to  why  the  evidence
    was not filed or served in time.  The Adjudicator appears to have given
    no consideration to the application of this Rule  but  simply  excluded
    the evidence on the basis of the wording of Rule 48(6) which states  as
    follows:

      "Subject to Section 108 of  the  2002  Act,  an  Adjudicator  or  the
       Tribunal must not take account of any evidence  that  has  not  been
       made available to all the parties."

25.   As the Vice-President who granted permission to appeal in  this  case
    commented, Section 108 is not relevant to this case.

26.   The wording of  sub-section  6  is  clearly  mandatory,  whereas  the
    opportunity exists under sub-section 5 for evidence not filed or served
    in accordance with time limits in the Rules  to  be  considered  by  an
    Adjudicator or the Tribunal, if satisfied that there are  good  reasons
    to do so.

27.   We doubt  that  the  draftsman  of  the  Rules  was  considering  the
    particular situation of non-appearance of one party when drafting  sub-
    paragraph 6  but  was  more  likely  considering  the  situation  where
    evidence is produced  after  the  hearing.   On  the  face  of  it  the
    Adjudicator would appear to have been entitled to exclude consideration
    of the evidence under sub-paragraph 6, but on this we  would  make  two
    comments.  Firstly it is the case  that  he  failed  to  consider  sub-
    paragraph 5 and the relationship between those two  sub-paragraphs  and
    which he ought to apply and why.  Secondly we consider that on a proper
    consideration of  the  two  he  could  and  should  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that, as was suggested by  the  Vice-President  who  granted
    permission, the evidence produced at the hearing by the  Appellant  was
    made available to all the parties in the sense that it was produced  at
    the  hearing  and  it  was  there  for   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative had there been one present to comment  on  it  and  make
    representations on it accordingly.  In the absence of a  representative
    of the Secretary of State at the hearing before the Adjudicator, we  do
    not consider that the Adjudicator properly acted under  Rule  48(6)  in
    excluding consideration of the evidence produced at the hearing  before
    him.

28.   That might seem to be an end of the matter, as we understood from  Mr
    Khan that he was seeking remittal in this case since  we  had  made  it
    clear to him that given the light of the Adjudicator's findings it  was
    not realistic for him to  expect  the  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright.

29.   We have however been persuaded by Mr Underwood's argument that in any
    event the error by the Adjudicator in this regard is saved by paragraph
    25 of the Determination.  In that paragraph the Adjudicator, though  he
    clearly had reservations as to whether the warrant originally  received
    in 1999 was still outstanding,  considered  that  even  if  the  appeal
    against the Appellant's acquittal was still  outstanding,  he  did  not
    accept that he would not receive a fair trial if the appeal  ever  came
    to court.  We consider that he was entitled to conclude that the  claim
    essentially involved fear of the two terrorist groups who had  demanded
    money.  The evidence did not support the  contention  that  there  were
    political undertones to this.  There was little mention of this in  the
    evidence which the Appellant had given in the  SEF  and  at  interview.
    The Adjudicator had noted the objective evidence concerning the MMA  at
    paragraph 22 of the Determination.  As the Adjudicator  properly  noted
    there, the only evidence concerning the MMA in the Country Report was a
    reference to the legislature of North West Frontier Province, dominated
    by the Islamists Six Party Coalition MMA unanimously passing a Bill  to
    implement Sharia law in the province.  There was no  corroboration  for
    the assertion that the  MMA  either  actively  or  passively  supported
    terrorist groups.  There was no evidence concerning incidents involving
    the military or the Taliban.  It was only a matter of inference that he
    suggested that the MMA were behind the activities of the two  terrorist
    groups, and, as the Adjudicator concluded, the evidence in that  regard
    was lacking.  As we have noted above, there  is  nothing  in  the  more
    recent statement of the Appellant or that of his wife to indicate  that
    relevant aspects of his claim to  substantiate  the  claimed  political
    aspect were not able to be  put  forward  at  the  hearing  before  the
    Adjudicator.

30.   The Tribunal considers the Adjudicator's findings  at  paragraphs  24
    and 25 to be sound.  Among other things he noted that the only problems
    the Appellant experienced were from members of the two terrorist groups
    who demanded money and shot him.  His report was noted  by  the  police
    and he stood trial and was acquitted.  The attack upon him was  neither
    encouraged nor condoned by the authorities.  The police had accepted an
    FIR in respect of both shooting incidents and were able to prevent  the
    abduction of his children in September 2000.  The  evidence  was  clear
    that there was a sufficiency of protection available to the  Appellant.
    The Adjudicator was also entitled to conclude  that  on  the  objective
    evidence, even if the warrant concerning his failure to appear  at  the
    appeal against his acquittal was still outstanding,  he would receive a
    fair trial in this regard.  We have of course taken  into  account  the
    evidence in the bundle from Mr Qazi concerning, among other things, the
    judiciary in Pakistan.  He does not  however  deal  with  the  specific
    situation of what the  Appellant  would  face  in  the  High  Court  in
    Peshawar.  As the Adjudicator noted, the objective evidence shows  that
    the higher courts are generally regarded as independent and  fair.   We
    have some concern that Mr Qazi appears to think that the  District  Co-
    ordinating Officers retain powers as he refers to  at  page  2  of  his
    report,  yet,  according  to  Amnesty  International,  referred  to  at
    paragraph 5.32 of the Country Report, in August  2001,  the  Office  of
    District Commissioner/District Magistrate  was  eliminated.   There  is
    specific reference at  paragraph  5.30  to  the  higher  level  of  the
    judiciary being considered to be competent and generally honest.

31.   Accordingly  we  consider  that  the  Adjudicator's  conclusions  are
    sustainable.  Albeit there was an error of law in his failure to  admit
    the evidence submitted on the day, that was not a material error of law
    because even had he taken that evidence into account it could and would
    not have made any difference to his decision in our view.  The evidence
    that  was  produced  consisted  of  newspaper  reports  concerning  the
    Appellant and a shooting incident in 1997 which refers to the Appellant
    as an active member of ANP who has  participated  greatly  in  election
    campaigns and was a target for the Mullahs for the last several  years.
    It is hardly consistent with his claim that he was being pursued by two
    terrorist groups for money.  The second  newspaper  item  concerns  the
    requirement that the Appellant attend  the  Peshawar  High  Court  with
    regard to the appeal against his acquittal, and the other document is a
    proclamation requiring his attendance at that court.  As we have  noted
    above,  the  Adjudicator  made  his  alternative  findings  as  if  his
    attendance at the court were required,  and  considered  the  objective
    evidence  properly  in  this  regard.   We  have  already   noted   our
    conclusions on the former that it  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  the
    essential nature of the Appellant's claim, and we do not consider  that
    the  Adjudicator  was  in  error  in  assessing  that  claim  as  being
    essentially to do with the fear of  terrorists  who  wished  to  extort
    money from him rather than having any  political  connotations  of  any
    significance.

32.   This appeal is therefore dismissed.







                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE-PRESIDENT
