
H-MOH-V1

               VV (Risk on Return - Country Information)  Sri Lanka [2004]
                                 UKIAT 00049

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on :  15 April 2003                           |                             |
|Delivered in Court : 15 April 2003            |.....22 March 2004           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |...                          |

                                   Before:


                           MR J BARNES - Chairman
                                 MR C MATHER
                          MRS A CROSS de CHAVANNES


between
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr S Bilbe, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms P Gandhi of Counsel, instructed by Ratna & Co.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  11th  November  1971
      and he is of Tamil ethnicity.  He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
      18th October 2001 and claimed asylum on the day of  arrival  with  his
      wife as his dependant.  Following submission of  a  witness  statement
      and an asylum interview his application was refused by  the  Secretary
      of State for the reasons set out in a letter dated 21st January  2002.
      On 28th January 2002 the Secretary of State issued directions for  his
      removal to Sri Lanka following refusal of leave to enter after refusal
      of his asylum application.  He appealed against that decision on  both
      asylum and human rights grounds  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  2nd
      September 2002 by Mr P Digney, an Adjudicator, who allowed his  appeal
      on both asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the European Convention.
       His claim that removal would be in breach of his Article 8 rights  to
      family life in this country was rejected by the Adjudicator and  there
      is no appeal before us in that respect.

2.      The Secretary of State was granted leave to appeal to  the  Tribunal
      on the basis that in allowing the appeal the Adjudicator had failed to
      consider  the  Respondent's  claim  on  the  basis  of  the  objective
      situation as at the date of hearing. He then goes on to  give  further
      details in the grounds as to the basis of that objection and to submit
      that  on  the  factual   evidence   the   Adjudicator's   finding   is
      unsustainable.

3.    The brief facts of the Respondent's experiences in Sri Lankan are  set
      out at paragraph 6 of the Adjudicator's determination in the following
      terms:

            "The Appellant was a Roman  Catholic  Tamil  who  assisted  his
           father  as  a  fisherman.   In  1994  his  brother   Antonisalas
           Anandakumar was forcibly made to join the LTTE.   The  Appellant
           was forced to assist the LTTE and  this  involved  rowing  their
           boats, something that he did on three occasions.  The  Appellant
           suffered harassment from both the  army  and  the  LTTE  in  the
           period up to 2001.  On 5th July of that year he was arrested  by
           the army and detained for about a month.  He was tortured during
           this period.  He was tied to a tree and  beaten  and  water  was
           poured into his mouth whilst he was questioned.   He  was  asked
           about the LTTE and his brother.  The army did not know that  his
           brother had been arrested in the south.  The Appellant  admitted
           that he had assisted the LTTE under duress.  He  was  kicked  in
           the stomach and beaten with the butt of  a  gun.   He  was  also
           beaten with firewood and a hot metal  bar.   The  soldiers  were
           usually drunk when they beat him.


            Whilst he  was  detained  his  wife  was  arrested,  raped  and
           physically ill-treated by three army officers.


           One of his uncles contacted the local priest, who  arranged  for
           his release through the payment of a bribe.  The priest told him
           that he should leave the area.   After  his  release  his  uncle
           contacted a member of the EPRLF who arranged for  the  Appellant
           and his wife to travel to Colombo.  There they went to stay with
           a  friend  of  his  father  called  Robin  who  said  that   the
           Appellant's brother had escaped from the LTTE  and  stayed  with
           him.  He had been arrested by the police in  a  roundup.   Robin
           did not want the Appellant to stay with him for this reason  and
           arranged for the Appellant and his wife to  leave  the  country.
           They came to this country via Moscow".


4.       It  is  perhaps   pertinent  at  this   point  to  deal   with  the
      situation of  the Appellant's brother.  There was evidence before  us,
      as before the Adjudicator, in the  form  of  a  certificate  from  the
      International Committee of the Red Cross that  the  brother  had  been
      arrested on 11th February 2001 and subsequently released from Kalutura
      prison on 11th September 2001 having  been  seen  on  three  occasions
      during that period by representatives of the  International  Committee
      of the Red Cross.  It also appears that he had made a formal complaint
      that he had been unlawfully arrested which was to be  investigated  by
      the  Presidential  Committee  for  the  unlawful  arrest   and   other
      harassment.

5.    In his findings, which are dealt with at paragraph 9, the  Adjudicator
      deals with the matter in a series  of  different  points.   The  first
      that he deals with is what he considers to be the risk in the north of
      Sri Lanka to the Respondent.  He puts it in these terms:

            "The Appellant was  arrested,  detained  and  tortured  in  the
           north.  Were he to return he would be at risk  of  suspicion  of
           having been with the LTTE during his absence  and  would  be  at
           risk  of  persecution  similar  to  that  which  he   previously
           suffered".


      The Adjudicator then goes on to consider whether the  Appellant  would
      be at risk in  Colombo.   He  does  this  in  far  greater  depth  and
      concludes, after lengthy analysis in his determination, that there  is
      no real likelihood of persecution in Colombo merely  because  of  what
      happened to the Respondent in the  north.   He  deals  next  with  the
      question of scarring and whether as a discrete issue this  would  lead
      to any potential risk to  the  Respondent.   He  says  that  there  is
      nothing visible by way of scars that would raise the suspicions of  an
      investigating officer.  Finally he turns  to  the  issue  of  internal
      flight and in that context concludes that because of the fact  of  the
      rape of the Respondent's wife and that the sight of people similar  to
      those who had carried out that act would be likely  to  cause  serious
      psychological harm, it is proper for him to take this into account  in
      considering whether relocation would be unduly harsh.   He  says  that
      suffering caused to someone who is conscious of his wife's  suffering,
      and the constant reminder of the rape that will be produced, makes  it
      unduly harsh to expect the husband to relocate, although but for  this
      consideration he would not have concluded that it was unduly harsh  to
      return the Respondent to Colombo.

6.    The first issue which we have to consider is  whether  the  first  and
      primary finding of the Adjudicator as to risk  in  the  north  of  Sri
      Lanka is sustainable on the evidence that  was  before  him.   In  his
      findings of fact at paragraph 7 of his determination he says  that  he
      has looked at the Appellant's evidence and attempted to decide whether
      it is consistent and coherent and that he  has  also  looked  at  that
      evidence in the light of the objective evidence.  He then  deals  with
      issues as to credibility which had been raised in the  refusal  letter
      but says that the Respondent's story remained consistent.  The medical
      evidence supported that story as did the objective evidence and he saw
      no reason not to accept the history as related by the  Respondent  and
      his wife as being correct.

7.    In the course of her submissions to us Ms Gandhi  sought  to  rely  on
      the fact that the Adjudicator twice referred to the objective evidence
      but it is  quite  clear  from  the  context  of  paragraph  7  of  the
      determination that he is  saying  that  he  considered  the  objective
      evidence in relation to the support that it gave for the  Respondent's
      account.  In other words,  he  was  looking  at  it  from  a  historic
      perspective.  We see no basis on which what he had said at paragraph 7
      can reasonably be otherwise interpreted,  and  we  do  not  accept  Ms
      Gandhi's submission that what is said in that paragraph must mean that
      he had considered the current country situation  in  relation  to  his
      primary finding.  It will be apparent from the very short way in which
      that primary finding is expressed that the only reason the Adjudicator
      gives for considering that the Respondent would be at risk is that  he
      might be under suspicion of having  been  with  the  LTTE  during  his
      absence.  What is to our mind quite clear is that the Adjudicator  has
      not sought to give any reason for his primary finding  which  suggests
      that he has looked at the supposed risk in relation to  the  situation
      in Sri  Lanka  at  the  date  of  his  determination.   Indeed  it  is
      interesting to note that when  he  deals  with  the  second  issue  of
      whether there is any risk to the Respondent  in  Colombo  he  makes  a
      specific finding that he  accepts  the  proposition  that  all  Tamils
      returned to Sri Lanka have a well-founded fear of persecution in their
      country is not arguable.

8.    By the time that he heard this  appeal  there  had  been  a  concluded
      ceasefire in Sri Lanka effective from February 2002.  There had been a
      number of important  developments  which  had  been  recorded  in  the
      country evidence which we are satisfied was before him,  because  this
      included the April 2002 CIPU Assessment and the report  of  the  visit
      made by the Home Office to  Sri  Lanka  in  March  2002.   Those  were
      primarily the issues which were considered by the Tribunal in the case
      of Jeyachandran [2002] UK IAT 01869.  The Tribunal in that case, which
      was heard on 21st May 2002  and  therefore  long  before  the  hearing
      before the Adjudicator, summarised the situation then applying in  Sri
      Lanka in the following terms at paragraph 5 of the determination:

            "The situation has changed  in  recent  months.   There  was  a
           ceasefire in February of this year  and  the  most  recent  CIPU
           Report for April 2002 records some of the relaxations that  have
           occurred since that ceasefire.  Paragraph  3.67  notes  that  in
           April 2002 the LTTE opened a political office  in  a  government
           held area in the north of the country and  that  that  had  been
           inaugurated under the ceasefire.  There had been permission  for
           LTTE cadres wearing cyanide capsules to move  back  to  an  LTTE
           controlled area and those who were clearly recognised  as  being
           LTTE activists were permitted to move around unmolested.  On  13
           April the LTTE signed a pact with the Sri Lankan Muslim Congress
           and agreed that nearly 100,000 Muslims expelled from  the  north
           by the Tamil Tigers  would  be  allowed  to  return.   All  this
           indicates the change of the situation and gives  hope  that  the
           situation will stabilise to such an extent that the  persecution
           which has existed in the past and the havoc created by the civil
           war will cease The likelihood of any difficulties on return  has
           also been considered by a  Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Sri  Lanka
           which visited that country at the end of  March  this  year  and
           those involved discussed the situation  with  among  others  the
           Director  and  the  Senior  Superintendent   in   the   Criminal
           Investigations  Department.   The  report  records  that  if   a
           returnee were not wanted he would not be stopped at the airport.
            We underline if a returnee were not wanted because there is  of
           course a finding in this case that the  Respondent  was  wanted.
           He went on a computer which holds the name, address and age of a
           wanted man.  The police purely go on records,  scars  would  not
           make a difference and the authorities would not make a  decision
           on this basis.".


      A little later at paragraph 8 of the same decision the Tribunal said:


            "We certainly are of the view that in the present situation  and
           having regard to the present trends it is only  the  exceptional
           case that will not be able to return in safety".


9.        What is clear to us from our reading of the determination  of  the
      Adjudicator is that he does not apparently seem  to  have  taken  into
      account any such matters although as we say  the  Country  Information
      containing that evidence was before him.


10.    It has long been accepted that our jurisdiction  is  not  limited  to
      questions of law.  It  was  dealt  with  in  the  following  terms  in
      Borrisov v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [1996]  Imm  AR
      524 where Lord Justice Hurst said this at page 535:


            "Thus the jurisdiction of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  is
           not limited to questions of law and it is within  the  scope  of
           their jurisdiction for them to review, if they see fit to do so,
           a Special Adjudicator's conclusions of fact, although  no  doubt
           this power will be sparingly exercised and,  in  any  event,  in
           accordance  with  general  principles  the  Immigration   Appeal
           Tribunal will naturally be most reluctant to interfere with  the
           finding of primary fact by  the  Special  Adjudicator  which  is
           dependent on his assessment of the reliability or credibility of
           a witness who has appeared before him".


      A little later in the judgment there was  a  quotation  with  approval
      from an earlier decision of Assah v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1994]
      Imm AR 519 in which Lord Justice Millet had said:

            "In the final  analysis  an  Appellate  Tribunal  such  as  the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal not only can but  should  reverse  a
           finding of fact if it is unsustainable".


11.   In the course of her submissions to us Ms Gandhi has referred  to  the
      recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Oleed v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2002] EWCA SIV 1906.   That  was  a  case  in
      which the court appears to have been concerned that there should be an
      even-handed approach as between both parties  to  appeals  before  the
      Immigration Appellate Authorities.  What  was  said  by  Lord  Justice
      Schiemann at paragraph 32 was this:

            "I accept that the  Tribunal  examines  the  situation  in  the
           country from which the refugee is fleeing as at the date of  his
           determination.  However, in the  present  case  in  my  judgment
           there was nothing wrong with  the  Adjudicator's  determination.
           There was therefore no reason to appeal it and it would be wrong
           for the Home Secretary on the back of an appeal which  has  been
           dismissed to seek to re-examine the threat to the  refugee  with
           reference to a date later than the Adjudicator's  determination.
           To permit this would merely encourage appeals by a party who has
           no ground for appeal but hopes that the situation  would  change
           sufficiently to enable him to  advance  different  arguments  on
           different facts on appeal.  Such  procedures  would  not  be  in
           anyone's interest".


      It appears that the Court of Appeal in that decision had in mind  very
      much that, where there has been a change in the country  circumstances
      subsequent to the Adjudicator's decision, it would be  wrong  for  the
      Secretary of State to be allowed to reopen the  matter  on  the  basis
      that determination at a later date would change the basis on which the
      decision was to be made.  That in our judgment is likely to be a  very
      rare situation, particularly bearing in mind  that  the  Secretary  of
      State, should he wish to appeal against a decision of an  Adjudicator,
      is under a very  short  time  limit  within  which  to  make  such  an
      application.  He has ten working days from  the  promulgation  of  the
      decision of the Adjudicator to him and it is anticipated that  in  the
      vast majority of cases such promulgation will  be  shortly  after  the
      Adjudicator's hearing of the appeal in question.  For that  reason  it
      seems to us that the ratio  in  Oleed  must  necessarily  be  of  very
      limited application in asylum and human rights appeals.  Nevertheless,
      it is quite clear that it has no application whatsoever to the present
      case where the complaint made by the Secretary of State  is  that  the
      Adjudicator simply failed to take into account the evidence which  was
      actually before him and, in so doing, arrived at a finding  which  was
      on the basis of  that  evidence  unsustainable  at  the  time  of  his
      determination.  The fact that we look at the situation subsequently at
      the date of the appeal before us makes no difference to the  essential
      basis of the challenge in the present case.  Whilst we have considered
      everything that Ms Gandhi has put before  us  on  this  point  we  are
      satisfied that the challenge of the Secretary of State is well-founded
      and  that  the  primary  finding  of  the  Adjudicator  is  not   only
      insufficiently reasoned, but also clearly fails to take  into  account
      background evidence which was before him and which  should  have  been
      taken into account as part of his overall reasoning in arriving at his
      conclusions.  For those reasons we consider that the proper course  is
      for us to reconsider that  primary  finding  on  the  basis  that  the
      factual findings as to the past experiences of the Respondent as found
      by the Adjudicator are accepted.

12.   Approaching the appeal on this basis, the issue before us  is  whether
      there is a reasonable likelihood that  the  Respondent  will,  in  the
      changed circumstances which now exist  in  Sri  Lanka,  be  reasonably
      likely to  be  persecuted  by  reason  of  his  ethnicity  or  imputed
      political opinion as a Tamil, or  to  suffer  treatment  which  is  in
      breach of his Article 3 rights, namely torture or inhuman or degrading
      treatment or punishment, if he is now returned.  We look at this  from
      the point of view of the situation in his home area.

13.   Mr Bilbe has drawn our attention to the continuing progress which  has
      taken place in Sri Lanka in the ensuing period and,  indeed,  this  is
      reflected in the many decisions which  the  Tribunal  has  reached  in
      relation to the situation of Tamils at the present time.   Looking  at
      the position as reflected in the October 2002 CIPU  Assessment,  there
      is clearly a continuing improvement in  the  situation  in  Sri  Lanka
      following the ceasefire and the current peace talks.  Although we  are
      mindful that Ms Gandhi has referred us to the  recent  occasion  where
      there was a sinking of an LTTE vessel by the Sri Lankan Navy, and that
      this caused a temporary stall in the  process,  nevertheless  in  many
      ways that seems to us to reinforce the degree of  progress  which  has
      been made and to be an event which is wholly out of keeping  with  the
      general tenor of events  in  Sri  Lanka.   These  are  dealt  with  at
      paragraphs 4.56 onwards in the  current  assessment.   They  show  the
      reopening  of  major  routes  to  the  north  and  easing  of   travel
      restrictions.  They show that a senior LTTE member has been allowed to
      make a public speech in Jaffna.  They show that for the first time  in
      seven years the LTTE has been allowed to open political offices in the
      north of the island since June 2002, and at paragraph 4.73  record  as
      follows:

            "On 29 July 2002, the SLMM issued a statement expressing  their
           satisfaction about the  progress  of  the  ceasefire  agreement,
           mentioning that the Sri Lankan government and LTTE were  getting
           closer to lasting peace.  The statement went on to say that both
           parties successfully refrained from military  operations  during
           the ceasefire, most fishing restrictions had  been  removed  and
           freedom of movement for both parties and  the  public  had  been
           greatly enhanced, among other benefits".


      The SLMM is of course the Sri Lankan  Monitoring  Mission  and  speaks
      with some authority.  In addition we note that the former  detentions,
      under the Emergency Regulations which have now  lapsed,  have  ceased,
      and that the Prevention of Terrorism Act is no  longer  used  for  the
      purposes of arrest and detention.  There is a  general  commitment  in
      the terms of the ceasefire agreement to abide by lawful  actions  only
      and to outlaw the problems which have bedevilled the situation in  Sri
      Lanka for many years past.  In broad terms that has been followed  and
      that is the position which we have to take into account in relation to
      the existence of a reasonable risk or otherwise for this Respondent.

14.   Ms Gandhi relied upon the letter from the UNHCR of 30th  January  2003
      which set out the UNHCR position in the following terms:

            "Currently our position is that although  steps  towards  peace
           have been taken in Sri Lanka recently, it is still premature  to
           advocate that the situation has reached a satisfactory level  of
           safety to warrant the return of all unsuccessful  applicants  to
           Sri Lanka.  In this regard UNHCR has been aware  that  returning
           Tamils are potentially open to risk of serious harm  similar  to
           those generally encountered by  young  male  Tamils  in  certain
           circumstances.  This risk may be triggered by suspicions on  the
           part of the security forces founded on various factual  elements
           relating to the  individual  concerned  including  the  lack  of
           identity documents, lack of proper authorisation  for  residents
           and travel, the fact that the individual concerned  is  a  young
           male Tamil from an uncleared area or the fact  that  the  person
           has close family members who are or have been involved with  the
           LTTE".


      Ms Gandhi placed particular reliance on the  last  point  saying  that
      the arrest which had been suffered  by  the  Respondent  had  occurred
      because of his brother's LTTE connection and that his brother too  had
      been subject to arrest.  That particular submission must in  our  view
      be tempered by the fact that it is perfectly clear from  the  evidence
      produced that the Appellant's brother was released  and,  indeed,  had
      complained about unlawful detention to the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
      the course of his detention.  That is clearly also a matter of  public
      record and it seems to us must be  taken  into  account  in  assessing
      whether his brother's past connection  with  the  LTTE  is  likely  to
      endanger this Respondent in any way.  It is also clear that the letter
      concerned, which simply reiterates part of what was said in an earlier
      letter of March 2002 antedating  Jeyachandran,  is  dealing  with  the
      position  which  may  apply  to  young  male  Tamils  and  that  is  a
      description  which  is  perhaps  not  wholly  appropriate   for   this
      Respondent.   Curiously,  it  purports  to  deal  with  some  only  of
      unsuccessful asylum applicants; it does not therefore purport to apply
      to all , and in any case it is curious that the UNHCR should  seek  to
      give such advice in relation to some of those who, by definition, will
      have failed to demonstrate a current well founded fear of  persecution
      in their own country. Moreover, it considers  the  position  of  young
      male Tamils in Sri Lanka  (apparently  ignoring  the  evidence  as  to
      increasing freedom of movement which is now recorded  in  the  country
      background evidence since the March  2002  letter  from  which  it  is
      extracted) but that is not the position  of  this  Respondent  at  the
      moment.  He will be returned, if unsuccessful before us,  with  proper
      identification documents obtained through the Sri  Lankan  Embassy  in
      London.  There is no reason why on arrival he should not then  acquire
      proper current documents from the Sri Lankan authorities  and,  as  we
      know, there is now no restriction since the reopening of the roads  to
      the north which would prevent him from returning to his home  area  if
      he should so desire.  For those reasons although we naturally pay  due
      regard to the reservations by the UNHCR it does not seem to us that on
      those facts this particular Respondent is reasonably likely to come to
      the adverse attention of the authorities.

15.   Finally we should mention that Ms Gandhi referred  us  to  the  recent
      decision of the Court of Appeal in Selvaratnam [2003] EWCA SIV 121  in
      which it was said that the Tribunal had failed to pay attention to the
      particular circumstances of the Respondent.  We hope that  that  is  a
      charge which cannot be levied against us having regard to what we have
      said above, but we note that in that particular  case  Mr  Selvaratnam
      had signed a confession to LTTE membership whilst  detained  and  that
      this was considered by the Court of Appeal to put him  at  a  specific
      risk over and  above  that  which  would  apply  to  the  majority  of
      returning  Tamils.   Such  is  not  the  case,  of  course,  in   this
      Respondent's case.  He was released, albeit by a  bribe,  but  it  has
      been held by the Tribunal that release in such  circumstances  is  not
      reasonably likely to mean that he will be regarded as still wanted  or
      as an escapee, and there is no evidence at all before us  that  he  is
      currently  on  a  wanted  list  in  Sri  Lanka  which  would  be   the
      circumstance which might bring him into some position of danger.

16.   For the above reasons we are satisfied in the present appeal that  the
      Adjudicator's primary finding was unsustainable and we substitute  for
      in our own finding that on  the  factual  basis  of  this  Appellant's
      claim, and having due regard to the country background evidence, there
      is no reasonable likelihood that he will be subjected  to  persecution
      or treatment in breach of his Article 3 rights if now returned to  Sri
      Lanka.  Accordingly, it follows that the Secretary of  State's  appeal
      is allowed.





                                                                    J BARNES
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT





