
H-VB-V1
|                                                                   |
|WO (Ogboni cult) Nigeria CG [2004] UKIAT 00277                     |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing: 7 September 2004                                  |
|Date Signed: 23 September 2004                                     |
|Date Determination Notified: 30 September 2004                     |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|Miss K Eshun - Vice President                                      |
|Mr P R Lane - Vice President                                       |
|Miss  S S Ramsumair JP                                             |
|                                                                   |
|Between                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |

For the Appellant:           Ms L Mensah, Counsel instructed by Messrs
                                  Jackson & Canter, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Morris, Senior Home Office Presenting
                 Officer

1.    The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appeals with  permission  against
the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr M T Sykes,  sitting  at  Manchester,
in which he dismissed on asylum and human  rights  grounds  the  Appellant's
appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  give  directions  for  the
Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant,  born  in  July  1969,  had  worked  as  a  teacher  of
mathematics in Nigeria during the 1990's.  He said that his father had  been
a member of the Ogboni cult and had sworn an oath that the  Appellant  would
himself become a member when the latter reached the age of 30.  However,  in
1981, the Appellant's father converted to Roman Catholism and renounced  the
Ogboni. Following this the  father  changed  from  being  a  member  of  the
National Party of Nigeria to that of  the  United  Party  of  Nigeria.   The
Ogboni regarded this change as  a  betrayal  and  began  to  intimidate  the
family.  In 1982, the family home was said to have been burnt to the  ground
in an act of arson by  someone  whom  the  Appellant  said  was  an  Ogboni.
However, before this man could be brought to trial he was killed  during  an
armed robbery (statement,  paragraph  12).   Whist  returning  home  from  a
political meeting in 1983, the Appellant's father was  attacked  and  killed
(paragraph 13).  The Appellant said that his uncle, who  was  also  involved
in politics, was murdered in  1992  and  that  four  men,  who  were  Ogboni
members of the NRC Party, were arrested but later released.

3.    Following the loss of his job as a teacher in 1996, the Appellant  was
persuaded by the Chairman of Christians in Leadership to stand for  election
as a local councillor of Ward 10 in Benin.  The  Appellant  was  elected  in
1998.  In the following year, he was elected Speaker to the legislative  arm
of Oredo Local Government Council.  Shortly after his election  as  Speaker,
leaders of the PDP told the Appellant that  they  were  Ogboni  members  and
reminded him that his father had sworn that the  Appellant  would  become  a
member when he was 30.  Following the Appellant's negative response  to  the
Ogboni, an intrigue began, as a result of which the Appellant was  compelled
to resign as Speaker, although he remained  as  a  councillor.   In  October
2000, Ogboni members tried to break into his house  but  the  Appellant  and
his family managed to escape.  He  reported  the  incident  to  the  police.
When the Appellant  returned  to  the  house  he  found  that  it  had  been
ransacked and  his  car  stolen.   Whilst  the  Appellant  was  telling  the
Chairman of the councillors about this, a person called  Osamede  Adun  came
into the room and told the Appellant that he had "refused to  take  a  clean
bath and that these were consequences and that there was nothing  I  can  do
about it.  He said if you couldn't beat them, you join them.  At  this,  the
chairman began to laugh" (statement, paragraph 31).

4.    In early 2001 the Appellant was present at  a  building  site  when  a
group of men arrived wielding cutlasses, iron bars and  knives.   These  men
attacked the Appellant and the workmen who were present at  the  site.   The
Appellant was beaten unconscious and awoke in hospital  a  few  days  later.
The police said that they would investigate the matter.

5.    After this, the Appellant decided to visit London in order  to  attend
a cultural festival.  He then returned to Nigeria where, on  his  way  to  a
ward meeting, a car followed him and shots  were  fired  at  the  Appellant.
The assailants beat his friend and his guard into unconsciousness and  stole
the car (paragraph 34).

6.    The Appellant moved into his new house in October 2001  and  bought  a
gun for protection.  His  political  mentor  was  assassinated  in  November
2001.  The Appellant joined a new party, the ANPP, and intended  to  contest
the  local  elections  in  2003  "and  to   reveal   the   Ogboni   secrets"
(determination, paragraph 14; statement, paragraphs  38  to  40).   However,
the Ogboni arranged for the police to deliver to  the  Appellant's  house  a
document requiring him to attend the police station in connection  with  the
possession of an illegal firearm.  The Appellant  was  told  by  his  lawyer
that "if he was detained he would be killed as the Police  Commissioner  was
an Ogboni".   The Appellant therefore left his family  and  went  to  Lagos,
whence he flew to the United Kingdom "under a false name" on 6 January  2003
(determination, paragraph 14).

7.     The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  fears  further
persecution at the hands of the Ogboni, should he be  returned.   He  "would
be arrested on the police warrant, detained and killed  whilst  in  custody"
(determination, paragraph 15).

8.    In paragraph 9 of his statement, the Appellant says "the Ogboni are  a
secret society in Nigeria.  They worship Satan and believe  in  the  use  of
charms.  Its members are drawn from  the  affluent  and  influential.   They
perform rituals, which include  human  sacrifice.   When  a  member  of  the
society is initiated he drinks human blood and swears an oath."

9.    Having heard the Appellant give evidence,  the  Adjudicator  did  "not
accept the core of it - that he  has  been  persecuted  by  members  of  the
Ogboni cult  or  that  he  would  be  at  risk  from  them  on  his  return"
(determination, paragraph 17).

10.   Ms Mensah (who also appeared before the  Adjudicator)  criticises  the
Adjudicator's credibility findings on the basis  that  the  Adjudicator  has
relied excessively upon findings  of  implausibilities.   She  referred  the
Tribunal to the determination of the Tribunal in Ibrahim  Ali  [2002]  UKIAT
07001, in  which  it  is  stated  that  "in  cross-cultural  matters  it  is
inherently dangerous to  place  too  much  weight  on  plausibility.   One's
judgment on plausibility is bound to be coloured or influenced by one's  own
values and environment.  What may be plausible for a  person  in  a  western
environment may be completely  implausible  for  someone  in  a  non-western
environment.  In determining whether an assertion or claim  is  credible  or
otherwise,  Adjudicators  must  take  great  care  in  not  allowing   their
perceptions and values to influence that judgment" (paragraph 3).

11.   The second basis upon which  the  Appellant  seeks  to  challenge  the
Adjudicator's findings is that the Adjudicator was wrong to find (as he  did
at paragraph 17 of the determination) that the Appellant's account  was  not
"supported by the objective material."

12.    These  two  matters  are  to  some  extent  interrelated  but  it  is
appropriate to examine first the objective situation regarding the Ogboni.

13.   The Adjudicator dealt with  this  matter  in  considerable  detail  at
paragraphs 28 to 30 of the determination.  At paragraph 28, the  Adjudicator
set out the passages in the Home Office  CIPU  Report  on  Nigeria,  in  the
version that was before  him.   These  passages  are  now  to  be  found  at
paragraphs 6.20 to 6.123 of the April 2004 Report:-

      "6.120     There are many cults in Nigeria.   Probably the best  known
              is the Ogboni.  The Ogboni are a secret society of the Yoruba
              tribe,  and  it  is  therefore  hard   to   obtain   reliable
              information about them.  As a  secret  society  it  has  been
              banned in Nigeria, and its power curtailed.  However this ban
              is hard to enforce, and it is still active and alleged to  be
              involved in satanic practices.

       6.121     The title Ogboni is only  conferred  on  the  elders,  i.e.
              senior members of the society.  These  are  usually  men  but
              women, usually six in number, were traditionally included  to
              represent  the  interests  of   women   in   the   community.
              Membership of the society is usually, but not always,  passed
              through patrilineal descent.

        6.122    The Ogboni  traditionally  played  a  significant  role  in
              Yoruba  religion  and  society,  and  were  involved  in  the
              installation of new Kings.  Historically an Ogboni  could  be
              said to have combined the powers of a local magistrate,  with
              those of a member of the local  government  and  a  religious
              leader.

       6.123     The Ogboni engaged in animal sacrifice.  There is  no  firm
              evidence to suggest that they  engaged  in  human  sacrifice.
              However, in the event that a King abused his power they could
              compel  him  to  commit  suicide.   They  could  also  impose
              sanctions against other members  of  the  community  if  they
              believed that these were justified.  The Ogboni  are  reputed
              to threaten its members with death should  they  break  their
              oath of secrecy regarding its rituals  and  beliefs.   It  is
              still regarded as being a  powerful  organisation  throughout
              Nigeria."

14.   At paragraph 29  of  his  determination,  the  Adjudicator  considered
certain material submitted by the Appellant.  An extract from  "The  Nemesis
of Power - Agho Obaseki and Benin Politics 1897-1956" makes  it  clear  that
the Ogboni were extremely powerful up to the end  of  the  1940's  but  were
then dislodged from power by the Reform Benin  Community.   The  Adjudicator
quotes  the  author  of  this  document  as  stating  that  "No  doubt...the
liquidation of Ogbonisim in Benin was one of its [i.e.  the  RBC's]  primary
objectives and raison d'etre."  The report entitled "Benin and  the  Midwest
Referendum" reported "waves of violence against the Ogboni leaders  in  1951
resulting in the breaking of the Ogboni infrastructure in  rural  areas  and
the subsequent fall from power of its leader" (paragraph 29(b)).

15.   Having noted in the  Appellant's  documentation  a  report  about  the
death of a young man at the hands of a secret College cult and a  report  of
an individual who successfully claimed asylum in Canada as a result of  that
person's refusal to participate in Ogboni ritual practices, the  Adjudicator
concluded at paragraph 30 of the determination that, whilst the  Ogboni  are
regarded as being a "powerful organisation throughout Nigeria", this was  "a
long way from corroborating the Appellant's assertions  of  their  pervasive
and violent influence on political life and their power  over  the  security
forces".  The Adjudicator drew a distinction between the fear of  a  son  to
take up family membership immediately after the death of a father (a  matter
to which the Tribunal will itself  return)  and  contrasted  this  with  the
account being given by the Appellant, which was that the Appellant's  father
had promised that the Appellant would  join  the  cult  when  the  Appellant
reached the age of 30.  The Adjudicator  also  drew  a  distinction  between
"rival student cults" and the Ogboni.  Reviewing the  evidence  as  a  whole
the Adjudicator concluded that the  Ogboni  "have  not  had  real  political
power in Nigeria for the last 50 years of so" (paragraph 30).

16.   At paragraph 18, the Adjudicator had noted that the  newspaper  report
placed before him regarding the fire at the family  home  of  the  Appellant
made no mention of the Ogboni.  There was also no report  at  all  regarding
the death of the father.  Having made his  findings  regarding  the  limited
influence of the Ogboni, the Adjudicator returned at  paragraph  31  of  the
determination to the absence of any newspaper or other  media  reports  that
linked the Ogboni to the attacks on the Appellant himself, his  father,  his
uncle and his political mentor.  The Adjudicator noted  that  the  Appellant
sought to explain this absence of evidence by asserting that the  Edo  State
Governor was an Ogboni and a PDP member "and that  newspaper  articles  must
be vetted by an editor appointed by the State Governor.   He  also  told  me
that no newspaper would dare print anything about the Ogboni but both  these
assertions are contrary to the objective evidence  about  press  freedom  in
Nigeria".  The Adjudicator noted in particular  that  the  CIPU  Report  (at
paragraph 6.3 of the version that was  before  him)  referred  to  Nigeria's
"long  tradition  of  a  vibrant  and  independently  minded   press.    The
Constitution provides for freedom of  speech  and  of  the  press,  and  the
government generally respected these rights."

17.   Having reviewed  the  objective  materials  before  us,  the  Tribunal
concludes  that  the  Adjudicator  reached  entirely   correct   conclusions
concerning the scope and power of the Ogboni cult in Nigeria.  As he  found,
and as paragraph 6.120 of the latest CIPU Report  makes  clear,  the  Ogboni
are "a secret society of the Yoruba tribe".   One of the sources  cited  for
that conclusion in the CIPU Report is a letter of  March  1998  from  Dr  B.
Akintunde Oyetade of the School of Oriental and African Studies,  University
of London.  Dr Oyetade is, in fact, the author of a  report  on  the  Ogboni
Society prepared on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  in  connection  with  these
Tribunal proceedings (pages 100-106 of the Appellant's  bundle).   There  is
nothing in that report that can be cited as authority  for  the  proposition
that the Ogboni have any significant (or, indeed any) membership drawn  from
tribes other then the Yoruba.  Furthermore  paragraph  6.124  of  the  April
2004 CIPU Report contains the statement that "the Ogboni is believed  to  be
a purely Yoruba cult, but there are a number of Yoruba sub-tribes  who  also
may be involved".  The source cited  for  this  proposition,  which  in  any
event is little more than a reiteration  of  the  point  that  emerges  from
paragraph 6.120, is  "The  Yoruba  Ogboni  cult  in  Oyo"  by  Peter  Morton
Williams.

18.   The fact that the Ogboni cult is confined to  the  Yoruba  immediately
places a significant limit upon its power to influence people and events  in
Nigeria.  As paragraph 6.44 of the CIPU Report makes plain, there are  "over
250 ethnic groups with different languages and dialects  in  Nigeria,  which
accounts for its cultural diversity.  In descending order the  Muslim  Hausa
Fulani centred on the north, the Yoruba centred on the south west,  and  the
predominately Christian Ibo (or Igbo) centred on  the  south  east  are  the
largest ethnic groups.  Yet no single tribe encompasses a  majority  of  the
population".  The US State Department Report on Human  Rights  Practices  in
Nigeria states that "There is no federal policy  of  discrimination  against
any of Nigeria's ethnic groups and legislation is  designed  not  to  favour
one group over another.  This is largely respected  provided  that  a  group
does not pursue secessionist demands.  An alleged dominance in the  military
and government is occasionally levelled at Hausa-Fulanis, with the  converse
claim that other ethnic groups are discriminated against".

19.    This  Tribunal  accordingly  finds  itself  in  agreement  with   the
conclusions  of  the  Tribunal   chaired   by   Mr   Freeman   in   Akinremi
(00/TH/01318), which, in a determination notified in September  2000,  found
that the power of the Ogboni "has been curtailed.  They are  an  exclusively
Yoruba cult: even if the Appellant was afraid some of her local police  were
members, it must have been clear that no non-Yoruba officer would be."

20.   It is a central feature of the Appellant's claim that the Ogboni  were
able to launch with impunity a series of direct, physical attacks upon  him,
his father, uncle, political associate, employees, home and other  property,
and that the final straw came when  he  apprehended  that  the  Ogboni  were
intent upon having him taken into  custody  and  murdered.   If  these  were
truly the sorts of activities in which the Ogboni are  engaged  in  Nigeria,
it frankly beggars belief that there would not  be,  amongst  the  objective
documentary evidence, some express acknowledgement of the fact.   Yet  there
is none.  As she had before the Adjudicator, Ms  Mensah  sought  before  the
Tribunal to counter this difficulty in her client's case by pointing to  the
provisions of the CIPU Report which identify the prevalence  of  politically
motivated crimes, including murders of political opponents, and the  various
abuses committed by the police, including arbitrary  arrest  and  detention.
The Adjudicator, at paragraphs 33 and 34 of the determination,  acknowledged
these problems in Nigeria society.  But, as paragraph  35  makes  clear,  he
refused to accept that these problems compelled him to conclude that it  was
reasonably likely that the Ogboni lay behind the Appellant's account of  his
difficulties.  Those difficulties were, rather, the result of  "an  ordinary
burglary" (paragraph 23) and the tumultuous  and  often  violent  nature  of
Nigerian politics.  They had nothing to do with a  campaign  of  persecution
by the Ogboni against the Appellant, as a result of his failure to join  the
cult.

21.   The Tribunal finds that the Adjudicator was entitled as  a  matter  of
law to his conclusions on the evidence before him in  this  regard.  If  any
political  violence  in  Nigeria  has  an  Ogboni  element,  the   objective
materials would say so. Given the restricted  ambit  of  the  cult  and  the
virile nature of  the  Nigerian  press,  silence  on  the  issue  cannot  be
ascribed to fear.  Furthermore, the expert report now  before  the  Tribunal
lends support to the  Adjudicator's  findings.   At  paragraph  11  of  that
report, Dr Oyetade states that "If your client's father was a member of  the
Ogboni society it is possible that the father may have given his son's  name
to the society as the name of the person to take  over  his  position  after
his death.  This is believed to be the  practice  in  the  society."   That,
however, was manifestly not what the Appellant was  claiming.   As  we  have
already noted, the Appellant  said  that  his  father  had  sworn  that  the
Appellant would become a member when the Appellant reached the  age  of  30.
The father himself died in the  early  1980's.   Thus,  not  only  does  the
Appellant's claim run counter to what the expert says is believed to be  the
practice in the Ogboni society, it can now be seen even more clearly  to  be
no  more  then  a  device  designed  to  inject  into  the  history  of  the
Appellant's local government career a spurious Ogboni element.

22.   In paragraph 11 of his report Dr Oyetade continues as follows:

            "If the person whose name is submitted refuses to  take  up  the
           position because they  hold  a  different  religious  view,  the
           person will have problems with the members of  the  society.   I
           have no evidence to confirm that the person who refuses to  take
           up the position reserved for him by  his  late  father  will  be
           sacrificed.  What is common knowledge, however, is that they may
           suffer unfortunate  circumstances,  misfortunes  and  sudden  or
           premature death.  This may be the  cultural  background  against
           which your client is exercising fear about returning to Nigeria.
            This would appear to be very  much  so  if  according  to  your
           client certain members of the society have  actually  confronted
           him and told him that if he refused to join them,  he  would  be
           killed."

23.   Nowhere in the report does Dr Oyetade state that the Ogboni are  known
or even suspected ever to have actually taken the step of  murdering  people
who refuse to join them.  On the contrary, at paragraph 14,  in  seeking  to
specify "the nature of the problems your client may encounter,"  Dr  Oyetade
merely states that these "may include mysterious illness, which would  force
him to submit himself to their wish.   He may  become  emotionally  unstable
until he agrees to consult a diviner, who in turn may in the  end  tell  him
to go and fulfil the pledge made on his behalf by his  father."   The  point
being made by Dr Oyetade is plain.   The  claim  which  the  Ogboni  may  be
perceived as making is that through  some  form  of  witchcraft,  they  will
attempt to induce a "mysterious illness" in the victim or  to  occasion  him
some other misfortune.  But that, however, is  categorically  not  what  the
Appellant claims to have experienced or to fear.

24.   In Omoruyi [2000] EWCA Civ 258 the Court of Appeal  had  before  it  a
case involving an alleged fear of the Ogboni cult.  Simon Brown  L  J  noted
that the Appellant in  that  case  "described  the  Ogboni  variously  as  a
'secret cult...associated with idol worshipping to the  extent  of  drinking
blood' 'a mafia organisation involved in criminal acts' and a  'devil  cult'
and he spoke of their carrying out 'rituals',  namely  'the  sacrificing  of
animals to a graven image [and the]  worshipping  of  idols.'"    Ms  Mensah
sought to derive from Omoruyi support for the proposition  that  the  Ogboni
are, indeed, capable of direct physical violence  against  their  opponents.
However, later in his judgment, Simon Brown L J makes  it  plain  that  "the
Secretary of State rejects the claim that the  Ogboni  are  associated  with
sinister killings". But since the Court was in that  case  concerned  solely
with the question of whether the alleged fear, even  if  credible,  was  one
based on religion, the learned Lord Justice was able to state that "for  the
purposes of this appeal, however, we  must  assume  that  the  Appellant  is
right both in his description  of  the  cult's  violent  reprisals  and  his
assertion that the police and other state authorities are unwilling  to  act
against them."   Omoruyi is, thus, in no sense to be regarded  as  authority
for the proposition that the Ogboni cult behaves in the way claimed  by  the
present Appellant.

25.   It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  the  various  "implausibilities"
identified by the Adjudicator in his determination.  At  paragraph  21,  the
Adjudicator found it  unlikely  that  the  Ogboni  would  have  allowed  the
Appellant to win the local government election  in  December  1998,  and  to
have become elected as Speaker in the following year,  "before  finding  out
what his attitude to them was.  They would have  approached  him  first  and
then withdrawn their support in the  election  if  he  had  refused."    The
Tribunal does not consider that this finding can in any  sense  be  said  to
have been "coloured or influenced" by  the  Adjudicator's  "own  values  and
environment" (to use the wording in Ibrahim Ali).  On the contrary, as  will
already have become apparent, the Adjudicator in the present  case  immersed
himself thoroughly in the evidence relating to Nigeria in  general  and  the
Ogboni cult in particular.  All that the Adjudicator was here doing - as  he
was entitled to do - was observe that the alleged reticence  of  the  Ogboni
members in their dealings with  the  Appellant  at  this  stage  was  wholly
inconsistent with their supposedly  ruthless  nature,  as  asserted  in  the
remainder of the Appellant's account.

26.    The  same  point  arises  in  relation  to  paragraph   22   of   the
determination, in which the Adjudicator found  it  implausible  that,  after
the Appellant had refused to join the Ogboni in 1999, nothing more  happened
to him until October 2000, when his house was broken into.  The  grounds  of
appeal assert that the Adjudicator was wrong to find that the only thing  to
link the Ogboni with the break-in was an "oblique remark"  made  during  the
conversation in the chairman's office.   At  paragraph  27  of  the  written
statement, the Appellant  had  in  fact  stated  that  the  masked  men  who
attacked his home "were chanting songs, which I later found out were  Ogboni
tunes usually chanted when they were attacking, and  shooting  guns".   This
criticism, however, does not meet the point made by  the  Adjudicator,  that
nothing happened between 1999 and October 2000.  Furthermore,  it  does  not
detract from the Adjudicator's finding that it was  odd  to  say  the  least
that someone who was a member of a ruthless criminal gang would not be  more
direct in his comments to the Appellant in the chairman's office.

27.   Similarly, at paragraph  26  of  the  determination,  the  Adjudicator
noted that there was a further peculiar delay on the part of the  Ogboni  in
doing anything about the Appellant from September 2001 until December  2002.
 In the circumstances, the Adjudicator was entitled to that  view.   He  was
also plainly entitled to find that, if the  Ogboni  were  seriously  set  on
eliminating the Appellant, they would have done  more  than  resort  to  the
feeble device of leaving with the Appellant's wife a document requiring  the
Appellant to attend the police station for  having  an  unlicensed  firearm,
without even bothering to check whether the Appellant himself  would  be  at
home, so that the Appellant had time to escape.

28.   In conclusion, the Adjudicator was entitled in law to his  credibility
findings.  On the basis of those findings, there is  no  Ogboni  element  to
the Appellant's case.  If returned to Nigeria, the Appellant  may  well,  as
the Adjudicator concluded, have to face possible prosecution for having  the
unlicensed firearm.  However, as the Adjudicator found at  paragraph  37  of
the determination, notwithstanding the undoubted  shortcomings  in  judicial
procedures in Nigeria, on the facts of this case there is no  real  risk  of
the Appellant facing persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

29.   Permission was sought before the Tribunal  to  adduce  in  evidence  a
photograph of a man dressed in what was said to  be  ritual  costume  of  an
Ogboni.  This photograph was said to  be  of  the  Appellant's  father.   No
suggestion was made that this photograph could not have been  obtained  with
reasonable diligence for use at the Adjudicator hearing.   If  it  had  been
produced before the Adjudicator, it cannot possibly be said,  in  accordance
with Ladd v  Marshall  principles,  that  it  would  probably  have  had  an
important influence on the  result.   Applying  those  principles,  as  most
recently enunciated by the Tribunal in  M  A  (Fresh  evidence)  Sri  Lanka*
[2004] UKIAT 00161, the  Tribunal  did  not  permit  the  photograph  to  be
admitted as evidence.

30.   This appeal is dismissed.



                                                                    P R LANE
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT

                                        Approved for electronic promulgation

