
                                 VL (Risk-Failed Asylum Seekers) Democratic
Republic of                      Congo CG [2004] UKIAT 00007


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                       Dates of Hearing: 7 October 2003 and 17 December 2003
                                            Date Determination
notified.........28/01/2004........


                                   Before:

                          Dr H H Storey (Chairman)
                                  Mr G Warr
                                 Mr A Jordan



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and



                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This case is a country guideline (CG) case on  the  issue  of  whether
      failed asylum seekers per se face a real risk  of  serious  harm  upon
      return to the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC).  As  such  it  is
      intended as definitive unless  there  is  a  change  of  circumstances
      materially affecting the  treatment  of  failed  asylum  seekers  upon
      return to the  DRC.  Originally  heard  on  7  October  2003,  it  was
      reconvened on 17 December 2003 in order to  hear  further  submissions
      from the parties on  materials  which  had  come  to  hand  since  the
      original hearing. Having been tasked with  reaching  an  authoritative
      decision on this issue, we saw it  as  essential  to  ensure  we  took
      cognisance of all materials having a bearing on the issue.


2.    The appellant, the Secretary of State, has appealed with leave of  the
      Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  M.T.  Sykes,
      allowing the appeal by the  respondent  ("claimant"),  a  national  of
      Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC),  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State refusing to grant leave to enter on asylum grounds.
      Mr C. Buckley appeared for the appellant.   Ms  S.  Malik  of  Counsel
      instructed by Birchfields Solicitors appeared for  the  respondent  at
      the first hearing. Mr F Aziz, a solicitor in this firm, represented at
      the second hearing.

3.    This case had been listed some time ago  to  be  a  country  guideline
      case in order to resolve a conflict  at  that  time  between  Tribunal
      decisions, several on the one hand  finding  that  failed  DRC  asylum
      seekers were not at risk and two -  Mozu  [2002]  UKIAT  05308  and  B
      [2003] UKIAT 00012 (DRC)) - finding that they  were.   However,  since
      then there have been several reported Tribunal decisions  specifically
      addressing this conflict and resolving it in favour of the  view  that
      failed asylum seekers per se are not at risk. They  include  K  [2003]
      00032, N [2003] UKIAT 00050, L [2003]  UKIAT  00046,  M  [2003]  UKIAT
      00051, [2003] UKIAT 00058, M [2003] UKIAT 00071, D  [2003] UKIAT 00112
      and [2003] UKIAT 00136. It can  be  seen  that  there  are  two  cases
      bearing the letter "M" : 00051 and 00071. We shall hereafter refer  to
      M 00071 simply as M, in view of the fact that we cite  it  more   than
      any other case.

4.    We consider that these decisions, the decision of  M   in  particular,
      based as it is on a comprehensive analysis of the  relevant  evidence,
      give valid reasons for rejecting the view that failed  asylum  seekers
      per se are at risk. Since we adopt the analysis and reasoning given in
      M in particular, we see no necessity or  virtue  in  re-examining  the
      same body of evidence and essaying our own separate analysis of it. As
      the Court of Appeal stated in S & Others [2002] INLR 416 at  para  28,
      there is

           "no public interest, nor any legitimate individual interest,  in
           multiple examinations of the state of the backdrop  [of  general
           country conditions] at any particular time. Such  revisits  give
           rise to  the  risk,  perhaps  the  likelihood,  of  inconsistent
           results; and the likelihood, perhaps the certainty, of  repeated
           and, therefore, wasted expenditure  of  judicial  and  financial
           resources upon the same issues and the same evidence".  (See  to
           similar effect,  Indrakumar [2003] EWCA Civ 1677, 13 Nov 2003 at
           para 13).


5.    However, before us there were several new items of evidence  that  had
      not been considered in previous cases.  The most  important  of  these
      were:


      -     evidence relating to new Home Office procedures  in  respect  of
         removals to the DRC;
      -     a UNHCR fax dated 15 December 2003;
      -     an important  new report by Dr Erik Kennes;
      -     materials assembled by Bail for Immigration Detainees (BIDS) and
         put into the public realm in late 2003 in ILPA publications.  These
         included details of two cases referred to as AB  and  DE,  both  of
         whom were said to have  been  ill  treated  in  the  DRC  following
         removal from the UK in late 2003.

6.    Before proceeding further, two general observations need  to  be  made
      about the inclusion  of the last two items just mentioned. The  recent
      report by one of the leading recognised experts on the DRC, Dr Kennes,
      was not adduced by either of the parties in this  case.  The  Tribunal
      became aware of it in the course of dealing with  another  case  which
      had to be remitted. However, given that it dealt with  generic  issues
      and included a statement that he was aware its contents would be  used
      in an immigration appeal and, given that no objection was made by  the
      representatives in that other case to its use by the Tribunal in this,
      we considered it right to refer to it. We made the  parties  aware  of
      our intention to refer to it and invited them to make  submissions  on
      it.


7.    In the case of the BIDS materials, which we shall  particularise  more
      precisely later, these became known to other Tribunal panels in  cases
      heard since the original hearing. Having  noted  that  they  had  been
      published by ILPA and placed thereby into the public realm, we decided
      to take account of them. As already noted, we reconvened  the  hearing
      in order that the parties had proper opportunity to  make  submissions
      as to their relevance to the issue central to this case.


8.    The steps we have taken in respect of these two items of evidence  are
      unusual but fully justified in our view by the task  we  were  set  of
      reaching a decision to be treated as a country guideline case. As Laws
      LJ observed in S & Others [2002] INLR 438 at para 15, where a case  is
      selected in order to produce a decision which is to  be  taken  to  be
      factually authoritative,


             "the exercise upon which the IAT is engaged assumes  something
           of an inquisitorial quality, although the adversarial  structure
           of the appeal procedure of course remains... It is important not
           to lose sight of the fact that the jurisdiction of the IAT is as
           pragmatic as any other."


9.    At paragraph 29 Laws LJ added:

           "... when it determines to produce an authoritative ruling  upon
           the state of affairs in any given territory, it must in our view
           take special care  to  see  that  its  decision  is  effectively
           comprehensive. It should address all  the  issues  in  the  case
           capable of having a real, as opposed to fanciful, bearing on the
           result and explain what it makes  of  the  substantial  evidence
           going to each such issue."

10.   In Shirazi [2003] EWCA Civ 1562 the Court of Appeal   re-affirmed  the
      observations. Once, therefore, the Tribunal embarks upon the  task  of
      making a country guideline decision, in the sense  identified  by  the
      Court of Appeal in S and Others, it is not  only  valid  but  also  in
      everyone's interest that it does all in its power  to  ensure  it  has
      before it all  known  materials  having  a  material  bearing  on  the
      relevant issues. It would defeat the object of  the  exercise  if  the
      Tribunal were to confine itself to the body of evidence adduced by the
      parties even when it  is  aware  that  that  body  of  evidence  omits
      potentially material evidence.


The claimant's case
11.   It is salient next to set out the facts of this particular  case.  The
      claimant was a national of DRC born  in  the  town  of   Bukavo  on  9
      September 1975.  She and her husband were market traders who lived  in
      Kinshasa. She had joined the Union of Democracy Social Progress  Party
      (UDPS) in 1996 and was active in the  women's  section.  In  1999  her
      husband began working as a  driver  for  a  Lebanese  businessman.  In
      January 2000 former President  Joseph  Kabila  was  assassinated.  She
      claimed that her husband had been arrested  in  February  2000,  being
      suspected, along with the Lebanese businessman, of involvement in  the
      assassination of President Kabila.  He had  been  detained  in  Makala
      prison for 10 months.  He  fell  ill  and  was  then  released,  being
      required to report every day on probation. In July 2001 police  raided
      their house and  arrested  the  claimant  and  her  husband.  She  was
      interrogated about her husband and the people for whom he drove.   She
      told them he was only a  driver.  She  was  raped  by  several  police
      officers.  They released her after two weeks because she was ill.  She
      was  re-arrested  later  in  July  and  again  beaten,  tortured   and
      interrogated. She was released again after a  further  two  weeks  but
      told to report ever day. She  went  into  hiding  and  then  fled  the
      country.

12.   She claimed that her UDPS membership would put her at risk on  return.
      However, the principal basis on which she put her claim was  that  she
      would be at  risk  because  she  and  her  husband  had  fallen  under
      suspicion of involvement in the assassination of President Kabila.

The Adjudicator's assessment
13.   The Adjudicator accepted that she had been a UDPS member albeit a low-
      level  one.  However,  he  did  not  consider  the  objective  country
      materials bore out that low level UDPS members were  at  risk  in  the
      DRC.  As regards the claimant's account of falling under suspicion  of
      being  involved  in  the  assassination  of  President   Kabila,   the
      Adjudicator did not find it credible. He rejected her account  of  her
      husband's arrests and detentions.

14.   We do not need to go into  the  Adjudicator's  reasons  for  accepting
      part of the claimant`s evidence but rejecting other parts.  There  was
      no attempt at a cross-appeal and no service of a  respondent's  notice
      under Rule 19 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules
      2003. Neither party has sought to  persuade  us  to  go  behind  these
      findings and in any event we consider they were based squarely on  the
      evidence.  However, insofar as his conclusions based on these findings
      dealt with risk arising from UDPS membership, we shall need to  return
      to  them  later.  And,  of  course,  we  have  also  to  examine   the
      sustainability of his conclusion on  the  generic  issue  of  risk  to
      failed asylum seekers, which he stated as follows:

             "22. There is  no  Article  3  claim  in  this  case  but  the
                 appellant is now towards the very end of her pregnancy and,
                 if returned, is likely to be sent back with  a  very  young
                 child. Having regard to the Tribunal's findings in Mozu,  I
                 find that there is a real risk of imprisonment and rape  on
                 her return and of consequent harm to her  child.  The  CIPU
                 Report deals with prison  conditions  at  paragraphs  4.14-
                 4.37. I need only cite paragraphs 4.14:

                     `The present regime  operates  220  known  prisons  and
                    other places of detention, and in all  such  facilities,
                    conditions are harsh,  unsanitary  and  life-threatening
                    ...Prisoners reportedly are beaten to  death,  tortured,
                    deprived of food and water and die of starvation.'


             23. I conclude that if returned the appellant is at real  risk
                 of being  detained  and  subjected  to  persecution  or  to
                 torture, or inhuman or degrading treatment  or  punishment.
                 This would be for  a  Convention  reason  -  the  political
                 opinion imputed to her from her having sought asylum in the
                 UK.'


The grounds of appeal and submissions

15.   The grounds of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  were  essentially  twofold.
      Firstly, it was argued that the Adjudicator fell into procedural error
      by unfairly denying the appellant the opportunity to present his  case
      or seek to rebut the  point  relied  upon  by  the  Adjudicator.  This
      argument arose because the Adjudicator said prior to the  commencement
      of closing submissions that he  would  place  heavy  reliance  on  the
      Tribunal determination of Mozu [2002] UKIAT 05328. The grounds  stated
      that although the Adjudicator gave the  respondent  a  short  time  to
      obtain instructions, the latter

             'was unable to provide the Adjudicator  with any hard evidence
             due to the fact that the fax machine at  Salford  Magistrate's
             Court was not working. The HOPO offered  to  provide  relevant
             documents at the first  available  opportunity  but  this  was
             denied and the Adjudicator said that he would only accept what
             was in front of him.'

16.   We have not been provided  with  the  Adjudicator's  comments  on  the
      proceedings; but since the determination mentions supplying a copy  of
      Mozu to the representatives, and since it is clear that  an  offer  to
      provide relevant documents  in  response  was  made,  we  have  enough
      information before us to decide this matter.  We  quite  understand  a
      decision not to adjourn except for a short time in such circumstances.
      However,  given  that  the  Adjudicator  e  himself  invoked  Mozu  as
      authority, it is most unfortunate he did not allow the parties a short
      time after completion of the hearing to submit any more recent  cases.
      The fact of the matter was  that  at  the  date  he  heard  this  case
      (10.3.03) there were several reported  Tribunal  decisions  postdating
      Mozu which expressly held that this decision was not  to  be  followed
      and, since it was his own research  which had located Mozu, that  same
      research  should  have  taken  care  to   check   whether   Mozu   was
      representative of the current position of the Tribunal on this  issue.
      In this regard we would emphasise that since the issue was plainly one
      which  potentially  affected  a  significant  number  of  cases,   the
      procedural duty of care on the Adjudicator was even greater.  Further,
      the result of refusal to allow time for the parties to adduce  further
      cases was a wholly artificial one. By default Mozu was  wrongly  taken
      to reflect the current position of the Tribunal as a whole.

17.   The second ground of appeal was that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  to
      conclude that failed asylum seekers were at risk upon  return  to  the
      DRC.

18.   In amplification of this ground of appeal Mr  Buckley  contended  that
      the objective evidence did not demonstrate a real risk of serious harm
      facing failed asylum seekers per se.  That was not the UNHCR  position
      as can be seen from their letter of  September  2003  and  their  very
      recent fax. Although their recent statements represented  a  shift  in
      view from their June 2002 position, they did not go as far  as  saying
      that all failed asylum seekers were at  risk.   Furthermore,  whatever
      the position previously,  there  had  been  a  recent  change  in  the
      procedure adopted by the Immigration Service Documentation Unit (ISDU)
      in respect of DRC nationals, which reduced even further  the  risk  of
      their being viewed adversely on return.


19.   Prior to September 2003 there  had  been  difficulties  with  securing
      documentation from the DRC Consulate.  Since  September  2003,  whilst
      the DRC still does not accept an EU travel document, they will  issue,
      where satisfied of  identity  and  eligibility,  an  emergency  travel
      document.   There  is  an  application  form   which   requires   four
      photographs and evidence of any ID card etc. The Home Office  forwards
      the completed application form with a  covering  letter  to  the   DRC
      authorities who, if satisfied as to  identity  and  eligibility,  will
      issue emergency travel documents. If the DRC authorities here are  not
      satisfied, then reference can be made  back  to  the  DRC  to  see  if
      eligibility can be established from there. In the short  period  since
      this procedure has been in place, the Home Office was not aware of any
      situation where, a completed form  having  been  forwarded,  a  travel
      documents was refused.  The upshot of this new procedure was, said  Mr
      Buckley, that if a DRC national was returned, leaving aside the  cases
      where they already had valid documents,  they  would  carry  emergency
      travel documents.

20.   This new procedure, added Mr Buckley, answered some  of  the  concerns
      expressed by UNHCR and Dr Kennes, who highlighted problems for persons
      returned without travel documents.

21.   Whilst the UK did not monitor returns, he  added,  the  experience  of
      other  EU  countries  indicated  that  returns   to   the   DRC   were
      unproblematic. It was true that the Dutch had at one stage temporarily
      suspended removals, but this was due to complaints about the manner in
      which  returnees  were  transported  to  the  airport  (keeping   them
      incarcerated with Cameroonians). These concerns were  not  related  to
      conditions on return.

22.   Mr Buckley also sought support from the  latest  CIPU  materials,  the
      April 2003 and October 2003 Assessments in particular.  The  criticism
      made of CIPU that it had not appended the Dutch  and  Belgian  reports
      with their Bulletin was misplaced: the Bulletin was referenced and  in
      any event both documents had been provided to the Tribunal.  The  fact
      of the matter was that the Belgian authorities had monitored  returns;
      what they found had therefore to be given  serious  weight.  Regarding
      the criticism made that CIPU was selective, even  if  that  were  true
      (which he did not accept) the Tribunal in this case had been  provided
      with all the relevant source documents themselves.

23.   As regards the position taken previously by the Tribunal,  he  pointed
      out that apart from Mozu and B, the consistent Tribunal  position  had
      been that failed asylum seekers were not at risk.  He referred  to   M
      as a recent example.


24.   In relation to the BIDS materials Mr  Buckley  urged  us  to  be  very
      circumspect in attaching any weight to them. In his view they  largely
      consisted of hearsay, unsubstantiated allegations and  assertions  and
      did not provide proper evidence from the  people  said  to  have  been
      mistreated on return.  It was virtually impossible  to  challenge  the
      evidence presented relating to AB and DE since no proper statement  of
      evidence had been submitted in relation to either.  Both accounts  had
      evident shortcomings in any event: it was highly  implausible  that  a
      DRC guard would allow someone detained a  mobile  phone  so  he  could
      contact parties in the UK.


25.   Mr Buckley submitted that the BIDS evidence was also at odds with  the
      evidence from the  authorities  of  two  countries  (Belgium  and  the
      Netherlands) based on actual returns which had taken place. The letter
      from the Dutch Embassy in London dated 21 July 2003 gave  figures  for
      the number of failed asylum seekers returned to the DRC between 2000 -
      May 2003 and stated that the Dutch Embassy in Kinshasa is not aware of
      failed asylum seekers having any problems with the  security  services
      upon return. The letter from the Belgian Embassy dated  22  July  2003
      also gave figures for return  of  failed  asylum  seekers  on  a  non-
      voluntary basis between 2000 - July 2003  and  stated  that  both  the
      Belgian Embassy in the DRC and officials from the Belgian  Immigration
      Department monitor the safety of failed asylum seekers returned to the
      DRC from Belgium.  It  stated  that  officials  from  this  Department
      regularly go to the DRC on fact-finding missions to obtain information
      on subjects that feature in asylum applications. It  concluded:  "None
      of these officials have seen or heard of any reports of failed  asylum
      seekers being persecuted for being  failed  asylum  seekers  -  either
      before or since November 2002". The Home Office was not aware, said Mr
      Buckley that since these two countries  had  written  regarding  their
      experience of returns  either  had  ceased  removals  because  of  any
      concerns about risk on  return.  BIDS`  representation  of  the  Irish
      position was incorrect. The Home Office had ascertained from the Irish
      counterpart of CIPU that that country did not have a  policy  of  non-
      return and the only  obstacles  to  returns  were  now  practical  and
      financial. It had not been possible to check  what  was  the  Canadian
      position, but it was  well-known  that  the  Canadian  policy  adopted
      criteria  broader  than  that  of  serious  harm  under  the   Refugee
      Convention. CIPU was quite accurate to state that it was not aware  of
      any corroborated evidence of persons being ill treated  on  return  to
      the DRC.


26.   The DocuCongo evidence, said Mr Buckley, had the same shortcomings  as
      the other BIDS' materials and it stated that  they  are  unwilling  to
      divulge their particular sources.

27.   Miss Malik considered  that  there  was  a  real  risk  on  return  of
      transfer to migratory detention centres by the intelligence  services.
      If such a transfer does take place, there would  be  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm because of conditions in  these  detention  centres.  The
      fact that the Dutch did not monitor  returns  meant  their  conclusion
      that there were no reported problems lacked an empirical  basis.  Even
      though the Belgians said they monitored, they too relied largely on  a
      lack of adverse reports. They  did  not  explain  how  they  monitored
      returns. The 22 December 2002 British  Embassy letter did not  explain
      what evidence it relied on.  Dr Kennes' recent report  lacked  clarity
      and what was "believable" was subjective to each individual.  The  new
      Home Office procedure raised as many doubts as it answered,  since  it
      envisaged that in some cases checks would be made with the authorities
      in the DRC who could  in  certain  cases  have  ulterior  motives  for
      confirming an individual could be issued with travel documents.

28.   At the resumed hearing Mr Aziz initially requested an  adjournment  in
      order to have more time to  submit  further  evidence.  We  gave  that
      request careful consideration but rejected it. It is true the  hearing
      was resumed at relatively short notice, but prior to  the  morning  of
      the hearing no adjournment had been requested and it seemed  plain  to
      us that some of the enquiries Mr Aziz now said he  needed  to  pursue,
      for example contacting BIDS, could have been pursued on  10  December,
      when he was told that a further hearing would take place and  when  he
      confirmed he was able to attend and represent.

29.   Mr Aziz submitted  that  the  recent  UNHCR  fax  confirmed  that  the
    situation in the DRC was fluid and the risks for returnees high. If the
    failure of UNHCR to state that all returnees were at  risk  was  to  be
    relied on, the Tribunal should bear in mind that UNHCR is scarcely in a
    position to give first-hand reports.  DocuCongo  merited  consideration
    as an independent organisation. In the light of the recent IAS critique
    of CIPU, extracts from which had  been  put  before  the  Tribunal,  we
    should be slow to attach weight to their assessment. Mr Buckley's claim
    that, as a result of recent Home Office procedures agreed with the  DRC
    Consulate, there would be less risk for returnees, as  they  would  now
    have validated travel documents, overlooked the fact that both "AB" and
    "DE" were persecuted despite having travel documents.

30.       In relation to the BIDS materials, the Tribunal, he  said,  should
      take note of the fact that despite various letters from  BIDS  to  the
      Home Office in July, August, September and November 2003, nothing  had
      been  done  regarding  the  cases  that  had  been  brought  to  their
      attention.

The issue of failed asylum seekers
31.   We have already noted the obvious point that  cases  which  raise  the
      issue of failed or rejected asylum seekers are in an unusual  category
      because  they  potentially  affect  all  or  many  claimants  who  are
      nationals of the country  concerned.  It  is  particularly  important,
      therefore, that care is taken with such cases  and  that  parties  and
      Adjudicators  ensure  reference  is  made  to  all  previous  relevant
      decisions of  the  Tribunal  and  courts.  In  doing  so  it  is  also
      imperative that greater weight is attached to recent treatments, so as
      to ensure that the guidance relates to the current and not simply  the
      historic position in a country, although in the absence of significant
      changes older decisions may well still contain valid guidance.

32.   The issue of failed  asylum  seekers  is  often  referred  to  as  the
      "Senga" point  after  the  unreported  case  R  V  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal ex p Senga, 9 March 1994 in which Laws J  (as  he  then  was)
      accepted that the mere fact of having claimed asylum in another  state
      might in some circumstances put the person at risk  for  a  Convention
      reason.    Of course, theoretically it is  relevant  in  every  asylum
      appeal. Even if a claimant is found wholly lacking in  credibility  so
      that nothing is accepted other than that he is a national  of  country
      X, it is always  possible that he would still  face  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm upon return, if the authorities of his country would take
      an adverse view of anyone returning from  the  country  where  he  has
      claimed asylum.   However, refugee law deals with issues of practical,
      not theoretical risk.  Whilst one can easily  think  of  an  imaginary
      case in which a country  may  have  some  valid  reason  for  applying
      serious sanctions against returnees they know have applied for  asylum
      in other countries, e.g. if the only nationals of country X  who  have
      gone to country Y are persons who have  committed  some  serious  non-
      political   crime,  then  one  could  at  least  understand   if   the
      authorities  in  country  X  adopted  blanket  sanctions  against  all
      returnees  from  country  Y.  But  in  the  modern  world   in   which
      international travel is intense, such  a  case  is  unlikely  ever  to
      arise. In practice, for a country to  seek  to  persecute  or  inflict
      serious harm upon all failed asylum seekers as a blanket  category  is
      usually an index of the fact that it is a  highly  repressive  one  in
      which the authorities have reached the stage of arbitrarily  labelling
      broad categories of its nationals as its enemies and riding  roughshod
      over basic human rights and fundamental freedoms.


 33.  Because it reflects a highly unusual state of affairs, it  is  not  in
      our view an issue which Adjudicators need to routinely  address,  even
      in the case of countries with a poor human  rights  record.  Thus  the
      Senga point is only relevant in the case of countries where  there  is
      some significant  body  of  objective  evidence  indicating  that  the
      authorities do (or would) view failed asylum seekers adversely.


 34.  Of course, the reason why they take that view may  vary.   It  may  be
      important  in  certain  types  of  cases  to  particularise  why   the
      authorities are said to react adversely to failed asylum  seekers.  It
      may be that they consider all returnees adversely. It may be they only
      view adversely returnees  from  certain  countries  (e.g.  because  of
      foreign policy  conflicts).   It  may  be  they  only  view  adversely
      returnees whom they know or perceive to be failed asylum  seekers.  In
      some cases it is suggested that their manner of return (e.g. by escort
      or charter flight)  may  serve  to  signpost  them  as  failed  asylum
      seekers.  It may be that time is a relevant factor:  it  is  sometimes
      argued that nationals returning after a lengthy  period  are  more  at
      risk of being labelled as failed asylum  seekers/persons  disloyal  to
      the regime. Such variations may be more or less important depending on
      the country and the prevailing circumstances in relation to which  the
      issue arises. But whatever the reasons and in whatever form it arises,
      the issue of failed asylum seekers per se should only be considered if
      there is a significant body of evidence which can be  adduced  in  its
      support. One, albeit not the only, source whose assessment will always
      require serious consideration, is UNHCR by virtue of the fact that  it
      maintains a presence and network of  contacts  familiar  with  refugee
      issues in a great many countries.

The DRC context
35.   Having noted that the failed asylum seeker issue always  needs  to  be
      considered in its particular country context, we need to  ask  whether
      there are any significant variables in the DRC context. We note  first
      of  all  that  there  is  some  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  DRC
      authorities view returnees from the UK differently from returnees from
      other EU Countries. Dr Kennes  has  mentioned  this  in  a  number  of
      reports. BIDS for one has maintained that since the Human Rights Watch
      report of July 2003 records  that  Britain  is  indirectly  supporting
      Ugandan and Rwandan rebel forces present  in  the  country,  it  is  a
      potential consequence that an asylum seeker returned from the  UK  may
      be the subject of  greater  suspicion  on  that  basis.  However,  for
      reasons we go on to give, we do not think  that  there  is  sufficient
      evidence to show that any greater suspicion on the  part  of  the  DRC
      authorities leads them to perceive returnees from the  UK  as  persons
      they should ill- treat. The evidence in our view establishes  that  an
      adverse interest by the DRC authorities in DRC returnees is likely  to
      be taken only in specific categories  of  cases,  e.g.  those  with  a
      military or  political  profile,  without  reference  to  the  sending
      country, certainly where it is an EU country. Nor do we consider  that
      being returned by  means  of  a  charter  flight  would  significantly
      increase the level of risk on return, since, in the UK  context,  only
      persons who  have  obtained  travel  documents  verified  by  the  DRC
      Consulate are returned.

36.   We note further that returns from the UK  are  to  Kinshasa.  This  is
      relevant when it comes to considering claims  from  persons  who  come
      from the east or rebel-held areas. Unless  there  is  some  reason  to
      consider that they cannot remain in Kinshasa, or that the  authorities
      would view them adversely because of where they come from,  they  will
      not necessarily succeed in their claim  by  showing  they  would  face
      serious harm in their home areas.

37.   With reference to the new items of evidence listed earlier,  we  shall
      deal with new Home office procedures and the UNHCR fax in  the  course
      of our later assessment. However, it is helpful if we give more detail
      at this stage  concerning  the  report  of  Dr  Kennes  and  the  BIDS
      materials.

The Kennes report of 29 September 2003
38.    This report specifically  addresses  the  issue  of  risk  to  failed
      asylum seekers and makes the same point as UNHCR does about the  fluid
      and unstable situation in the country. He states that since  there  is
      much "manipulated information" circulating about  asylum  seekers,  he
      has sought to rely on cases interviewed by Kinshasa-based  researchers
      under his supervision.  His overall position is categorical:

                "In the Democratic Republic of Congo,  the  failed  returned
           asylum seekers are as such not a persecuted category. This means
           that  a  failed  returned  asylum  seeker  as  such   will   not
           automatically be arrested at the airport (p.2 ).
           ...


                  The mere fact of being a failed returned asylum seeker  on
           (sic) itself does not create a security  risk.  The  aggravating
           factors are the possession of valid travel  documents,  and  the
           existence of a case against this person (p. 8)."


39.   However,  his  report  qualifies  this  position  by  reference  to  a
      distinction between "returned asylum seekers who had a  genuine  claim
      to political asylum but  were  unjustly  refused  in  the  country  of
      asylum" and those who did not have a genuine claim.  In regard to  the
      former, he mentions three cases, one concerning a  middle-level  civil
      servant, one a special police services employee and one a  former  DSP
      member. In each case they had  fallen  foul  of  the  DRC  authorities
      before they left and in each case met persecution on  return.  But  in
      regard to the latter, he states, with reference to several cases:

      "       If somebody invented a story and returns to the  country  with
           valid travel documents, there will be no problem for him/her  at
           the airport. He will enter the country as anybody else.


                  If, however, no valid travel documents can  be  presented,
           the person will  experience  difficulties.  In  this  case,  the
           returnee is put under custody with the aim to squeeze money  out
           of his or her pockets... If the person or his family  is  unable
           to pay, the returnees  will  be  transferred  to  CPRK  (Makala)
           prison until he or she pays,  most  likely  a  higher  fee  than
           initially requested. "

 40.  His report also discusses  "migratory  detention  centres"  concluding
      that whilst these are not the simple screening agencies  described  by
      the authorities, they are only partly operational and do  not  involve
      persecution except for those already identified for persecution before
      they left. "The real function of the detention  centres",  he  writes,
      "is thus linked to the overall government policy towards  opposition".
      In the context of an analysis of Amnesty International  correspondence
      and UNHCR documents, his report goes on to consider what are the  risk
      categories in the DRC currently. His report includes returnees without
      valid travel documents, persons known or perceived to have a  military
      or political profile/background, persons who have other  nationalities
      than Congolese (e.g. Rwandan  or  Ugandan)  and  Tutsi  or  Tutsi-like
      groups. He confirms his view that  despite  the  announcement  by  the
      Minister of Interior that the Agence Nationale  des  Renseignments  or
      ANR (security services) and Detection  Militaire  des  Activites  Anti
      patrie  or  DEMIAP  (military  security)   services  were  no   longer
      operating at the airport, it is obvious they are still covertly active
      there.

The BIDS materials
41.   For proper  reasons  largely  to  do  with  concerns  about  continued
      detention of a number of  failed  DRC  asylum-seekers,  the  Bail  for
      Immigration Detainees (BIDS) organisation whose co-ordinator is Mr Tim
      Baster, has entered into correspondence with  the  Home  Office,  with
      CIPU and a number of other bodies.  Towards the end of 2003 key  parts
      of this correspondence together with a number of other documents  were
      published by the Immigration Law Practitioners Association (ILPA).  We
      do not propose to itemise all of it in the text of this determination.
      It will suffice to say that it  broadly  covers  materials  considered
      relevant by BIDS up to and including their letter to the  Home  Office
      dated 25 November 2003.  It is necessary also to say that much  of  it
      raises issues, e.g. the continued detention of failed asylum  seekers,
      the history of Home Office failure to respond  to  BIDS'  request  for
      further enquiries, which are not our concern.  However, insofar as  it
      constitutes relevant new evidence meriting  Tribunal  assessment,  its
      essential particulars can be summarised as follows:

  42. The November 2003 BIDS' letter asserts that on 12 March 2002 a charter
      flight was  organised  by  the  Resettlement  and  Co-ordination  Unit
      (RESCU) to Kinshasa. It included 13 passengers who were  nationals  of
      the DRC. According to first and second hand information given to BIDS,
      all but one of the 13 passengers concerned met with detention and  ill
      treatment upon return. As for the only one who was not,  he  had  been
      returned straightaway to the UK. Another of  the  passengers  who  had
      eventually been released had made his way back to the UK  and  claimed
      asylum. An anonymised statement setting out his experiences on  return
      was contained in the bundle before us.

43.    The same  BIDS  letter  asserts  that  it  knows  of  3  further  DRC
      nationals who have been removed since 10 October, 2003, two of whom  -
      AB and DE - appear to have ended up in the Central Prison in Makala.

  44. Marrying this information together with  that  supplied  by  the  Home
      Office regarding the number of person returned  in  2002-  2003,  BIDS
      contends (in its 25 November 2003 letter) that:

      "Even assuming that all DRC nationals who were  removed  from  the  UK
           between January 2002 and November 2003  were  actually  sent  to
           Kinshasa,  then  of  38  (adding  the  2002  statistics  to  the
           provisional statistics for January - March 2003  and  the  three
           recent removals that we are aware of) there is evidence that  15
           of these returnees were imprisoned on arrival in Kinshasa.  This
           represents a  rate  of  detention  of  some  40%  of  all  known
           returnees over a two year period".


  45. The BIDS` bundle also includes materials from a Congolese NGO with  an
      office in the Netherlands called   "DocuCongo"  which  indicates  that
      this body has learnt of DRC  nationals  removed  from  other  European
      countries who have been  detained  and  ill  treated  on  return.  The
      position of this organisation on the subject is mainly set  out  in  a
      letter dated 26 September 2003. It summarises  two  cases  of  persons
      said to have  been  returned  from  the  Netherlands  to  Kinshasa  in
      November 2002 and two in June 2003. Mention is also  made  of  another
      person said to have been detained on arrival having  been  removed  by
      Germany in September 2003.  The author also refers to "a source in the
      DGM" (Direction Generale de Migration) giving an account  of  frequent
      mistreatment on return.

  46. The BIDS materials also make reference to some  Amnesty  International
      materials. Adding to  earlier  Amnesty  International  evidence  about
      detention and mistreatment of DRC nationals returned to the  DRC  from
      Congo  (Brazzaville),  Amnesty  International  (Netherlands)  has  had
      reports of persons who, having been removed from  Holland  by  charter
      flight, found themselves subjected to frequent visits  to  their  home
      addresses by the authorities.

  47. Also in the BIDS bundle is a letter from Amba Bongo, Project  Director
      of an NGO called Active Women,  chronicling  a  field  trip  she  made
      between August and September 2003. It cites  "my  own  source,  Mr  X,
      officer of the Agence Nationale de  Reseignements  (ANR)  assigned  to
      N`djili Airport" claiming that failed asylum seekers are  ill  treated
      and persecuted on arrival at the airport regardless of  their  gender,
      or the fact that they are returned with children or not.

  48. BIDS also contains commentary on the policies and practices  of  other
      governments as regards  the  return  of  failed  DRC  asylum  seekers.
      According  to  BIDS  the  Irish  government  has  a  policy  of   "not
      considering returning failed asylum seekers to the DRC",  Canada  does
      not return DRC nationals and, although Holland and Belgium do  conduct
      returns, their own monitoring procedures  suggest  that  there  remain
      doubts among Dutch and Belgian authorities about whether DRC nationals
      will be safe on return.  BIDS also complains that but for a failure to
      properly investigate the results of UK returns, the Home Office  would
      have recognised that failed asylum seekers have been and  continue  to
      be at risk.

  49. Earlier letters from BIDS (also in the bundle of BIDS materials)  seek
      to rely on the  ACCORD/UNHCR  Report  of  June  28-9  2002  and  UNHCR
      concerns as set out in a letter of 23 January 2003 about the risks  to
      returnees of being sent back by charter flight.  Although  recognising
      that UNHCR has stopped short of advising against blanket returns, BIDS
      says the body has shown increased  levels  of  concern  since  January
      2003. BIDS also raises concerns about the role in assisting  the  (UK)
      Home Office with verifying the DRC nationality  of  certain  potential
      returnees of a Mr Kabwe, an agent for the DRC government.
Assessment
50.   In M the Tribunal reached two main findings: (1)  that  failed  asylum
      seekers per se are not at risk; but that (2) since  the  situation  in
      the DRC remains one in which there  are  serious  concerns  about  the
      ongoing level of human rights abuses committed by the  government  and
      other organisations, great care has to  be  taken  to  recognise  that
      there are specific risk categories, in particular persons (we rephrase
      slightly) having or perceived  as  having  nationality  of  a  country
      hostile to the DRC and persons who have or are  perceived  to  have  a
      military or political profile. M reminds us that the DRC has a  highly
      unstable political past and political present and  that  sight  should
      not be lost of the fact that  "some 3 million people are estimated  to
      have been killed during the course of the civil  war,  making  it  the
      largest conflict, in terms of  loss  of  life,  since  World  War  11"
      (paragraph 12).

51.   In seeking to assess the new evidence to hand since M, we  have  asked
      ourselves the following question. What sources among the  many  placed
      before us can we attach most weight to and why? In our view there  are
      three sources which merit very considerable weight being  placed  upon
      them. They are UNHCR, European  governments  and  the  September  2003
      report of Dr Kennes.

The UNHCR position
52.    We  consider  the  Tribunal  has  been  entirely   right   to   place
      considerable weight on the UNHCR position. As was noted in M, what  is
      clear  from  recent  UNHCR  letters,  that  of  2  September  2003  in
      particular, is that although they no longer endorse routine returns of
      DRC nationals who are failed asylum seekers, they do not  support  the
      view that failed asylum seekers per se are at risk either. Rather they
      favour a case-by-case  approach,  looking  at  factors  which  may  be
      relevant in predicting the attitude likely to  be  taken  by  the  DRC
      authorities to the claimant on return (we shall return to the  subject
      of specific risk categories later).

 53.  We now have before us a further fax from UNHCR  elicited  by  a  query
      from the solicitors acting in this case. It is dated 15 December 2003.
      It confirms that information obtained from its Headquarters in  Geneva
      had not altered the position taken by the UNHCR  in  its  2  September
      2003 letter.  Since Mr Aziz  has  sought  to  cast  doubt  on  UNHCR's
      ability to know what actually happens in Kinshasa to returnees, it  is
      pertinent to note that this fax confirms what was made  clear  in  the
      earlier ACCORD/UNHCR report of  June  2003,  which  likewise  did  not
      support the view that failed asylum seekers per se were at risk.   The
      fax states:

           "Our  September  assessment  was  drafted  on   the   basis   of
           information which was sourced directly from our field office  in
           the DRC and cleared by our Headquarters in Geneva.


           UNHCR`s view on country of  origin  information  are  a  primary
           source as they are based on first-hand reports  from  its  field
           presence around the world.
           ...
           We make continuous efforts to ensure that our  positions  mirror
           the current situation in the country  concerned.  In  line  with
           this, given the particularly fluid political  situation  in  the
           DRC during the past months, our position on  the  DRC  has  seen
           changes when the need arose".

54.   This fax reinforces our view that the UNHCR position  is  properly  to
      be regarded in the DRC context as a primary source based on first hand
      reports evaluated by persons with particular awareness of the  Refugee
      Convention criteria. To the extent that BIDS and  the  representatives
      in this case have argued that the UNHCR position  supports  their  own
      view as regards failed asylum  seekers,  they  are  simply  incorrect.
      Unless and until UNHCR concludes that all failed asylum seekers are at
      risk, we expect representatives in DRC cases to cease wasting judicial
      time by trying to argue that the UNHCR position does not mean what  it
      says.

55.   One other matter we should note is that UNHCR has not  maintained  the
      concern expressed in its January 2003 letter that returning persons on
      charter flights adds to the risk  factors,  by  drawing  attention  to
      their failed asylum seeker status.

56.   Even  though  UNHCR  has  apparently  maintained  its  concerns  about
      reports of abuse of power by security officers at Ndjili international
      airport, in the form of intimidation of deportees to extort money  and
      send them to detention centres where neither they nor  their  families
      can pay, it is clear that they do not consider this a widescale enough
      problem to place returnees generally at real risk of  such  treatment.
      In any event we entirely agree with the  assessment  of  this  problem
      made at paragraph 37 of the Tribunal determination in M.

Policies and practices of other countries, EU governments in particular
57.   Although the Tribunal has previously considered evidence  relating  to
      the recent experiences of the UK and EU  countries,  the  Netherlands,
      Belgium and France in particular, it is important that we deal with it
      here, in view of the assertion by BIDS that the experiences  of  other
      countries generally is demonstrative of a real risk to  failed  asylum
      seekers on return.

58.   Let us first turn to the evidence from the British Ambassador  to  the
      DRC who stated in November 2002 that he had not seen any  evidence  to
      indicate that failed asylum seekers are persecuted on return. Ms Malik
      and Mr Aziz, echoing BIDS`s contentions, have  argued  that  there  is
      nothing to show that the British Ambassador  has  any  firm  empirical
      basis  for  this  statement.  We  would  agree  the  letter  from  the
      Ambassador does not specify his sources. We are also  aware  that  the
      Tribunal in M [2003]  00051 decided  to  "place  no  weight"  on  this
      evidence. However, it is clear that since early 2000 if  not  earlier,
      the UK authorities  here  and  abroad  have  been  aware  of  concerns
      expressed about returns and we may at  least  infer,  therefore,  that
      this statement by the British Ambassador was made by reference to real
      checks made in Kinshasa itself. Furthermore, as the Tribunal noted  in
      M, this statement is supported  by  the  comments  of  Mr  Byaruhanga,
      Central Africa Researcher, of Amnesty International, London who stated
      in the ACCORD/UNHCR report of June 2002 that he  was  not  aware  that
      people have been detained solely for seeking asylum.

59.   Whilst dealing with the evidence from the British  Ambassador,  it  is
      pertinent to address the evidence concerning recent  changes  in  Home
      Office policy since early September 2003  regarding  removals  to  the
      DRC. Bearing in mind the importance attached by UNHCR and by Dr Kennes
      (the latter on the basis of research carried out under his auspices in
      Kinshasa), to the possession  of  travel  documents  (see  below),  we
      consider that these changes are particularly significant. Their effect
      is that no-one will be  returned  to  the  DRC  without  valid  travel
      documents. According to Dr Kennes, possession of a travel document not
      only obviates risk of adverse attention on return  (except  for  those
      already targeted), but also greatly reduces the risk of  extortion  at
      the hands of DRC officials demanding bribes.

60.   Mr Aziz highlighted concerns raised  by  BIDS  regarding  Home  Office
      liaison with a DRC Ministry of Interior representative, a  certain  Mr
      Kabwe,  who is said to have visited London in order to validate travel
      documents. The BIDS letter voices concern  that  the  result  of  Home
      Office facilitation of this man`s interviews with DRC  nationals  held
      in detention centres in the UK could be that  information  that  could
      endanger returnees is divulged to the DRC authorities. Insofar as BIDS
      may be referring to  persons  whose  asylum  claims  are  still  being
      processed, they are not a  matter  for  this  Tribunal.  We  are  only
      concerned with persons whose claims to asylum have failed and who have
      reached the end of the  appeal  process.  To  allege,  in  respect  of
      persons in this category, that there is something untoward in  the  UK
      government seeking to take practical steps for their removal by  means
      of liaison with the DRC authorities here and in Kinshasa,  is  in  our
      view quite unfounded.  In any event, we gather from  Mr  Buckley  that
      the data sought from the persons concerned goes no further than  basic
      particulars or "biodata".

61.   Mr Aziz prayed in aid the existence  of  a  Canadian  policy  of  non-
      return set to remain in place until March 2004. He helpfully  referred
      us to the BIDS summary of this as contained in Mr Baster`s  letter  of
      25 November 2003 which cites a Canadian  Council  of  Refugees  source
      stating that:

           "the basis for the suspension is in the Immigration and  Refugee
           Protection Regulations (230(1)) which states: `The Minister  may
           impose stay on removal orders with respect to a country or place
           if the circumstances in that country or place pose a generalised
           risk to the entire civilian population as  a  result  of  a)  an
           armed conflict within the country, b) an environmental  disaster
           resulting  in  a  substantial  temporary  disruption  of  living
           conditions, c) any situation that is temporary or generalised"


62.   The evidence such as we have relating  to  the  Canadian  position  is
      limited, but it is plain from the passage just cited that  their  non-
      return policy is not based on the test of real risk applied in the UK.
      Both under the Refugee Convention and under Art 3, the UK  courts  and
      Tribunal have consistently held that exposure to the normal  incidents
      of armed conflict/civil war or to generalised violence is  not  enough
      to establish a real risk of serious harm: (see Adan [1997] 1 WLR 1107,
      Vilvirajah v UK (1991) 14 EHRR 248. At best, therefore,  the  Canadian
      evidence is of neutral weight.

63.   We face a difficulty  in  regard  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      position of the Irish authorities. The BIDS letter  contends  that  on
      the strength of a recent letter from the Refugee Documentation  Centre
      in Dublin the Republic of Ireland "currently operates a policy of  not
      considering returning failed asylum seekers to the DRC".  Since  there
      is nothing to indicate on what evidence  the  Irish  authorities  base
      their view on DRC returns , this information needs to be treated  with
      some caution. But in any event, Mr  Buckley  stated  at  the  December
      hearing that his own enquiries of the Refugee Documentation Centre had
      produced a different answer, namely that there was no policy  of  non-
      return and returns were only not currently taking place for  practical
      and financial reasons. At best, therefore, evidence  relating  to  the
      Irish position is inconclusive and not self-evidently based on any DRC-
      based source.

64.   That brings us to the evidence  provided  by  the  Belgian  and  Dutch
      governments. The Tribunal  in  considering  this  evidence  in  recent
      decisions has afforded it considerable importance. We confirm our view
      that they have been right to do so. We have before us their letters in
      full. However, the contents  of  these  is  accurately  summarised  at
      paragraphs 6.45 - 6.46 of the October 2003 CIPU Assessment as follows:



      "6.45. It is possible  for  failed  Congolese  asylum  seekers  to  be
           returned to the DRC provided they have valid  travel  documents.
           The British Ambassador stated in a letter of November 2002  that
           he has not seen any evidence to indicate  that  returned  failed
           asylum seekers are persecuted on arrival in  Kinshasa.  He  also
           stated that the French, Belgian and Dutch governments  regularly
           return failed Congolese asylum seekers to the DRC.

      6.46. The Belgian  and  Dutch  governments  have  also  not  seen  any
           evidence to indicate that returned  failed  asylum  seekers  are
           persecuted. A letter from the Belgium Embassy in London of  July
           2003 states that the Belgian government enforces the returns  of
           failed Congolese asylum seekers to the  DRC.  Both  the  Belgian
           Embassy in  Kinshasa  and  the  Belgian  Immigration  Department
           monitor the treatment of returned failed asylum seekers  to  the
           DRC from Belgium and have not seen any evidence to indicate that
           returned failed asylum seekers are at  risk  of  persecution.  A
           letter from the Dutch Embassy in London of July 2003 states that
           the Dutch Government enforces the returns  of  failed  Congolese
           asylum seekers to the DRC and that the Dutch Embassy in Kinshasa
           has not seen any  evidence  to  indicate  that  returned  failed
           asylum seekers are at risk of persecution, although they do  not
           monitor the treatment of returned failed  asylum  seekers  as  a
           matter of policy".

65.   We do not have more  detailed  evidence  from  the  Dutch  authorities
      themselves about their procedure, but, according  to  BIDS,  a  letter
      from the Dutch Ministry of Justice to DocuCongo of 24  September  2003
      stated that:

           "Upon arrival in Kinshasa a  so-called  reception  committee  is
           present. This committee is mainly  made  up  of  representatives
           from the IND, the Royal Military  (Kmar)  and  if  necessary  an
           official from the Dutch Embassy in Kinshasa.  In  addition,  the
           Director of the DGM sits on the committee. Family members of the
           person being returned to the DRC can also make up  part  of  the
           committee, as well as workers from the International Red  Cross.
           Furthermore, there is a Deportations Supervisory Board, which is
           made up of officials from the Kmar  and  a  professor  from  the
           Royal  University  of  Brabant.  This  committee  oversees   the
           procedure followed if the person in question disappears."

66.   Mr Aziz, echoing BIDS, criticises this procedure as  insufficient  and
      in any event indicative that there are real concerns on  the  part  of
      both the Dutch and Belgian governments that returnees will  face  real
      risk unless the authorities know they are monitored.

67.   Mr Buckley, reverting to BIDS`s criticism of  the  UK  government  for
      failing to install monitoring procedures in Kinshasa, argued that from
      the point of view of BIDS and others associating with  them  on  this,
      "one is dammed if you do and damned if you don't". Whether he is right
      in that response, we are satisfied that, as  a  result  of  Dutch  and
      Belgian initiatives, it is clear that the authorities in Kinshasa have
      put in place a number of procedures,  mindful  of  external  scrutiny,
      including from the International Red Cross. On  balance,  we  consider
      that tends to demonstrate  that  there  is  no  systematic  policy  of
      persecuting returnees, monitored or unmonitored, even if there may  be
      individual breaches of procedures.

68.   Before moving on from  the  Dutch  and  Belgian  evidence,  we  should
      address the argument also referred to by Ms Malik  and  Mr  Aziz  that
      there is evidence that the Dutch at one point suspended removals on an
      emergency basis. That appears accurate. However,  as  Mr  Buckley  has
      correctly identified, there is no evidence to show that there was  any
      other reason for this than concerns that had  been  raised  about  the
      detention conditions in which  certain DRC and  Cameroonian  returnees
      had been kept by the Dutch authorities on the way to  the  airport  in
      the Netherlands.

69.   We note further that there is no evidence before  us  that  any  other
      European government has deemed it necessary on the basis of their  own
      experience to adopt a policy of non-returns based  on  concerns  about
      the risk of persecution on return to the DRC.

  70. We conclude, therefore, that the evidence  from  European  governments
      lends strong support for the view that failed asylum  seekers  per  se
      are not at real risk on return. It considering what weight  to  attach
      to such evidence we bear in mind that the authorities in EU  countries
      are under a legal obligation to ensure that they do not  act  contrary
      to Art 3 of the ECHR or to the Refugee Convention.  We  do  not  think
      that either Mr Baster or the representatives in this case have in  any
      satisfactory  way  demonstrated  that  these  authorities  have   been
      derelict in fulfilling their international obligations in relation  to
      DRC returnees. We would add the comment that the denunciatory tone  of
      some of the BIDS letters does not assist the task of weighing evidence
      impartially.


Expert evidence and the latest report of Dr Kennes
71.   As the Court of Appeal said in S & Others

           "In this field opinion evidence will often or  usually  be  very
           important since assessment of the risk of persecutory  treatment
           in the milieu of a perhaps unstable political situation may be a
           complex and difficult task in which the fact-finding tribunal is
           bound to place heavy  reliance  on  the  views  of  experts  and
           specialists".

72.   Nevertheless, we have some,  albeit  limited,  difficulties  with  the
      expert evidence relating to the central issue before us in this  case.
      Whilst the Tribunal has previously paid considerable deference to past
      reports  by  Dr  Erik   Kennes,  it  has   identified   some   limited
      shortcomings (see in particular M [2003] 0051 at paras  11.2  -  11.5)
      and  for a number of reasons the Tribunal generally was not  persuaded
      by his reports that asylum seekers per se were at real risk. We do not
      propose to revisit his past reports, save to note that on the issue of
      detention centres for migration, there now appears to be further doubt
      (over and above those identified in M 00051 ) that  he  was  right  to
      identify this as a real source of risk.  We  put  it  no  higher  than
      saying "further doubt", since we go only by the DocuCongo evidence, to
      which we generally attach very  limited  weight.  Their  23  September
      letter takes issue with Dr Kenne`s reliance on statements made by then
      Director of Immigration in the DRC, Leyka Moussa Nyembo.  It  suggests
      that Dr Kenne`s reliance on what he had been told about these  centres
      was misplaced. In May 2001 Mr Leyka had announced,  according  to  the
      DocuCongo letter, the creation of  "detention  centres  for  migration
      where all foreigners facing expulsion will be detained  provisionally.
      As well as nationals who were kicked  out  of  the  West".  Dr  Kennes
      reported  being  told  by  Mr  Leyka`s  assistant   in   a   telephone
      conversation that some of these centres were already up  and  running.
      But according to the DocuCongo letter, they had been  unable  to  find
      any trace of these centres and "we believe that the  centres  that  Mr
      Leyka  talked  about  were  never  created...In  fact,  Mr  Leyka  was
      dismissed from his job by decree 064/2002 on 6 June 2002."

73.   However, we now have before us a more recent report by Dr Kennes.  The
      latter report was not prepared with this  case  in  mind:  as  already
      explained, we ourselves put it into evidence in this case, in view  of
      the fact that it dealt with a generic issue.  We  do  not  propose  to
      describe its contents in any detail except to note  that  much  of  it
      covers recent events and recent items of evidence. In broad  terms  we
      consider we should attach significant weight to  this  report.  It  is
      true that at least  in  respect  of  migratory  detention  centres  it
      largely repeats what is said in the December 2002 report  -and in this
      respect we must apply the "further doubts" we expressed earlier  about
      reliance on information from or on behalf of Mr Leyka.  However,  what
      is important so far as the issue before us is concerned,  is  that  in
      this report Dr Kennes  clearly  resiles  from  his  previous  apparent
      position that failed asylum seekers per se are at  risk  and  that  he
      does so having  drawn  in  part  on  recent  evidence  which  includes
      interviews conducted by academic researchers  in  Kinshasa  under  his
      supervision.

74.   Ms Malik urged us to place very limited weight on this recent  report,
      particularly in view of the fact that Dr  Kennes` own  elaboration  of
      risk categories was based on far too subjective criteria. We do  agree
      with Ms Malik that it is far from clear how to translate what he means
      by "unjustly/justly refused asylum seekers" into a risk category based
      on how the DRC authorities would view someone on return.  However,  it
      is sufficiently clear from his development of the distinction that  he
      considers that those unjustly refused are persons who  have  had  "  a
      case against them in the DRC", i.e.  (as  we  understand  it)  persons
      already targeted by the DRC authorities.

75.   We reiterate the point that insofar as he  presents  his  reasons  for
      concluding that failed asylum seekers per se  are  not  at  risk,  his
      report is clearly based on his own  investigations  and  research  and
      should be accorded due weight.

76.   In deciding to attach most weight to  the  three  sources  dealt  with
      above (UNHCR, European governments  and  the  latest  report  from  Dr
      Kennes), we need conversely to explain why we have decided  to  attach
      little or no weight to other sources relied upon by Ms  Malik  and  Mr
      Aziz in this case.

77.   Turning  first  to  the  BIDS  letters,  they  do  not  support  their
      assertions with evidence in the  form  one  would  expect  of  an  NGO
      familiar with the rules governing presentation of evidence  to  public
      bodies in the UK. We quite understand their  concern  not  to  furnish
      evidence (via ILPA) to the public at large in an "open letter"  giving
      personal particulars. It is only right that they act as they see it to
      maintain confidentiality and ensure  the  safety  of  the  individuals
      concerned. However, we cannot fathom any valid  reason  for  them  not
      furnishing well before now better particulars to the Home  Office.  It
      is not suggested that the individuals themselves have any objection in
      principle to giving full particulars so  long  as  confidentiality  is
      ensured. BIDS is or should be perfectly aware that the Home Office  is
      under a duty of confidentiality  in  relation  to  a  person's  asylum
      particulars.  Even if they have now sent the Home  Office  the  fuller
      particulars - and Mr Buckley said none had been sent that he was aware
      of - we have not seen them. Mr Aziz had seven days to approach BIDS to
      see if such particulars could be made available  to  the  Tribunal  in
      this case, but mentioned no  efforts  to  do  so.  We  must  base  our
      assessment, therefore, on the summaries provided by BIDS. Whilst  that
      is less than ideal, we note that BIDS plainly sought in its letters to
      present the  evidence,  subject  to  the  above  constraints,  at  its
      strongest.

78.   The case  in  relation  to  which  BIDS  have  adduced  an  anonymised
      statement concerns a DRC national who claims to have been one  of  the
      passengers on  the  March  2002  charter  flight,  He  avers  in  that
      statement that upon arrival in  Kinshasa  he  was  detained  and  ill-
      treated before eventually being released. BIDS states that upon return
      to the UK he made a claim for asylum. We raised with  the  parties  at
      the December hearing our receipt of  unverified  information  that  an
      asylum seeker who claimed to have been on the March  2002  flight  had
      appealed and that  an  Adjudicator  had  dismissed  his  appeal  quite
      recently. However, despite their raising no objections, we decided not
      to take steps to direct further inquiries or to seek to obtain a  copy
      of any determination. Thus we make no  judgment  as  to  whether  that
      dismissal, if one  has  been  made,  relates  to  the  author  of  the
      statement submitted  by  BIDS.  What  we  can  state  with  certainty,
      however, is that there is no evidence before  us  to  show  that  this
      statement's author  has  been  accepted  as  credible  by  either  the
      immigration authorities or the  appellate  authorities.  Doubtless  if
      this person is found  to  be  credible  as  a  result  of  his  asylum
      application and/or appeal, that would put matters in a very  different
      light.

79.   The same observation applies to the evidence of  another  person  said
      by BIDS to have been  on  this  flight  but  to  have  been  "bounced"
      straight back. BIDS states  that  he  has  also  claimed  asylum.  His
      evidence too can only be described as being as yet unaccepted  by  any
      UK authority.

80.   BIDS elsewhere refers to other information it  has  received  relating
      to persons who were on  the  March  2002  charter  flight,  but  since
      nothing is specified, we can only assume it viewed such information as
      less significant than those items of evidence it has particularised.

81.   That brings us to the two cases referred to  by  BIDS  as  AB  and  DE
      respectively. The BIDS letter describes the former case thus:

           "'AB` was removed from Heathrow in October 2003,  by  flight  to
           Nairobi and thence to Kinshasa. His partner in the UK received a
           very distressed phone call from  him  at  Kinshasa  airport,  in
           which he stated that he had already been arrested and was on his
           way to prison. A traveller at the airport witnessed  his  arrest
           and beating and also phoned his partner. "

82.   The BIDS letter goes on to state that based on the above  information,
      it approached human rights  organisations  for  help  in  tracing  and
      confirming AB`s whereabouts.  It  then  outlines  the  contents  of  a
      statement from someone described as a "reputable witness, known  to  a
      number of international human rights organisations" who visited AB and
      heard from him about his detention and ill treatment.

83.   BIDS` account of the case of DE was as  follows.  DE  was  removed  in
      late October 2003. His solicitor was so concerned about his fate  that
      she (unusually) gave him her mobile number immediately before  removal
      and asked him to phone her on arrival in Kinshasa. He did not call her
      from Kinshasa for some two weeks after his removal, but, when he  did,
      he  said  he  was  calling  from  Makala  prison  where  he  had  been
      incarcerated and ill-treated.

84.   In addition to these  cases  the  BIDS  materials  included  DocuCongo
      letters detailing several cases of persons returned by the  Dutch  and
      German authorities who were also said by them to  have  been  detained
      and ill treated on arrival.

85.   There are obvious criticisms that could be  made  of  the  manner  and
      form of the BIDS, DocuCongo and Active Women evidence. However, we are
      conscious that all three have  limited  resources  and  understandably
      seek to act on whatever evidence appears to them  to  have  relevance.
      Hence we would not seek to discount such evidence for merely technical
      reasons.  But  in  approaching  our  task  of  deciding  whether   the
      Adjudicator was right to find that the claimant would face a real risk
      of serious harm under the Refugee Convention and  Art  3,  it  remains
      that we have to bear in mind a number of things. Firstly, in assessing
      the issue of real  risk  to  failed  asylum  seekers  per  se,  it  is
      necessary to ask, not simply are cases occurring of ill  treatment  on
      return, but also are they occurring  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  a
      consistent pattern of gross and systematic abuses of the human  rights
      of returnees. This is important because it is plain  that  that  there
      continues to be significant levels of human rights abuses committed by
      DRC officials of all kinds and thus that there is a certain  level  of
      arbitrary and improper conduct on their part. It  would  be  nave  to
      think that,  amongst  DC  officials  involved  in  the  processing  of
      returnees to Kinshasa, there was not a  similar  level  of  individual
      acts  of  misconduct.  But  that  is  different  from  evidence  of  a
      consistent pattern of gross and systematic violation  of  basic  human
      rights.

86.   A further matter we have to bear in mind is that,  in  respect  of  AB
      and DE, the accounts as given are far from  self-evidently  plausible.
      Believing AB`s account would mean accepting as reasonably likely  that
      the DRC authorities would have permitted him to  phone  after  he  had
      been arrested and  was  being  escorted  to  prison.  Believing   DE`s
      account would mean accepting that, whilst  inside  Makala  prison,  DE
      would still have had access to money he had with him when  he  arrived
      and would have been able to use it to bribe a prison official to  call
      his solicitor in the UK. Both accounts described the calls  as  having
      been cut off or terminated. Given that both had  said  they  had  been
      granted access to a phone, this was a  further  oddity.  AB`s  account
      involved acceptance, further, of the coincidence that not only was his
      arrest witnessed by a traveller at the airport but a traveller who was
      able to elicit straightaway from the policeman who had  beaten  AB  in
      front of him the address of where AB was going.  This  traveller  also
      happened to know AB and so was able to phone his partner in the UK who
      had earlier received the phone call from AB himself.  IF AB`s  account
      had indeed been verified by a "reputable witness, known to a number of
      international human rights organisations", then we would have expected
      that, between October and the date of hearing in December  2003,  some
      specific report from such organisations not only confirming the  visit
      but giving reasons why this person attached credence to  AB`s  account
      would have been forthcoming.

87.   In relation to the DocuCongo cases,  similar  although  not  identical
      considerations apply and in any event we are even  further  away  from
      having direct tested evidence than in relation to the BIDS  cases.  It
      is not clear either to  what  extent  the  problems  in  some  of  the
      DocuCongo  cases  stemmed  from  those  concerned  returning   without
      identity documents - something which would not arise in the context of
      UK removals.

88.   Another thing we have to  bear  in  mind  is  that  it  is  not  known
      precisely why any  of  the  individuals  concerned  in  the  BIDS  and
      DocuCongo dossiers, even assuming  their  accounts  were  found  after
      fuller examination to be true, fell foul of the  authorities.  Was  it
      simply because they were failed asylum seekers  or  was  it  something
      related to other matters  such  as  perceived  political  profiles  or
      failure to  perform  civic  obligations?  Was  it  because  they  were
      regarded as having a nationality of a country hostile to the DRC (e.g.
      Rwanda, Uganda) or a political or  military  profile  opposed  to  the
      regime? Certainly in some of the cases  mentioned  we  simply  do  not
      know. Mr Aziz`s response,  again  echoing  BIDS,  was  that  all  that
      matters in relation to AB and DE is that these were people whom the UK
      authorities had found not  to  have  any  asylum-related  problems  on
      return. However, in point of fact we have no evidence in  proper  form
      even to show that the individuals concerned had made claims for asylum
      and were not, for example, persons returning from a family or business
      visit. Furthermore, even assuming each had made claims for asylum  and
      been refused, the conclusions reached by UK  authorities  about  their
      asylum claims can only have been based on the evidence as furnished by
      those individuals; it cannot be assumed  those  concerned  necessarily
      gave  the  same  account  of  themselves  upon  return  to   the   DRC
      authorities.

89.   These shortcomings in the evidence presented  in  the  BIDS  materials
      lead us to seriously question their contention that there is a UK rate
      of detention of some 40% of all known DRC returnees over  a  two  year
      period. Of the figure of 38 removed between Jan  2002-March  2003,  we
      have not found satisfactory the evidence relating to  any  of  the  13
      persons mentioned as being returned on a charter flight in March  2002
      or the evidence relating to the two cases of AB and DE.  Put  bluntly,
      that means that  we  have  not  found  the  evidence  satisfactory  in
      relation to the claims made about any of the 38 mentioned.

90.   With reference to the BIDS materials and  a  recent  IAS  critique  of
      CIPU  reports  (Natasha  Carver  (ed)  2003,   Home   Office   Country
      Assessments: an Analysis, London IAS), Mr  Aziz  criticised  the  CIPU
      assessments as set out in the April  2003  and  October  2003  reports
      concluding that failed asylum seekers per se are not at risk. However,
      as Mr Buckley has rightly observed, several of those  criticisms  have
      no application to this case, since we do have the  Dutch  and  Belgian
      letters before us and it has not been suggested the evidence before us
      was selective. We are not in a position to know the  extent  to  which
      the CIPU assessments of the failed asylum seeker position  were  based
      on multiple sources. However, since its position  accurately  reflects
      the position taken in other major sources identified elsewhere in this
      determination, we see no valid reason for discounting it.

91.   That brings us to BIDS` argument that the Home Office  and  CIPU  view
      about failed asylum seekers would be  different  had  they  undertaken
      proper  inquiries  into  relevant  matters,  including  the   evidence
      relating to the March 2002 charter flight. It is not for  us  to  pass
      judgment on Home Office procedures in respect  of  removals.  However,
      insofar as the BIDS argument raises the general point that more active
      steps should have been taken by UK authorities to monitor returns,  we
      would concur with the point made in the Tribunal determination in  the
      case of S (Serbia and Montenegro - Kosovo) [2003] UKIAT 00031 that the
      Tribunal is bound by the principles set out  in  the  House  of  Lords
      judgment in Abdi and Gawe [1996] 1 WLR  298  regarding  disclosure  of
      evidence within accelerated  procedures.  There  is  no  duty  on  the
      Secretary of State to embark upon an investigation into  evidence  not
      in his hands for the preparation of country bulletins or  reports,  in
      order to assist appellants in making their cases.

92.   We note the reference in the BIDS letter to an  Amnesty  International
      (Netherlands) letter  to  the  Dutch  Government  dated  8  July  2003
      reporting intimidating  behaviour  from  security  services  following
      removals from Holland to Kinshasa by charter flight.  In  one  respect
      the accounts they mention do not support  BIDS`  contention  that  all
      asylum seekers are routinely detained on arrival  at  Kinshasa,  since
      those concerned mention no problems at the airport beyond being  asked
      to give their name and  address.  In  another  respect,  however,  the
      evidence does suggest that in these cases the security services  began
      within  a  few  days  systematically  and  repeatedly  visiting  these
      addresses in order to make inquiries.  As  such  it  does  raise  some
      concerns. However, we consider (as did the Tribunal in M 00051 at para
      11.13) that there would need to  be  much  more  substantial  evidence
      indicative that  this  type  of  harassment  was  routine,  before  it
      demonstrated a real risk of persecution or serious harm.  Furthermore,
      if this behaviour were routine, we would have expected that UNHCR  and
      European  governments  who  conduct  returns  would  have  made  known
      concerns about  it.  Clearly  the  Dutch  government  considered  this
      evidence but did not decide to change its policy in the light of it.

Risk Categories
  93. Our essential focus in this determination has been  on  the  issue  of
      failed asylum seekers.  However,  the  adjudicator  in  allowing  this
      appeal made reference to one further  risk  factor,  namely,  being  a
      woman with a very young child:  see  paragraph  22.  In  view  of  the
      analysis  set  out  in  M   and  in  preceding  paragraphs   of   this
      determination, we also have to  consider  whether  there  was  another
      possible risk category into which she would fall,  with  reference  to
      identification by the Tribunal in M  of  two definite risk  categories
      as follows:

        a) Nationality or perceived nationality  of  a  state  regarded  as
           hostile to the DRC (in particular those who have or are presumed
           to have Rwandan connections or are of Rwandan origin);
        b) having or being  perceived  to  have  a  military  or  political
           profile or background.

  94.  As  explained  earlier,  we  consider  that  M  00071  reached  sound
      conclusions and we adopt its conclusions in this respect  as  well  as
      others. We note that both the latest UNHCR  evidence  and  the  latest
      report of Dr Kennes lend further  support  to  the  identification  of
      these two categories. They also lend support to inclusion of  a  third
      category, being without travel documents, but this does not  arise  in
      the UK context for reasons already given.

  95.  We would also observe  that  both  UNHCR  and  Dr  Kennes  have  made
      reference in the past to other possible categories, including

being from rebel held areas;
being of a family of mixed ethnicity;
being of Tutsi origin or being perceived to be Tutsis.

However, since in our view the latest evidence is not clear-cut  in  respect
      of these additional categories and the Tribunal  has  not  found  that
      they are effective risk categories currently, we leave the  matter  to
      be more definitively decided as and when necessary in future  reported
      cases.

The claimant's particular circumstances
  96. We see no proper basis for the adjudicator's conclusion that merely by
      virtue of being a woman returning with a very young child the claimant
      would be at real risk of serious harm.  Even the Active Women  report,
      whose conclusions we have not accepted, only identifies being a  woman
      or returning with children as giving rise to differential treatment as
      a result of the authorities have already taken an adverse  view  in  a
      returnee. The sections dealing with women in the CIPU Assessments  for
      April and October 2003 note a number of problems  specific  to  women,
      including the fact that many suffer from domestic violence  and  rape,
      that women are relegated to a secondary role in society and  that  the
      law discriminates against women in many areas of life. However,  there
      is nothing to indicate that the authorities at  the  point  of  return
      target women (or women with very young children)  for  ill  treatment,
      nor indeed to indicate that there is a real risk of  serious  harm  to
      women returnees (with or without very young children) once  they  have
      passed through the airport procedures.


97.   That leaves the matter of the claimant's status as a member  of  UDPS.
      This  was  not  raised  by  the  Adjudicator,   but   still   requires
      examination. The question we have to answer is,  does  the  claimant's
      accepted background as a low- level  UDPS  member  place  her  in  the
      second risk category identified above - having or being  perceived  to
      have a military or political profile or background?

98.   In considering the UDPS dimension we bear in mind  that  the  Tribunal
       has considered this matter recently  in  L  [2003]  UKIAT  00058  and
       decided that it was not UDPS membership as such which  will  bring  a
       person  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,  but  UDPS
       membership allied with the belief on the part of the authorities that
       he or she is conspiring with the rebels in the Eastern  part  of  the
       country. It found  that  those  UDPS  members  at  risk  were  either
       prominent high level party officials and activists or members of  any
       level who take part in political demonstrations which  are  generally
       illegal and broken up by the authorities. In  so  doing  it  did  not
       follow the view reached by the Tribunal in Nibanga [2002] UKIAT 02369
       heard in April 2002.


99.   Since this case was decided we have the September 2003  report  of  Dr
      Kennes. Although he only deals in passing with  UDPS  members,  it  is
      clear from his  analysis  that  the  persons  involved  in  opposition
      parties of groupings who do face a real risk on return are  those  who
      have been identified as of adverse interest prior to their  departure.
      (His analysis does  not  address  the  separate  question  of  whether
      persons involved in UDPS activities sur plus may also fall within  the
      "political or military profile  or  background"  category,  but  since
      there was no evidence in this case that the claimant was  involved  in
      any sur plus UDPS activities, that is not a relevant question in  this
      case.) We also have the CIPU October 2003  Assessment.  It  highlights
      the difficulties the UDPS met in April  2002  when  its  members  were
      targeted for detention. It also mentions that in  2002  it  formed  an
      alliance with the ASD (Alliance to Save the Dialogue with Rwanda)  and
      the RCD-G (Congolese Rally for Democracy based in  Goma)  and  briefly
      considered taking up armed struggle. However, in September 2003  their
      leader returned from self-imposed exile in South Africa  in  order  to
      prepare the party for parliamentary and presidential elections due  to
      be held in 2005. This Assessment does not demonstrate, therefore, that
      the UDPS has continued to experience the same level of difficulties as
      they met in 2002.
 100. We remind ourselves that the UNHCR description  of  the  "military  or
      political profile or background" category does not draw a  distinction
      between high level and low level individuals. At the same  time  UNHCR
      does not suggest that merely being a member  of  an  opposition  party
      such as the UDPS suffices to place one in a risk category. Further, it
      does not state that persons falling into this category are necessarily
      at risk, only that they were "likely  to  be  at  risk  and  therefore
      deserved to receive particular and  careful  consideration".   In  our
      view, whilst this category admits of a broad definition, it  can  only
      apply (leaving aside  possible  sur  place  cases)  to  persons  whose
      activities on behalf of UDPS have brought themselves  to  the  adverse
      notice of the authorities beforehand: i.e. they must have  acquired  a
      certain profile in the eyes of the authorities before they left.


101.  How does this analysis  affect  the  position  of  the  claimant?  The
      Adjudicator's finding was that although the claimant was a  low  level
      member of UDPS, there was no credible evidence of serious  harm  being
      caused to her prior to her departure by virtue of her UDPS membership.
      We remind ourselves at this point that on her own account she had been
      a member of UDPS in Kinshasa since 1996 and had left the DRC  in  late
      2002. Thus on the Adjudicator's findings her UDPS membership  had  not
      caused her any difficulties for a period of several years.

 102. Even accepting therefore that the UNHCR risk category  of   actual  or
      perceived "military or political  profile  or  background"  should  be
      given a broad reading, we consider that the claimant in this case  had
      not shown that her low level UDPS activities over a five or  six  year
      period prior to leaving the DRC led her  into  difficulties  with  the
      authorities. We find further that upon return, they would not view her
      past UDPS membership, even if it became known, as a basis for treating
      her adversely.


103.  For the above reasons the appeal is allowed.



                               DR H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                           -----------------------
      30


