

                            PP (Visit  visa:   paper  or  oral?)  India
[2004] UKIAT 00128



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                              Date of Hearing: 24th May 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               7th June 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr S L Batiste (Vice President)
                       Miss B Mensah (Vice President)




                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Bombay
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
  1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, appeals with permission against the
     determination of an Adjudicator, Mr D M Page,  dismissing  her  appeal
     against the decision of the Respondent on 8th July 2003  refusing  her
     entry clearance as a visitor.  Before us today, she is represented  by
     Mr Patel of Jasvir Jutla & Co and the Respondent is represented by  Mr
     Saunders.  Both of them agree with the substance of the decision which
     we make.

  2. The Appellant made her application for a visit visa on 8th July  2003.
     She was, as we have said, refused:  the base of the refusal being  the
     same.   She  made  no  comment  at  the  time  of  the  refusal,   but
     subsequently representatives lodged an appeal on  her  behalf.   As  a
     result of that, the Entry Clearance Manager completed a form.  In  the
     course of completing the form he ticked  a  box  indicating  that  the
     "type of appeal" was to be "paper".  We do not know the basis on which
     that decision was made because the notice  of  appeal  which  she  was
     considering did not indicate whether a paper or oral evidence  hearing
     was sought.

  3. When the following matter  came  before  the  Adjudicator  there  were
     representations of various sorts from  Jasvir  Jutla  &  Co,  but  the
     Adjudicator gives no indication of having considered  the  process  by
     which she should determine the appeal.

  4. It is common ground before us that an Adjudicator's power to determine
     an appeal without a hearing is contained in Rule 45, which we  do  not
     need to set out.  It is clear  in  the  present  case  that  this  was
     neither an appeal where  all  parties  consented  to  a  determination
     without a hearing, nor one where the party outside the United  Kingdom
     was not represented.  The Adjudicator  needed  to  make  a  procedural
     decision.  There is no trace of him having made that decision.

  5. We are aware that there are in the system a number of cases in  which,
     following the removal of the fees regime for visitors,  introduced  by
     the 1999 Act, out-of-date forms have been used, with the  result  that
     an applicant who does not pay a fee is treated as a  person  who  also
     did not pay the higher fee and so is not entitled to an oral  hearing.
     That is entirely  incorrect.   In  all  visit  visas  it  is  for  the
     Adjudicator to decide  on  the  material  before  him,  including  any
     indication by the parties as to how  they  wished  the  appeal  to  be
     determined, whether to determine the appeal with or without a hearing.

  6. In the present case, it is said on the Appellant's behalf that  it  is
     essential for the sponsor's evidence to be heard.   That  evidence  is
     not before us.  In the circumstances, we must remit this appeal for  a
     fresh  consideration  by  an  Adjudicator  other  than  Mr  Page.   We
     emphasise that it will be for that Adjudicator to decide on the  basis
     of all the material before him, and having  regard  to  Rule  45,  the
     process of determining the appeal.  We would  also  wish  to  make  it
     clear that the new Adjudicator is not to consider the  conclusions  of
     Mr Page, which were made without any regard to what might be  said  on
     the Appellant's side of the case.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT




      -----------------------
      1


