
                                                 MA (Female draft evader)
                                           Eritrea CG [2004] UKIAT 00098 | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 11th April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                 04 May 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Mr A Steadman, instructed by White Ryland
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





  1. The Appellant, who was born on 12th March 1985 and is now nineteen, is
     a citizen of Eritrea.  The Secretary of State refused  her  claim  for
     asylum and gave directions for her removal on 7th  August  2002.   The
     Adjudicator, Miss G A Black, dismissed her appeal in  a  determination
     promulgated on 16th October 2003 but, following the refusal  of  leave
     to appeal to the IAT, Statutory Review was granted on the  basis  that
     there was an area of risk to the Appellant which the  Adjudicator  had
     not considered.

  2. The Appellant claimed to have left Eritrea in September 2001 when  she
     was required, as a sixteen year old,  to  report  for  her  compulsory
     military training.  She feared that she would be  made  to  fight,  to
     complete her military service and claimed also to be in  fear  because
     she had left Eritrea illegally.  At her appeal, she also alleged  that
     military service was against her religious  beliefs  as  a  Muslim,  a
     claim which the Adjudicator rejected as not credible.  The Adjudicator
     also rejected her claim to have been  persecuted  on  account  of  her
     father's involvement with the ELF;  he had been killed  when  she  was
     three.

  3. The Adjudicator rejected her claim that she had received  her  call-up
     papers when she was sixteen;  children were not  called  up  now  that
     there was a peace agreement between Eritrea  and  Ethiopia.   However,
     she said that the Appellant was now over eighteen and on her return to
     Eritrea would be required to  complete  her  military  training.   She
     said:

      "I treat the appellant as if she were to be seen  as  either  a  draft
      evader or required to complete her military service  upon  return.   I
      find that she has failed to establish a claim that her failure  to  do
      military service  would  amount  [to]  persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason."

  4. After rejecting the claim  that  the  Appellant  was  a  conscientious
     objector or that the fact that she would have to do  military  service
     itself  amounted  to  a  Convention  reason   for   persecution,   the
     Adjudicator said that a three-year prison term for failure to complete
     military service was not disproportionate.  Neither her failure to  do
     military service nor her objections to military  service  would  cause
     her to face a real risk of treatment contrary to the ECHR.

  5. Finally, the Adjudicator concluded that returning the Appellant  as  a
     single woman to the country where she had lived, established her  life
     and had been educated, where she had at least one  family  member  and
     would not be destitute or alone, would not contravene  her  Article  3
     rights.

  6. The nub of the Appellant's submissions to the Tribunal were  that  the
     Adjudicator, having found that the Appellant would be seen either as a
     draft evader or as someone required to do military  service,  did  not
     examine the background evidence as to how the former might be treated.
      We accept that the Adjudicator put the Appellant into one or other of
     two categories, and that it may not have been possible  to  know  into
     which category the Eritrean authorities would put her.   It  was  then
     necessary for the Adjudicator to examine both  of  the  possibilities.
     The Adjudicator did not do so but reached conclusions only relevant to
     someone who would be required to complete her  service  or  who  would
     simply face a prison sentence for her failure do  so.   But  there  is
     background material which calls for consideration as  to  how  someone
     who is  seen  as  a  draft  evader  is  in  practice  treated  by  the
     authorities, including those who exercise power or  control  over  the
     military service and punishment of draft evaders.  We have accordingly
     examined that material.

  7. The October 2003 CIPU Report says (5.53) that since the  beginning  of
     the border war in  1998,  more  than  six  percent  of  the  country's
     population had served in the armed forces, leading to severe  manpower
     shortages.  To overcome this, soldiers  had  served  in  local  public
     works programmes while awaiting demobilisation.  Soldiers have however
     been checking on young men and women who have evaded  the  draft.   In
     2002, as in 2001, military police had been deployed at roadblocks  and
     in sweeps and searches to find deserters and draft evaders and  detain
     them.  "There was a general public  perception  that  these  round-ups
     were directed particularly at female draftees."  (5.57)  There was  no
     exception available for religious or conscientious objection, nor  any
     alternative form of service; the punishment for  refusing  to  perform
     national service was a maximum of three year's imprisonment.

  8. Paragraph 5.63 referred to the pressures put on young people to fulfil
     their national service:

           "The University of Asmara refused diplomas to students  who  had
           completed their studies unless  they  undertook  their  national
           service; additionally new graduates were occasionally  pressured
           to work for government bodies.  The  army  resorted  to  various
           forms  of  extreme  physical  punishment  to  force   objectors,
           including  some  Jehovah's  Witnesses,  to  undertake   military
           service.  The US State Department 2003  report  notes  that  the
           police subjected deserters and draft evades to various  military
           disciplinary actions that included  prolonged  sun  exposure  in
           temperatures of up to 113 degrees Fahrenheit or the tying of the
           hands and feet for extended periods of time."

  9. The last passage was  strongly  relied  on  by  Mr  Steadman  for  the
     Appellant.  It appeared in a number  of  background  reports.   It  is
     sourced via the US State Department Report to an Amnesty International
     Report of 2003.

 10. The CIPU Report later refers  to  torture  specifically.   Torture  is
     prohibited by the Constitution but the USSD reports many observers  as
     believing that the police at least occasionally resort to torture  and
     physical beatings of prisoners particularly during interrogations. The
     CIPU Report (6.9) records that the  2002  UN  fact-finding  delegation
     found much disagreement  about  the  prevalence  of  torture;  western
     embassies said that they were not aware of its routine  use  and  were
     clear that its use was not systematic, whilst  recognising  that  they
     would not be told if it did happen.  It was thought possible  that  it
     was used in particular circumstances such as against an Eritrean Jihad
     group. Others, including Amnesty International and Dr Gilkes, believed
     that its use was prevalent.  The latter could not comment on the scale
     of its use but noted that there were several reports  of  its  use  in
     Asab and of beatings in the  military  and  in  prison.   CIPU  (6.12)
     refers to Amnesty International's attempts to research  the  issue  of
     torture in Eritrea and to the disturbing reports which it has received
     from army deserters about two forms of torture both  practised  during
     the Menghistu regime, one of which, tying, is specifically  identified
     as penalty given for going AWOL and other misdemeanours.

 11. Women between 18 and 40 are required to perform national service  but,
     although women were involved in the fighting with Ethiopia in 1998 and
     1999, during that year women began to be  re-assigned  away  from  the
     front line to other duties.

 12. This re-assignment needs to be  seen  in  the  light  of  the  end  of
     hostilities between Eritrea and Ethiopia, which  the  Adjudicator  set
     out (paragraph 20) as follows:

           "20.   Relations  with  Ethiopia  which  were   good   following
                 independence in 1993 deteriorated in 1997 as  disagreements
                 arose.  Fighting erupted in May 1998 in the disputed border
                 area around Badme and spread in June 1998 with  both  sides
                 carrying  out  air  raids  against  towns  in  each  others
                 territory.  A ceasefire in aerial war fare  was  agreed  in
                 June 1998 and there was a lull in fighting  until  February
                 1999.  There were clashes between  Eritrean  and  Ethiopian
                 troops throughout the late 1990's and early 2000.  In April
                 2002 delegations from Ethiopia and Eritrea agreed to attend
                 the Organisation of African  Unity  Peace  Plans  Sponsored
                 Talks in Algeria although those talks ultimately collapsed.
                  In May 2000 hostilities resumed with Ethiopia launching  a
                 major offensive  and  these  continued  into  mid-June  but
                 following extensive negotiations both sides expressed their
                 readiness to accept the AOU ceasefire agreement and finally
                 on 19th June 2000 the agreement was signed.  This  provided
                 for an immediate ceasefire  and  the  deployment  of  a  UN
                 Peacekeeping Force in a buffer zone inside Eritrea.  On  12
                 December 2000 in Algiers  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  signed  a
                 comprehensive peace agreement ending the border conflict."

 13. Other reports paint a not very dissimilar picture although varying  in
     emphasis.  The US State Department Report on  Human  Rights  Practices
     2003, of 25th February 2004,  referred  to  the  use  of  torture  and
     beatings of prisoners and to the severe mistreatment of deserters  and
     draft evaders;  this included tying and prolonged sun exposure in high
     temperatures.  This is what the CIPU Report draws on.  Although deadly
     force was authorised against those fleeing during searches  for  draft
     evaders and deserters, there were no reports of such deaths in 2003.

 14. The Report also referred to 220 Eritreans who had been  deported  from
     Malta in late 2002 and who were believed to have fled Eritrea to avoid
     military service.  They were detained upon arrival and held in  secret
     locations, incommunicado and without charge.  There were reports  that
     some had tried to escape and had  been  killed.   Mr  Steadman  relied
     strongly on this as evidence of the risks to which the Appellant would
     be exposed.

 15. It referred to the ages of those liable to do national service  as  18
     to 45 for men and 18 to 27 for women.   This  differs  from  the  ages
     given for women in the CIPU Report (18 to  40).   But  the  Government
     does not issue exit visas to those who are  required  to  do  national
     service though the Report states that during 2003  efforts  to  detain
     women evaders and deserters decreased.  It  noted  some  reports  that
     those drafted were subject to sexual harassment.   It  continued:  "In
     2002, most  women  in  the  national  service  were  scheduled  to  be
     demobilized;  however, many were still  serving  at  year's  end.   In
     addition, hundreds were required to  continue  serving  in  government
     ministries."  Amnesty International refers to the announcement of that
     demobilization.  A UN Report of the position in  May  2003  said  that
     demobilization was still awaited.

 16. The UNHCR "Position on  the  Return  of  Rejected  Asylum  Seekers  to
     Eritrea" dated 20th January 2004 took 18 to 40 as the  service  period
     for both men and women and said that no meaningful demobilization  had
     taken place.  It referred  to  the  reports  of  severe  ill-treatment
     against deserters and evaders, to  the  widespread  searches  and  the
     fatalities which have in the past resulted from resistance during such
     searches.  It  provided  further  information  about  those  who  were
     deported from Malta, some of whom were  not  asylum  seekers  at  all.
     They were detained without  the  detention  being  acknowledged;   but
     those over forty or with children had been released.   The  conditions
     of detention were congested, unsanitary and uncomfortable, leading  to
     disease and malnutrition, which had led to some deaths.  One had  been
     killed trying to escape.  There were reports of some  being  tortured.
     It drew upon the earlier US State Department Reports  and  an  Amnesty
     International Report for 2002 in this context, much as CIPU had  done.
     The Human Rights Watch Report of January  2004  referred  to  them  as
     refugees and said that they were still in detention incommunicado.

 17. It concluded that the human rights situation had deteriorated  in  the
     last  two  years,  that  the  deportees  from  Malta  may  have  faced
     persecution and that it could not be excluded  that  future  deportees
     would not face persecution.   Asylum  claims  should  receive  careful
     consideration and it recommended against the forced return  of  failed
     asylum seekers and in favour of them being  granted  another  form  of
     temporary protection.

 18. The Amnesty International Report  for  2002  referred  to  the  severe
     punishments for those caught evading  conscription  including  torture
     and detention for hard labour followed by military service.

 19. We, like the Adjudicator do  not  consider  that  the  fact  that  the
     Appellant will be required to do  national  service  and  may  face  a
     maximum three year prison term for failing to answer her call up would
     amount to a breach of either  Convention  and  the  contrary  was  not
     argued.  The conditions in civilian prisons are not such as to lead to
     create a real risk of a breach of Article 3 or of  persecution.   CIPU
     describes  them  (5.48)  as  spartan  with  family   visits   but   no
     international monitoring.  There were no reported deaths from lack  of
     medical care, although it was thought that the police did occasionally
     resort to torture and beatings during interrogation.

 20. The real question is as to the  sort  of  treatment  which  she  would
     receive as someone who would be identified  as  a  draft  evader.  She
     would not fall into those categories who  refuse  to  undertake  their
     national service  for  religious  or  conscientious  reasons  such  as
     Jehovah's Witnesses, who face the harshest of treatment  in  order  to
     break their defiance of the regime's requirements. She would not be  a
     deserter from the frontline because she has not served and  women  are
     no longer required to serve there.  Nor in view of the state of peace,
     or at least the absence of active hostilities, would she  be  seen  as
     someone trying to evade her wartime duty.  Deserters in wartime, those
     who refuse to serve at  all,  who  resist  when  apprehended  are  all
     likelier to be the more harshly treated.  Women may serve for a lesser
     period, a decision not  to  use  them  on  the  front  line  has  been
     implemented and a decision to demobilize them has been taken  but  not
     apparently implemented.  They are required to do various forms of work
     for the Government.

 21. The reports do not differentiate between those  various  circumstances
     when referring  to  those  who  experience  treatment  which  breaches
     Article 3  or  is  persecutory.   The  reports  do  not  indicate  the
     frequency of occurrence of such treatment, whether it is  routine  for
     all or an infrequent occurrence arising when a more  serious  deserter
     was apprehended or someone with a conscientious objection  refused  to
     fight or work.  It would be surprising, in view of the need for labour
     and the extent of the call up, with attempts at evasion so  widespread
     that there are roadblocks, sweeps and searches commonly undertaken, if
     the serious treatment were not reserved for those  whose  conduct  was
     seen as the most serious or who were continuing to  refuse  to  serve.
     It might be random but that is unlikely to mean that a return would be
     in breach of either Convention.

 22. The Appellant would not be persecuted for  a  Convention  reason;  her
     claim to a religious objection has been properly rejected and there is
     no complaint which can be made about that.  There is no evidence  that
     her illegal exit and failure to respond to her call  up  papers  would
     lead her to have any political opinion imputed to her which would  put
     her at risk of persecution.  The issue is whether she would  be  at  a
     real risk of treatment which breached Article 3.

 23. The UNHCR recommendation for temporary protection while the  situation
     is reviewed in mid 2004 is weighty.  But the  material  which  is  the
     most troubling is that which concerns the forced return from Malta  of
     those who were of draft age, and were in part at least  failed  asylum
     seekers.  They appear to be  held  incommunicado,  without  charge  or
     visits in conditions which do not appear to be simply the spartan ones
     to which CIPU referred  for  civilian  prisons.   Although  the  UNHCR
     Report refers to "dwellings" where they are detained,  the  conditions
     which are described include forced labour, beatings,  torture,  and  a
     lack of medical care, food or sanitation leading  to  disease  and  in
     some cases death.  These conditions are  quite  likely  to  involve  a
     breach of Article 3.  Because this evidence relates to the  experience
     of those who were actually returned,  significant  weight  has  to  be
     given to it.  We do not know all of their circumstances, why they left
     Eritrea and what measures were taken to prepare their return with  the
     Eritrean authorities.  The evidence is credible.  There  is  no  other
     evidence as to what happens to those who are returned  and  no  better
     evidence as to what happened to those returned from Malta.

 24. At present it appears to us from that evidence that there  is  a  real
     risk that the Appellant would be subjected to the  same  treatment  as
     those deported from Malta and that her rights under Article 3 would be
     breached.  That position may change with  the  UNHCR  review  or  with
     other evidence as to how someone in  the  position  of  the  Appellant
     would be treated on return, or other evidence as to  the  position  of
     those deported from Malta.

 25. Accordingly her appeal against the refusal of asylum is dismissed  and
     her appeal in relation to human rights is allowed.







                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT


