
Heard at Field House | | | |
|On 18 May 2004             |        |MD (good reasons to         |
|                           |        |consider) Pakistan [2004]   |
|                           |        |UKIAT 00197                 |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|...........16/07/2004...........                                  |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins                                                      |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|HH Judge G Risius CB                                              |
|(Vice President)                                                  |
|Mr D J Parkes                                                     |
|(Acting Vice President)                                           |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Before us the Respondent was represented by Mr  A  Hutton,  a  Senior  Home
Office Presenting Officer.  The  Appellant  did  not  appear  and  was  not
represented.

The papers show that notice of hearing was sent to  the  Appellant  at  his
home address in Leeds and to his solicitors, Maher & Co of Harrow, by first
class post on 30 October 2003.  This is good service in  law  but  on  this
occasion we asked the usher to contact the solicitors' offices  to  see  if
there was any explanation for their not attending.  There was.   The  usher
was told that the office had been damaged by fire and many papers had  been
destroyed.  Additionally members of staff handling immigration matters  had
left.  Since the hearing we have received  a  letter  from  the  solicitors
confirming all this.  The point is that the  solicitors  did  not  actually
know about the hearing.  Given the nature of the  criticisms  made  in  the
grounds of appeal we decided to carry on in their absence.

The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 23 August  1959  so
is now 44 years old.  He appeals the  decision  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  M
Davies, who in a determination promulgated on 3  July  2003  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  that  he
was not entitled to refugee status and that removing him  from  the  United
Kingdom was not contrary to his rights under  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights.

Although the grounds of appeal extend to  11  paragraphs  they  essentially
make two points.  In part they complain about the  Adjudicator's  attitude.
They suggest he was impatient and inattentive to the case before  him.   We
attach no weight whatsoever to those criticisms.  There is  nothing  before
us to substantiate them and we find them somewhat unattractive  coming,  as
they do, from a firm of solicitors whose own attention to the case did  not
extend to ensuring that the  Appellant  produced  a  witness  statement  in
accordance with directions.

The second point in the grounds of appeal  arises  from  the  Adjudicator's
decision to refuse to receive a witness statement on  the  morning  of  the
hearing.  The statement had not been served in accordance with  directions.
According to the  determination  the  Adjudicator  announced  that  he  was
considering determining the appeal under the provisions of Rule 45(1)(c) or
45(1)(ii) of the Immigration and Asylum (Procedure) Rules 2003.  We  assume
that the "Immigration and Asylum (Procedure) Rules 2003" is  an  inaccurate
description of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2003.
Rule 45(1)(c) provides:-

  "An Adjudicator ... may ... determine an appeal without a hearing if  ...
  (c) a party has failed to comply with a provision of these Rules  or  the
  direction of the Appellate Authority, and the Adjudicator ...is satisfied
  that in all the circumstances, including the extent of  the  failure  and
  any reason for it, it is appropriate to determine the  appeal  without  a
  hearing;".

The reference to Rule 45(1)(ii) puzzles us.  There is no such Rule  in  the
Immigration and Asylum Appeals Procedure Rules 2003.

The Adjudicator says in paragraph 1 of his determination that the Appellant
has failed to comply with directions made on 4 February 2003, 2 April  2003
and 30 May 2003.  We note additionally that  the  application  was  refused
under paragraph 340 of HC 395 because the Appellant did not comply with the
requirement to attend for interview and, as indicated  above,  he  did  not
appear before us.

However the directions given on 4 February 2004  were  standard  directions
requiring the Appellant to complete a Reply.  The Appellant  did  not  mark
box A and B as directed but he did mark box C explaining that  he  was  not
ready to proceed and referring to a letter that he attached to  the  reply.
The directions given on 2 April 2003 were the standard directions requiring
a  witness  statement,  an  indexed  bundle,  a  skeleton  argument  and  a
chronology.  These were repeated in  directions  issued  on  30  May  2003.
There is a file note dated  16  June  2003  indicating  that  a  clerk  had
"chased" the Appellant for a bundle.

The Adjudicator was faced with an Appellant and representative who appeared
to be ready for a hearing.  The  Appellant  wanted  to  give  evidence  and
wanted to serve on the morning of the hearing  a  witness  statement.   The
Adjudicator should have, and should have shown in the determination that he
had, addressed his mind to the  requirements  of  paragraph  48(5)  of  the
Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.  This provides that:-


  "An Adjudicator or the Tribunal must not consider any evidence  which  is
  not filed or served in accordance with time limits set out in these Rules
  or directions given under Rule 38, unless satisfied that there  are  good
  reasons to do so."

The Adjudicator may well have  appreciated  that  the  Rule  prohibits  the
consideration of evidence served late but that prohibition  is  subject  to
the qualification "unless satisfied that there are good reasons to do  so".
There is nothing in the determination to suggest that the Adjudicator asked
if there were good reasons why he should receive the evidence.  This is not
the same as asking if there were good reasons why  the  evidence  had  been
served late.  We have to say that the grounds of appeal suggest to us  very
strongly that there were no good reasons  for  the  evidence  being  served
late.  If, as  is  suggested,  the  Appellant  had  difficulty  maintaining
contact with his solicitors, or them with him, then it is a difficulty that
could have been remedied by telephone  calls,  letters,  travelling,  using
local agents, or instructing a different firm.

Although it may be easy for an adjudicator, faced with an Appellant who has
failed to comply with directions and who has not  disclosed  his  case,  to
forget how important his decision may  be  it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to
remember  his  duty.   Rule  4  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum   Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 2003 provides "The overriding objective of these Rules is
to secure the just, timely and effective disposal of appeals".  In  a  case
considering the proper application of paragraph 45(2)  of  the  Immigration
Asylum and Appeals (Procedure) Rules  2003,  Muhammad  (01/TH/01223)  Mr  J
Barnes, Vice President, said:-

  "...  Adjudicators should be conscious that  part  of  their  over-riding
  duty is to ensure a  just  disposal.   Partly  this  is  because  a  just
  disposal will be a final disposal; partly because  there  is  a  duty  on
  immigration  judiciary  to  give  the  most  anxious   consideration   to
  applications which involve a claim that their makers fear persecution for
  a Convention reason if returned to [their] own  country,  or,  since  the
  introduction of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  that  [they]  will  suffer
  inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to Article 3."

The Procedure Rules provide  for  the  oral  hearing  of  an  appeal.   The
Appellant wanted to give evidence and produced a witness statement,  albeit
late.  Adjudicators have a duty to apply the most anxious scrutiny and  the
high standards of fairness to the Appellant's case.

One of the problems of the late disclosure of evidence is that it can cause
unfairness to the Secretary of State who is expected to respond to  a  case
that he has not considered.  This does not mean  that  it  will  always  be
right to exclude evidence that is served late.  Often the late  service  of
evidence will not really cause any difficulty to the  other  side,  usually
the Secretary of State.  Often a witness statement  simply  repeats  points
that have been made previously but puts them into a better order  or  makes
points that might be dealt with better in cross-examination in  any  event.
Where this Adjudicator, in our view, was clearly wrong is that  he  decided
to exclude the evidence upon which the Appellant  wanted  to  rely  without
enquiring if there were any "good reasons" to admit the evidence, including
if admitting it would cause any unfair problems for the Secretary of State.


Faced with an application  of  this  kind  it  is  clear  to  us  that  the
Adjudicator should have reminded himself of the requirements of Rule  48(5)
and addressed his  mind  specifically  to  the  points  raised  there  and,
particularly if he decided to exclude the evidence, explained carefully why
he was not satisfied that there were good reasons to consider it.

We do not intend to make an  exclusive  list  of  "good  reasons"  but  the
adjudicator should have enquired into the significance of the evidence, the
reason for the late submission and any problems  that  late  service  would
cause to the other side.  "Good reasons"  must  mean  more  than  that  the
evidence is relevant.  Adjudicators never have to consider evidence that is
not relevant at all.  However "good reasons" could include  the  fact  that
the evidence is highly pertinent; that it could not  have  been  served  in
accordance with directions; that the other side had notice of the nature of
the evidence and that considering it causes no  unfair  difficulty  to  the
other side.

Further in deciding whether or not there were "good  reasons"  to  consider
the  evidence  the  Adjudicator  should  have  considered  if  any   unfair
difficulties to the Respondent could have been corrected by an Adjournment.
 If it could he should then have decided if adjourning the hearing was  the
appropriate course bearing in mind the restraints  on  adjourning  hearings
provided by Rule 40 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules
2003 and the need to decide cases quickly.

We are very far from saying that a person who produces evidence other  than
in accordance with directions should automatically have  it  considered  or
have his appeal adjourned for the other side  to  consider  it.   The  just
consequence will sometimes be that the adjudicator must  not  consider  the
evidence that the party wants to adduce.  However remedying  a  problem  by
adjourning is something the Adjudicator should have considered and on  this
occasion this Adjudicator did not.

The Adjudicator had before him an appeal that was listed for  hearing.   He
had a represented Appellant and a representative from the  Respondent  who,
it seems, was ready to go ahead with the hearing.  The Procedure Rules show
what the Adjudicator should have done when faced  with  an  application  to
consider evidence that had not been produced in accordance with directions.
 The adjudicator was quite wrong to consider determining the appeal without
a hearing without first satisfying himself that there were no  good  reason
not to admit the statements or that the hearing could not justly  go  ahead
and should not be adjourned.

Although at paragraph 7 of his determination the  Adjudicator  purports  to
have considered the requirements of Rule 45(1)(c) and has concluded that it
"was appropriate to determine the appeal without a  hearing"  he  gives  no
sufficient explanation for that.

Most significantly the adjudicator gives no indication that the  Respondent
has been in any way prejudiced by the late production of the statement.  We
have not seen the statement that the Appellant wanted to  produce.   Before
us Mr Hutton had a copy.  He said that he did not see how the Secretary  of
State would have been prejudiced by the late production of  the  statement.
To borrow a phrase that used to appear in the commentary to  the  Rules  of
the Supreme Court, rules do not exist for the  sake  of  discipline.   Rule
45(1)(c) empowers the Appellate Authority to determine an appeal without  a
hearing but it will rarely be "appropriate" to do that where at  least  one
of the parties wants a hearing and there is no unfairness to the  other  in
letting a hearing go ahead.

With respect to the Adjudicator the approach he took on this  occasion  was
clearly wrong.  The Appellant wanted a  hearing  and  the  Adjudicator  has
given no proper reasons for his decision to determine the  case  without  a
hearing.

In the circumstances we allow the appeal to the extent that we direct  that
it be heard again by an Adjudicator other than Mr Mark Davies.




                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                              Vice President

                                                                 1 July 2004




