

FM ("Upgrade" appeal:  - Human rights unarguable) Serbia and Montenegro
[2004]
UKIAT 00309
                                                                         | |

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                          Date of Hearing: 20 September 2004
                                   Determination delivered orally at Hearing
                                     Date Determination notified: 25/11/2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr C P Mather (Vice President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Ms F Meyler of Refugee Legal Centre (London)
For the Respondent:          Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer

It is difficult to see that a grant of leave to remain (which is the
decision at the basis of an "upgrade" appeal) can raise any question of
human rights.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Serbia  and  Montenegro.   She  appeals
     against the decision of an Adjudicator, Mr G  D  Thompson,  dismissing
     her appeal against the decision of the Respondent on 24 November  2000
     refusing to grant her leave to remain and refusing  her  asylum.   She
     was granted limited leave to remain for a period of just under a year,
     expiring on 31 October 2001.

  2. Her appeal to the Adjudicator was accordingly under section  69(3)  of
     the 1999 Act.  That  is  the  section  which  enables  an  individual,
     refused asylum but granted leave to remain, to appeal  on  the  ground
     that requiring him (in this case her)  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
     after the time limited by the leave would be contrary to  the  Refugee
     Convention.  Because the decision was made after 2  October  2000,  it
     carries also a right of appeal under s 65  of  the  1999  Act  on  the
     ground that the decision breaches the Appellant's human  rights.   The
     Adjudicator decided that the Appellant was not entitled to be regarded
     as a refugee.  The appeal to us is on the basis that  the  Adjudicator
     failed to deal properly with the Appellant's human rights.

  3. As  has  been  readily  acknowledged  before  us  by  the  Appellant's
     representative, it is extremely difficult to see  that  the  grant  of
     leave to the Appellant is a decision which did breach or  was  capable
     of breaching her human rights.  The grant of leave which she was given
     protected her from removal for a  limited  period  and  in  fact  that
     limited period has been extended by the course of this  appeal  (which
     further protects her from removal while the appeal is pending).

  4. Mr Saville has acknowledged to us that if it is now proposed to remove
     the Appellant, she will be issued with removal directions  which  will
     themselves carry a right of appeal on human  rights  grounds  under  s
     82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act.

  5. The position as we see it is that it will be difficult  or  impossible
     for any individual to show that a grant of leave to  remain  infringes
     human rights.  It has to be remembered in all appeals under  the  1999
     Act that the grounds of appeal are strictly limited by the terms of ss
     69 and 65.  The position in this case is that grounds under neither of
     those sections can be successfully raised against the  decision  which
     was in fact made.

  6. We emphasise that our decision does not carry any judgement about  the
     viability of an appeal  by  the  Appellant  on  human  rights  grounds
     against any decision which may be made in the future.  But, so far  as
     the appeal against the decision of November 2000 is concerned, it must
     be and is dismissed.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
