
H-SS-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 29 March 2004           |        |MC (Ahmadi - IFA-           |
|                           |        |sufficiency of protection)  |
|                           |        |Pakistan [2004] UKIAT 00139 |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|10 June 2004                                                      |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Miss K Eshun - Chairman                                           |
|HH D Holden                                                       |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representations:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Babajee, Counsel instructed by  Thompson
                      & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  appeals  with  leave  of  the
    Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent made on 14  March  2002
    refusing him leave to enter and asylum.

2.    The Appellant left Pakistan on 15 January 2002 using a false  passport
    and arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 January 2002 and claimed asylum
    immediately.

3.    He claimed that he was an Ahmadi Muslim from Sialkot in Pakistan.   He
    faced societal discrimination and harassment as an Ahmadi.

4.    There was only  one  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  account  which  the
    Adjudicator regarded as implausible and that is the suggestion that  in
    the two incidents in September 2001 and shortly thereafter where  shots
    were  fired,  he  was  able  to  escape  without  being  injured.   The
    Adjudicator concluded that the allegation that shots were fired at  him
    was an embellishment, which the Appellant had added  in  an  effort  to
    bolster his claim.

5.    Apart from that, the  Adjudicator  accepted  the  Appellant  as  being
    credible.  He accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  an  Ahmadi  and  was
    subjected  to  harassment.   He  found  however,  that  the  number  of
    incidents with which he was involved over the period from 1993  to  his
    departure was fairly limited.  There appears to have been one  incident
    at college when he was beaten up and he claimed that the  police  would
    take no action.  In 1999 he was arrested by the  police  and  held  for
    three days.  He was threatened by Ghulam Haide in February 2000 and was
    subjected to a fairly minor assault in August 2000.  He was arrested in
    March 2001 and detained for twenty days during which time he was beaten
    on three or four occasions and then released on  payment  of  a  bribe.
    The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  during  that  period  the   Appellant
    continued to preach to non-Ahmadis.  There were then  the  two  further
    incidents, the first  of  which  was  on  1  September  2000  when  the
    Adjudicator accepted that he had further  trouble  with  Ghulam  Haide,
    that he was not assaulted in either of these incidents and was able  to
    escape to Daska where he was approached again a short time  later,  and
    that he felt he was at serious  risk  as  a  result  of  his  continued
    contacts with Ghulam Haide and his associates.  The  Adjudicator  noted
    that the Appellant did not report either of the last two  incidents  to
    the police and did not seek the protection  of  the  authorities.   The
    Adjudicator noted the Appellant's account that  the  only  incident  he
    reported to the police was when he was assaulted  during  his  time  at
    college.  On the other occasions in December 1999 and in March 2001 the
    Appellant said that the police arrested him.  However, the  Adjudicator
    was of the view that if the Appellant had been shot at  and  there  had
    been attempts to kill him as he claimed, he would have expected him  to
    report these to the authorities.

6.    In the light of his findings of fact, the Adjudicator found  that  the
    Appellant had a subjective  fear  of  persecution  in  Pakistan  for  a
    Convention reason, namely his religion.  He stated  that  it  has  long
    being settled that simply being an Ahmadi does not engage  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The objective evidence suggests that  there  are  a  large
    number of Ahmadis in Pakistan and that many of them are  able  to  live
    peacefully without encountering the difficulties, which  the  Appellant
    claims to have encountered.

7.    The Adjudicator accepted that if returned to  Pakistan  the  Appellant
    would continue to preach no matter how dangerous  the  consequences  of
    that action  may  be.   Counsel  for  the  Appellant  referred  to  the
    Adjudicator to the case of Iftikhar.  The Adjudicator  found  that  the
    Appellant in this case was in a different position from  the  Appellant
    in Iftikhar.  In Iftikhar the Appellant was on a daily basis  subjected
    to harassment and a degree of physical violence including being spat at
    and stones being thrown at him, and he and his family were subjected to
    the most appalling treatment.  His house was attacked and burnt down on
    at least one if not two occasions.  He  found  that  the  treatment  to
    which this Appellant had been subjected was not as serious and did  not
    think that this case could be compared with that of  the  Appellant  in
    Iftikhar.

8.    The Adjudicator then looked at whether the  Appellant  could  relocate
    within Pakistan.  The evidence was that following  the  incident  on  1
    September 2001 he moved to Daska, which is  only  about  fifteen  miles
    from his home village.  He then went to Shadra and from there to Lahore
    where he stayed with a friend of his father's and  during  this  period
    was not traced by Khatme Nabuwat.   The  Appellant  had  said  in  oral
    evidence that he could not go to Rabwah as it was not safe  to  do  so.
    The Adjudicator looked at the Tribunal decisions in Mansoor  Ahmed  and
    Mahmood Ali Mirza in which the  Tribunal  had  reviewed  the  objective
    evidence in detail and had come to the conclusion,  not  only  that  it
    would be safe for the Appellants in those cases to relocate to  Rabwah,
    but that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  them  to  do  so.   Having
    considered the objective material that was before him, the  Adjudicator
    found that being a single young  man,  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellant could not relocate to  Rabwah.   If  he  wished  to  continue
    preaching then  he  could  do  so  without  there  being  a  reasonable
    likelihood that he would be ill-treated by members of Khatme Nabuwat.

9.    At the  hearing  Counsel  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which
    highlighted three areas where it was argued the Adjudicator erred.  The
    first was that the Adjudicator's conclusion that the shooting incidents
    were an embellishment, was  inconsistent  with  the  Adjudicator's  own
    overall favourable conclusions as to the Appellant's  credibility,  and
    with the background evidence of the extreme responses to  preaching  by
    fundamentalists  in  Pakistan.   The  second  was  in  respect  of  the
    Adjudicator's conclusion, that the Appellant had not sought  police  or
    state protection in any incident save the first and failed to  consider
    the Appellant's reasons as  to  why  he  failed  to  report  these  two
    subsequent incidents.   The  third  argument  was  in  respect  of  the
    Adjudicator's finding  that  the  Appellant  has  a  viable  option  of
    internal flight, particularly to Rabwah.

10.   With regard to the first two issues, the Tribunal took the  view  that
    whether or not the Appellant was shot at and escaped and whether or not
    he reported the incidents to the police, these matters did not  enhance
    the Appellant's claim.  This is because of  the  Adjudicator's  finding
    that the Appellant did have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his
    home area.  That was where those incidents occurred.

11.   Therefore the issue that we have to consider is whether the  Appellant
    has a viable internal flight option, in particular to Rabwah.

12.   The grounds of appeal which Counsel relied on said that the  Appellant
    would seek to adduce  further  evidence  not  previously  available  in
    relation to the activities of the fundamentalist  groups,  particularly
    Khatme Nabuwat, in Rabwah.  Counsel drew our attention  to  an  Amnesty
    International Report of May 2001.    The  report  stated  that  in  the
    Punjabi particularly, militant anti-Ahmadi bodies have sprung up.   The
    representative of a new Mujahideen Force which was formed in the summer
    of 2000, was quoted as saying that the  "Sipah  Khatam-e-Nabuttwat  has
    bee established to  block  the  illegal  activities  of  Ahmadis.   The
    government's unwillingness or inability  to  control  militant  Isamist
    groups targeting minorities was further evident in early 2000 when  the
    Resident Magistrate informed the Ahmadiyya  community  in  Rabwah  that
    "about 20  Afghanistan  trained  boys  belonging  to  different  Jihadi
    organisations had a meeting to start a campaign to assassinate Ahmadis.
     They boys had come to Rabwah to eliminate Ahmadis."

13.   Counsel also cited paragraph 6.68 of the  October  2003  CIPU  Report,
    which states that Ahmadis are often targets of  religious  intolerance,
    much of which is instigated by organised religious extremists.   Ahmadi
    leaders claim that militant Sunni Mullahs and their followers sometimes
    stage marches throughout the streets of Rabwah.  Backed  by  crowds  of
    100 to 200 persons, the Mullahs reportedly denounced Ahmadis and  their
    founder, a situation that sometimes  leads  to  violence.  The  Ahmadis
    claimed, that bullies generally are present during these  marches,  but
    do not intervene to prevent trouble.  That was about the only  evidence
    Counsel  could  rely  on  in  relation  to  the   activities   of   the
    fundamentalist groups in Rabwah.

14.   Ms Brown relied on the case of 198 A (Pakistan) in which the  Tribunal
    had rejected the notion that simply because an Ahmadi preaches,  he  is
    at risk of serious harm.  In response Counsel relied  on  the  Tribunal
    decision of Razzaq heard on 20 December 2001 in which the Tribunal were
    not persuaded, in the light of the objective evidence before them, that
    it was likely that Rabwah was a safe city as  far  as  that  particular
    Appellant  was  concerned.   We  note  however,  that   the   objective
    information the Tribunal relied on  in  reading  its  conclusion  about
    Rabwah, covered the period 1984 to April 1996.   Furthermore,  although
    Razzaq had, like this appellant, also suffered attacks and  harassment,
    the Tribunal found that he was  not  just  an  ordinary  Ahmadi.    His
    father was a leading elder in the  Ahmadi  community,  which  does  not
    apply to our appellant.  Razzaq had reported the attacks on him to  the
    police but this appellant did not.  Razzaq had attempted to relocate on
    many occasions without success.  This appellant had problems  in  Dasha
    but not in Lahore.  In the circumstances we find that Razzaq cannot  be
    applied to this appellant.

15.  We have taken into consideration the  objective  evidence  that  a  new
    Mujahideen Force  was  established  in  2000  which  has  as  its  main
    objective, the elimination of Ahmadis. There was however  no  objective
    evidence to say that this force is actively pursuing its objective  and
    is succeeding.   The latest objective evidence  from  the  CIPU  merely
    indicates that militant Sunni Mullahs  and  their  followers  sometimes
    stage marches throughout the streets of Rabwah, which  sometimes  leads
    to violence.  This  suggests  to  us  that  the  threats  made  by  the
    Mujahideen Force has not materialised.  In the circumstances  we  agree
    with the Adjudicator that the incidents of violence in  Rabwah  against
    Ahmadis are not large scale or endemic and fall short of  demonstrating
    that the authorities there are generally unable or unwilling to  afford
    local Ahmadis effective protection.  We also rely on the case  of  198A
    (Pakistan) in which  the  Tribunal  rejected  the  notion  that  simply
    because an Ahmadi preaches he is likely to be at risk  of  persecution.
    We also rely on Mirza in which the Tribunal held that as  Rabwah  is  a
    city predominantly occupied by Ahmadis, all levels of  authority  would
    include many persons who are themselves of the Ahmadi faith,  including
    members of the police force.  In those circumstances we  find  that  it
    will  the  rare  case  in  which  an  Ahmadi  can  establish  that  the
    authorities  in  Rabwah  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  offer  him   a
    sufficiency of protection.

16.   Therefore, on the totality of the evidence we find that it  would  not
    be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate to Rabwah, and that
    he  would  be  afforded  a  sufficiency  of   protection   in   Rabwah.
    Accordingly we uphold the Adjudicator's determination and  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.





                                                                Miss K Eshun
                                                              Vice President
