
ar
            AB (return of Southern  Sudanese)  Sudan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
00260

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                            Date of Hearing : 10 August 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                           17 September 2004

                                   Before:

                        Miss K Eshun (Vice President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT

Representation:
For the appellant: Mr M. Blundell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the  respondent:  Miss  E  Rutherford,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Messrs
Blakemores


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, who is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department,
      appeals with permission against the determination of  an  Adjudicator,
      Ms S.B. Kirvan, sitting at Walsall, in  which  she  allowed  on  human
      rights grounds the respondent's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to give directions  for  the  respondent's  removal
      from the United Kingdom.

2.     Unfortunately,  when  permission  to  appeal  was  given,   incorrect
      headings and other information appeared on the  document  setting  out
      the reasons for decision.  It is, however, plain  from  those  reasons
      that the Vice President who granted  permission  had  before  him  the
      determination of Ms Kirvan and the Home Office grounds  of  appeal  in
      relation to it, and  that  he  accordingly  has  in  practice  granted
      permission  in  relation  to  that  determination.   Miss   Rutherford
      confirmed to the Tribunal that she could not seek to argue otherwise.

3.    The case before the Adjudicator  was  that  the  respondent  had  been
      persecuted in Sudan by reason of his political  opinion.   His  father
      had been an active member of the Sudan Liberation Movement  (SPLM) who
      had been detained on  three  occasions  and  then  left  to  join  the
      military wing of the movement, namely, the SPLA.   The  appellant  and
      his mother were then arrested and detained by  the  security  services
      for a month, during which time he was ill-treated and tortured.  After
      this he  left  Malakal  (in  the  south  of  Sudan)  and  studied  car
      mechanics. This appears  to  have  been  in  Omdurman,  Khartoum.  His
      studies lasted a year and a half but  he  was  then  called  back  his
      mother to Malakal.  She  said  she  was  under  observation  from  the
      security services.  The  appellant  accordingly  sent  his  mother  to
      Uganda. When they released she had gone the security  forces  arrested
      the appellant himself and again tortured him.  He was  released  after
      twenty days, having promised to cooperate with  the  authorities.   He
      returned to Omdurman and worked there for two months  before  security
      officers arrested him. Once more, he was tortured but released on  the
      basis that he would  cooperate.  The  appellant  thereupon  went  into
      hiding and escaped via Port Sudan to the  United  Kingdom.   Following
      his arrival here, the appellant said  that  the  he  had  been  active
      supporter of the SPLA in this country. He said he would be at risk  of
      being killed if he were now  returned  to  the  Sudan  (determination,
      paragraphs 6-9).

4.    At paragraph 23,  the  Adjudicator  stated  that  she  considered  the
      credibility of the appellant to be a 'key issue in this case'.

5.    It is manifest from paragraphs 23 to 30 of the determination that  the
      Adjudicator had serious issues with the appellant's  credibility.   At
      paragraph 23, she observed significant discrepancies  in  the  various
      statements  made  by  him,  which  she  did  not  consider  had   been
      satisfactorily explained (paragraph 24).   She  also  noted  that  the
      appellant 'said that the organisation he was supporting did not have a
      specific name'.

6.    At paragraph 25, the Adjudicator records that the appellant  told  her
      at first that he was in touch with his mother who was 'in the southern
      area' of Sudan. He then said that 'now she is in Uganda'. He said that
      he had meant to say 'Uganda'.  At paragraph 26, the Adjudicator  noted
      that at this point in  the  proceedings    the  appellant   was  being
      questioned by his own representative 'and  was  not  under  pressure'.
      The Adjudicator was 'not inclined to think he did not make a  mistake,
      but rather that he was speaking honestly in his answer  when  he  said
      she was in S.Sudan a month and a half ago'.

7.    Before the Adjudicator, a  letter  was  produced  in  support  of  the
      appellant by  someone  calling  himself  the  chairman  of  the  SPLM,
      Midlands Chapter. The Adjudicator describes this letter  at  paragraph
      21 of the determination. At paragraph 22 the Adjudicator records  that
      the appellant came to court with a witness, Mr Wai Dut,  who  was  not
      the writer of the letter but  who  gave  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.  Mr Dut said that he was 'political  affairs  secretary  of
      the SPLM/UK and Ireland' and that in June 1993 he  had  been  able  to
      meet the appellant's mother  at  a  refugee  camp  'near  the  Ugandan
      border'.

8.    At  paragraph  27,  the  Adjudicator  makes  it  plain  that  she  was
      unimpressed by the evidence of Mr Dut who 'did not offer any proof  of
      his role in the SPLM, or of his recent visit  to  Uganda,  except  his
      oral evidence.  He produced a SPLM membership card  which  expired  on
      4.2.2003. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that I  should  rely
      on his evidence and do not.'

9.    At paragraph 28 the Adjudicator found  that  the  appellant  'has  not
      been entirely honest in his oral evidence and  that  this  also  calls
      into question part of his account of his claimed  persecution  in  the
      Sudan'.   At  paragraph  29,  the  Adjudicator  considered  it  highly
      unlikely that the appellant would have been released three  times,  as
      he suggests, if he were of any interest to the  authorities,  when  on
      his own account he had nothing to tell them. 'This, coupled  with  the
      discrepancies between the self-completion  [sic]  and  the  less  than
      honest account of his mother's recent whereabouts lead me to find that
      the appellant has not satisfied me even to the lower standard of proof
      that he was detained as claimed'.

10.   As for the respondent's support for the SPLM in  the  United  Kingdom,
      the Adjudicator found at paragraph 30 of the determination  that  this
      must 'be based primarily on his activities in the UK which he says has
      involved  him  in  attending  demonstrations,  including  outside  the
      Sudanese  embassy  in  London  which  was  filmed  by   some   Embassy
      employees.' Apparently  referring  to  the  SPLM  letter  and  to  the
      evidence of Mr Dut, the Adjudicator went on to find that the  SPLM  in
      the United Kingdom 'must have their information about [the respondent]
      in Sudan primarily from him. The [respondent's]  witness  clamed  that
      they have their method of checking a person's credentials, and  it  is
      not possible for me to rely on this, on trust, unless the evidence has
      been made available for the hearing.'

11.   At paragraph 31,  the  Adjudicator  found  that,  in  any  event,  the
      respondent said that he had only helped his father  with  meetings  at
      home in the Sudan and that these  were  'secret  meetings  and  people
      attending would appear as if guests'. The respondent had 'also  helped
      his father collect and sell cattle  to  raise  funds  for  the  SPLA'.
      However, after his father had left their home in Sudan  in  1997,  the
      Adjudicator observed that 'it would seem that no  political  work  was
      done by the [respondent]  after  that,  in  Uganda'.  At  the  end  of
      paragraph 31, the Adjudicator accepted the respondent's account of his
      involvement: 'It  seems  straightforward  and  unembellished.  I  also
      accept the account given by [the respondent] of  his  activities  with
      the SPLM in the UK.'

12.   At paragraph 32, the Adjudicator noted that paragraphs 5.42  and  5.43
      of the CIPU Assessment on Sudan (April 2003) stated that 'Leaders  and
      high ranking members of opposition parties, who are already  known  to
      the security forces, may encounter problems with the  security  forces
      on return to Sudan'. It also states that there is no law, or  similar,
      in force issued to border guards stating that all  returning  Sudanese
      nationals who have been abroad  for  more  than  one  year  should  be
      arrested and detained for questioning.'

13.   At paragraph 33, the  Adjudicator  contrasted  that  information  with
      what was stated in a letter from the UNHCR  of  1  July  2002  to  the
      Refugee Legal Centre where there  is  'mention  of  an  administrative
      decree   [my  italics]  of   28.2.1993  issued  to  border  points  to
      authorise the arrest of all returning Sudanese who left after the 1989
      coup and have been away for  more  than  one  year.  Returning  asylum
      seekers are questioned at points of entry by security personnel. UNHCR
      is aware of some who have been subjected to detention without trial on
      return'.

14.   At paragraph 34, the Adjudicator noted that the same  letter  referred
      to 'particular dangers' for 'southern Sudanese  from  the  south'  who
      'are returned to Khartoum.  They  may  be  placed  in  camps  for  the
      internally displaced and will be likely to  be  compelled  to  contend
      with the  harsh  living  conditions  and  physical  insecurity'.   The
      Adjudicator was 'satisfied that the UNHCR letter should be taken  into
      account in my decision-making'.

15.   At paragraph 36, the Adjudicator concluded  that  the  respondent  had
      not established that he had suffered  persecution  by  reason  of  his
      political opinion, nor had he established that he  would  be  at  real
      risk of further persecution under the Refugee Convention, if returned.
       The Adjudicator accordingly dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds.
      No challenge to that decision has been made by the respondent.

16.   Notwithstanding her earlier findings,  the  Adjudicator  proceeded  at
      paragraphs 37 to 39 of  the  determination  to  allow  the  appeal  by
      reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.    Her reasons  are  contained  in
      paragraph 38:-

            '38.  Article 3 prohibits the use of  torture,  or  inhuman  or
                 degrading treatment. In accord  with  my  findings  on  the
                 Asylum claim I am not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
                 established that he is at risk of such treatment should  he
                 be returned on  the  basis  of  his  political  activities.
                 However, I also have to consider whether he may be at  risk
                 as a returned unsuccessful asylum seeker.  In  making  this
                 assessment I have followed the guidance given in the  UNHCR
                 letter of 1.7.02. I find that  he  is  very  likely  to  be
                 subject  to  investigation  by  the  security  services  on
                 arrival. The UNHCR are aware that some have  been  detained
                 without trial,  and  international  agencies  do  not  have
                 access to detainees, including the Red Cross.  In  addition
                 he would not only be a failed asylum seeker  but  also  one
                 who hailed  from  the  south  of  Sudan.  He  may  well  be
                 prevented from travelling to the south but placed in a camp
                 with harsh living conditions and  physical  insecurity.   I
                 also take into account that the appellant has  been  active
                 with the SPLM in the UK,  and  has  probably  come  to  the
                 attention of security forces in Sudan. I also  accept  that
                 the  appellant  does  have  a  family  background  of  SPLM
                 membership,  which  again  could  make  him  vulnerable  on
                 entry.'

17.   Given those  circumstances,  and  the  'human  rights  record  of  the
      government' the Adjudicator decided that the  appellant  would  be  at
      real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR if he were to
      be returned to Sudan.

18.   That finding is challenged by the Secretary of State  in  the  grounds
      of appeal.  In his submissions to the Tribunal  in  support  of  those
      grounds, Mr Blundell argued that the Adjudicator had erred in  law  in
      placing  weight  upon  the  assertion  that  there  was  in  force  an
      administrative decree whose effect was that those who  had  been  away
      from  the  Sudan  for  more  than  a  year  would  be   detained   and
      investigated.  The Adjudicator was wrong to prefer the evidence  (such
      as it is) of the UNHCR letter of 1 July  2002  to  that  in  the  CIPU
      Assessment of April 2003.   The Tribunal has in  fact  considered  the
      whole question of the so-called administrative decree in detail in  AA
      (Kreish ethnicity, Decree 4/B/307) [2004] UKIAT 00167.

19.   The Tribunal finds that the Adjudicator has materially  erred  in  law
      in placing undue weight upon the supposed  administrative  decree  and
      that this is one of a number of significant errors in paragraph 38  of
      her determination  which  led  her  at  paragraph  39  to  the  wholly
      unsustainable conclusion that (have dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum
      grounds, in  the   light  of  her  credibility  findings)  the  appeal
      nevertheless had to be allowed by reference to Article 3.
20.   The Tribunal at paragraph 10  of  AA  (Sudan)  sets  out  the  English
      version of the decree:-


             'It is hereby decided to detain any Sudanese person  returning
             from abroad who has left the Sudan  after  the  Revolution  of
             Salvation - and resided for abroad for a period of one year or
             more. He is to be  transferred  to  the  headquarters  of  the
             Public Security Department for investigation and for  carrying
             out the necessary security measures.'

21.   At  paragraph  11  of  its  determination,  the  Tribunal  noted  that
      investigations had failed to uncover  any  sign  that  such  a  decree
      existed and that, even if it had, it would have been superseded by the
      National Security Act 1999.  The Sudanese  lawyer  who  provided  this
      information went on to say that 'There was a general feeling that  the
      government of Sudan was encouraging refugees  to  come  home  as  this
      might work as good publicity for them abroad.'

22.   In addition, the Netherlands Embassy in Cairo is quoted  at  paragraph
      12 of the Tribunal determination as stating that there is no decree or
      regulation with a 4/B/307 reference and that 'Sudanese  nationals  who
      have been abroad for more than one year do  not  have  to  report  the
      Security Service, police or any other investigative  agency  in  Sudan
      for an interview. On the other hand, those who have  been  abroad  for
      more than one year do have to report to the tax authorities  in  Sudan
      on their return.'

23.   At paragraph 13, we  find  that  a  Danish  Fact  Finding  Report  was
      informed that 'Sudanese citizens in possession  of  a  valid  national
      passport could enter Sudan without any difficulty.  However,  if  they
      only had a temporary travel document they would  be  questioned  about
      their circumstances on arrival in Sudan. This applied  only  to  those
      returning voluntarily to Sudan. The source had  no  information  about
      conditions on entry  for  Sudanese  citizens  who  had  been  forcibly
      repatriated to Sudan'.  In the same passage it is noted that  'Germany
      had never  had  problems  with  the  deportation  of  rejected  asylum
      applicants to Khartoum, either on entry or following entry'.

24.   At paragraph 15 of its determination, the Tribunal found that  if  the
      decree 'ever existed it is not in force. If it or its aims were  being
      pursued with any sort of vigour at all, we cannot  envisage  that  the
      various embassies in Khartoum and Cairo would  be  holding  the  views
      that they do about what is actually happening to returnees in Sudan.'

25.   No evidence has been placed before the Tribunal in  the  present  case
      to call into question the conclusions of the Tribunal in AA (Sudan).

26.   Apart from the deficiencies  in  the  UNHCR  letter  of  1  July  2002
      concerning the  so-called  administrative  decree,  which  misled  the
      Adjudicator, paragraph 38 of her determination reveals that  she  made
      various other inferences in respect of that letter which are not borne
      out by what the letter actually says. In the third paragraph on page 2
      of the letter, Mr Mahr states that 'UNHCR is aware of some individuals
      who have been subjected to detention without trial on their return  to
      Sudan.  The  length  of  detention  is  uncertain  and   international
      agencies, including the ICRC, do not have access to detainees'.

27.   The Adjudicator  refers  to  this  passage  in  paragraph  38  of  her
      determination. It  is,  however,  plainly  incapable  of  constituting
      evidence that there is a real risk that anyone in the position of  the
      respondent would find himself in such detention.

28.   This is so, notwithstanding that the respondent  originated  from  the
      south of Sudan and is said to be of Nuba ethnicity.

29.   At paragraph 17 of the Tribunal's determination in AA  (Sudan)  it  is
      stated that 'We are further not aware of any  information  that  shows
      that the Sudanese  authorities  in  Khartoum  are  treating  returning
      southerners in such a way as to put them at real  risk  of  Article  3
      harm.'  The Adjudicator's finding in the present  case  runs  entirely
      counter to this. As the Adjudicator had herself observed, a  ceasefire
      between the Sudanese government and the SPLA has been in  force  since
      January 2002.  Miss Rutherford urged us to find that, on the objective
      evidence,  ceasefire  violations  are  still  taking  place  and  that
      accordingly, as  a  southerner,  the  respondent  could  find  himself
      subjected to more intense scrutiny on return.

30.   The most recent information regarding the ceasefire is to be found  at
      paragraph 6.132 to 6.134 of the CIPU Report of April 2004.  This notes
      that the ceasefire was extended once more in January 2004 by agreement
      between the government and the  SPLM/A.    Paragraph  6.134  is  worth
      quoting in full:

          '6.134    The IRIA reported that the  ceasefire  resulted  in  the
                 establishment of an international presence; a cessation  of
                 hostilities and reduction in violence;  humanitarian access
                 and aid; a check  on  the  alarming  decline  of  the  food
                 security situation in the SPLM/A controlled  areas  of  the
                 region.  A Deutsch Presse Agenteur article of January  2004
                 reported that there had been no major infringements of  the
                 ceasefire since the agreement was signed  in  January  2002
                 and that "Of 54 investigated alleged ceasefire allegations,
                 only 9 cases had been considered real violations".'

31.   The UNHCR letter of 1 July 2002  has  only  this  to  say  by  way  of
      specific comment on Southerners:

             'Further factors to be taken  into  account  are  the  dangers
             posed where Southern Sudanese who  hail  from  the  south  are
             returned to Khartoum. Such persons may be placed in camps  for
             the internally displaced and  would  likely  be  compelled  to
             contend with harsh living conditions and physical insecurity'.

32.   The Adjudicator at paragraph 38 paraphrases  the  last  part  of  this
      passage, with the additional comment that the respondent 'may well  be
      prevented from travelling to the South'.

33.   It is, however, difficult to see how any of this, even taken  together
      with other factors, could lead the Adjudicator to the conclusion  that
      there is a real risk of Article  3  violation  in  the  present  case.
      Even accepting that the respondent originated  from  a  place  in  the
      south of Sudan, on his own evidence he has lived, studied  and  worked
      for significant periods in Omdurman, outside  Khartoum.  There  is  no
      evidence that he would wish or need to make his way ot  the  south  of
      Sudan, if returned.  There is no evidence to show that he would be  at
      real risk of finding himself in a camp for displaced persons. Even  if
      he did, the UNHCR letter contains no assertion that  conditions  in  a
      camp for the  internally  displaced,  albeit  involving  harsh  living
      conditions and physical insecurity, would be such as to cross the high
      threshold required for Article 3.  The  respondent  is,  we  note,  an
      apparently able-bodied man of twenty-eight.

34.   We accept that  the  US  State  Department  Report  of  2003  contains
      references to continuing problems of various kinds  in  the  south  of
      Sudan, involving both the  Sudanese  government  and  the  SPLM.   The
      overall picture, however, is plainly one of  improvement.  Indeed,  at
      page 7 of the report (second full paragraph)  it  is  stated  that  in
      August 2003  President  Bashir  'promised  to  release  all  political
      detainees as part of peace talks with the rebel SPLM/A.  By  November,
      a number of political prisoners were released,  including  Hassan  Al-
      Turai, former Speaker of the National Assembly and Head  of  the  PNC.
      However, security forces detained a number of persons  after  Turabi's
      release, including  many  from  Darfur.   An  undetermined  number  of
      Darfurians remained in detention at year's end'.

35.   At the bottom of page 17 of the same report, it is stated  that  large
      numbers of southerners, as well as those  from  Darfur,  'continue  to
      live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area'. Reference is  also  made
      to the government's announced plans to upgrade conditions  in  certain
      camps for displaced persons. As we  have  already  observed,  however,
      there is no evidence to show that this respondent would need to  avail
      himself of such a camp or live in a squatter slum but, even if he did,
      Article 3 is not thereby invoked.

36.   At page 18 of the US State Department Report, we find  that  'improved
      security in the south due to the ceasefire has increased the  risk  of
      return of displaced populations into areas of origin  that  have  been
      severely affected by the war and lacking basic  services.  There  were
      reports that a number of refugees and  displaced  persons  voluntarily
      returned to the country during the  year,  particularly  to  the  Nuba
      Mountains region.'  Mr Blundell also drew the Tribunal's attention  to
      a passage at page 24 of the report, where,  unlike  2002,  there  were
      during 2003 no  reports  that  militia  raiders  supported  by  forces
      controlled by the government, systematically raided villages  in  Bahr
      El-Ghazal and Upper Nile.

37.   The position, then, is that neither the fact that the respondent  will
      be returned as a failed asylum seeker who has  been  absent  from  the
      Sudan for more than a year, nor the fact that he has  originated  from
      the south of that country, will be reasonably likely to result in  him
      being subjected to significant investigation (let alone detention)  by
      the immigration authorities at Khartoum Airport.

38.   Miss Rutherford sought to counter this conclusion by pointing  to  the
      fact that  the  Adjudicator  at  paragraph  38  of  the  determination
      accepted that the respondent 'does have a family  background  of  SPLM
      membership, which again could make  him  vulnerable  on  entry'.   The
      problem with this submission, however, is  that  the  Adjudicator  has
      made a specific finding that the activities of the respondent's father
      and the respondent himself in Sudan did not result in  the  respondent
      coming to the adverse attention of the Sudanese authorities.

39.   Finally, Miss Rutherford relied upon the finding  of  the  Adjudicator
      at paragraph 38 that the respondent 'had been active with the SPLM  in
      the UK, and this has probably come to the attention of security forces
      in the Sudan'.

  40. In the light of the Adjudicator's findings regarding this  issue  and,
      in particular, the evidence of Mr Yai Dut, to which  we  have  already
      referred, Mr Blundell was, the Tribunal finds, correct  to  categorise
      this purported finding at paragraph 38 as  entirely  unreasoned.   The
      Adjudicator gives no clue as to why she concluded that the  respondent
      'has probably come' to the attention of the Sudanese authorities. Miss
      Rutherford asked us to find that he has been captured on film  outside
      the Sudanese embassy in London.  It is, however,  extremely  difficult
      to see how a photograph of what would be an unknown face  in  a  crowd
      could be linked to the respondent, upon his return. As Brooke LJ  held
      in Danian [2000] IAR 96, it should be borne in mind that opportunistic
      post-flight activities will not necessarily  create  a  real  risk  of
      persecution in the claimant's home country, either because  they  will
      not come to the attention  of  the  authorities  of  that  country  or
      because of the opportunistic nature of such activities, which will  be
      apparent to all, including those authorities.

41.   In the  present  case,  the  inexorable  logic  of  the  Adjudicator's
      finding that the respondent had fabricated key parts of  his  account,
      including being detained by the Sudanese authorities, means  that  the
      respondent's alleged political activities in the United  Kingdom  must
      indeed be regarded as opportunistic.   In  the  circumstances,  cogent
      evidence is needed to show that  elements  of  the  Sudanese  security
      services in the English Midlands,  even  supposing  they  exist,  have
      found out that the respondent had been distributing leaflets on behalf
      of the SPLM.  There is no such evidence.

42.   In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that:

      (a)   there is no evidence before it to cast doubt upon the Tribunal's
           findings in AA (Sudan);


      (b)   there is no evidence to show that, at the present time, being  a
           person who originates from southern Sudan is such as to put  him
           or her at real risk on return to Khartoum;


      (c)   conditions in displaced persons  camps  and  squatter  slums  in
           Khartoum, for those originating from southern Sudan, are  not  a
           violation of Article 3 of the ECHR, and


      (d)   the UNHCR letter of 1 July 2002 is today  of  little  evidential
           value.

43.   For the  reasons  we  have  given,  the  Adjudicator  reached  legally
      unsustainable findings in relation to Article 3.

44.   This appeal is accordingly allowed.





                                            P.R. LANE

                                          VICE PRESIDENT

                    Approved for electronic promulgation










                           -----------------------
      1


