
AK and others (Tribunal Appeal- out of time) Bulgaria * [2004] UKIAT 00201
| |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                         Date of Hearing: 24th February 2004
                                Date Determination notified:  23rd June 2004

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                        Mr J Barnes (Vice President)
                       Mr R Chalkley (Vice President)

Between:
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and

                                                                  RESPONDENT
Appearances
For the Appellants:          Mr P Jorro, instructed by Gill & Co (AK)
                       Mr P Jorro, instructed by Elder Rahimi (SS)
                       Ms D O'Rawe, instructed by Nag & Co (KT)
For the Respondent:          Mr D Saville, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. We have before us three cases in each of which the Secretary of  State
     was granted  permission  to  appeal  against  a  determination  of  an
     Adjudicator, despite the fact that his application was late.

  2. Rule 18 of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules  2000,
     which were the Rules in force at the time that each of the  grants  of
     permission was purportedly made, reads as follows:

           "Leave to appeal
           18.-(1)     An appeal from the determination of  an  adjudicator
                 may be made only with the leave of the Tribunal.
                  (2)  An application for leave to appeal shall be made  no
                 later than 10 days, or in the case of an  application  made
                 from  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  28  days,  after  the
                 appellant has received written notice of the  determination
                 against which he wishes to appeal.
                  (3)  A time  limit  set  out  in  paragraph  (2)  may  be
                 extended by the Tribunal where it is satisfied that because
                 of special circumstances, it is just for the time limit  to
                 be extended.
                  (4)  An application for leave to appeal shall be made  by
                 serving upon the Tribunal the appropriate prescribed  form,
                 which shall-
                 (a)   be signed by the appellant or his representative (if
                 he has one);
                 (b)   be accompanied by the adjudicator's determination;
                 (c)   identify the alleged errors of fact or  law  in  the
                       adjudicator's determination which would have  made  a
                       material difference to the outcome, together with all
                       the grounds relied on for the appeal;  and
                 (d)   state whether a hearing of the appeal is desired.
              (5)      When an application for  leave  to  appeal  has  been
                 made, the Tribunal shall notify the other parties.
              (6)      The Tribunal shall not be required  to  consider  any
                 grounds other than those included in that application.
              (7)      Leave to appeal shall be granted only where-
                 (a)   the Tribunal is satisfied that the appeal would  have
                       a real prospect of success;  or
                 (b)   there is some other compelling reason why the  appeal
                       should be heard.
              (8)      An application for leave to appeal shall  be  decided
                 by a legally qualified member without a hearing.
              (9)      When an application for  leave  to  appeal  has  been
                 decided, written notice of the Tribunal's decision  on  the
                 application shall be sent to the parties and,  if  granted,
                 the grounds upon which the appellant may appeal.
              (10)     Where the application for leave to appeal is refused,
                 the notice referred to in paragraph (9) shall  include,  in
                 summary form, the reasons for the refusal.
              (11)     Subject to  section  77  [of  the  1999  Act],  where
                 evidence which was not  submitted  to  the  adjudicator  is
                 relied upon in an application  for  leave  to  appeal,  the
                 Tribunal shall not be required to consider that evidence in
                 deciding whether to grant leave to  appeal,  unless  it  is
                 satisfied that there were  good  reasons  why  it  was  not
                 submitted to the adjudicator."

AK

  3. The Claimant is a citizen of Bulgaria.  She appealed to an Adjudicator
     against a decision made on 14th April 2000 refusing her leave to enter
     and refusing her asylum.  The Secretary of State certified the  asylum
     claim under paragraph 5(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1993 Act (as amended).
      An Adjudicator, Mrs Clayton, dismissed the appeal and agreed with the
     certificate.  The effect of her agreement  with  the  certificate  was
     that there was no right of appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,
     but Mrs Clayton's determination was set aside by a Consent Order  made
     in proceedings for Judicial  Review.   The  matter  then  came  before
     another Adjudicator, Mrs P Monro.  She allowed the appeal  on  Refugee
     Convention grounds.  Because the date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision was before 2nd October 2000, there was no human rights appeal
     before her.

  4. The Secretary of State applied  to  the  Tribunal  for  permission  to
     appeal against Mrs Monro's decision.  The Secretary of State's  notice
     of appeal had, it is now conceded, two features which might  cause  it
     to be regard it as defective.  First, it  was  not  signed,  with  the
     effect that the statement of truth (which forms part of the prescribed
     form) was not completed.  Secondly, it was out  of  time.   It  should
     have been submitted by 24th April 2002, but was  not  submitted  until
     25th April.

  5. It appears that the delay and the defect of form  were  not,  at  that
     stage,  detected  either  administratively  or  judicially.   A   Vice
     President granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds,  which  he
     regarded as  clearly  arguable.   The  appeal  then  came  before  the
     Tribunal (Mr J Freeman, Vice President, sitting with Mr C A N Edinboro
     and Mr M G Taylor CBE).  The procedural points were taken before  that
     Tribunal.  So  far  as  the  time  point  was  concerned,  Mr  Freeman
     indicated that his practice when dealing with leave  applications  was
     merely to consider whether the application  "is  roughly  in  time  or
     not", and asserted that, if that was the case, a  Vice  President  who
     granted permission "should be deemed to  have  granted  the  necessary
     extension".

  6. On the point about formal compliance, the Tribunal cited the  decision
     of the Court of Appeal in Ravichandran & Jeyeanthan v SSHD [2000]  Imm
     AR 10, and the  substantial  re-enactment  of  Rule  38  of  the  1996
     Procedure Rules (which are the subject of reference in that  decision)
     by Rule 49 of the 2000 Procedure Rules.   An  applicant's  failure  to
     comply with the formal requirements of an  application  for  leave  to
     appeal  did  not  render  the  application  a  nullity  but   was   an
     irregularity capable of being cured by the Tribunal.  We should  point
     out that as Judge LJ (with whom the other members of the Court agreed)
     indicated, the decision whether to afford a cure is a  matter  of  the
     exercise of a discretion by the Tribunal;  and  we  should  note  also
     that Lord Woolf MR indicated  his  view  that,  in  the  case  of  the
     Appellant Ravichandran, "by taking part in the hearing of the  appeal,
     he had effectively impliedly waived the requirement".

  7. The Tribunal had also heard an argument that section 72(3) of the 1999
     Act was of some relevance.  Although the matter was not raised  before
     us, it is perhaps worth dealing with that point here.  Section  72  is
     within Part IV of the Act, headed "Appeals".  The  section  itself  is
     headed "Miscellaneous" and subsection 3 is in the following terms:

           "No appeal under this Part may be made in relation to a decision
           made on an application if-
                 (a)    the  application  was  required  to  be  made  in  a
                       prescribed form but was not made in that form;  or
                 (b)   the applicant was required to take  prescribed  steps
                       in relation to the application, or to take such steps
                       at a prescribed time or within a  prescribed  period,
                       but failed to do so."

  8. In our view, there is no doubt at all that "decision" in that  section
     refers to the initial decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  (or  an
     Immigration Officer  or  Entry  Clearance  Officer)  not  to  judicial
     decisions, which are apparently consistently  called  "determinations"
     in that Act.  The purpose of section 72(3) was to prevent  the  appeal
     system being invoked at all by  a  person  whose  application  to  the
     relevant Government Officer had been rejected because it was not  made
     in the proper form.

  9. The Tribunal's conclusion was, therefore, that time had been impliedly
     extended and that the formal defect could be and should be cured.   It
     thus went on to hear the Secretary of State's appeal substantively and
     allowed it.

 10. There was then an appeal to the Court of Appeal, which was settled  by
     consent, although the Court gave a considered judgment on the  process
     before it:  [2003] EWCA Civ 804.   The  Tribunal's  determination  was
     quashed and the appeal was remitted to the Tribunal:

           "... for reconsideration of the following questions:-


              (a)      whether the  Secretary  of  State  can  now  make  an
                 application for extension of time, and if so,
              (b)      whether he should be granted an extension of time  on
                 that application to pursue his appeal to the Tribunal  from
                 the determination of the  adjudicator  promulgated  on  8th
                 April 2002 and if such extension of time is granted, for  a
                 hearing of the appeal before a different Tribunal."

 11. It is thus that the appeal comes before us, the procedural  issue  now
     being limited to the question of time.

SS

 12. SS appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  12th
     April 2002 to give directions for his removal as an illegal entrant to
     Iraq, the country of which he is a national.  An Adjudicator, Mr  D  A
     Kinloch, allowed his appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.   The
     Secretary of State made an application for  leave  to  appeal  to  the
     Tribunal against that decision.  His application  was  one  day  late.
     The lateness was noticed by a member of the Tribunal's staff, who sent
     the Secretary of State a letter  in  form  TRIB06,  in  the  following
     terms:

           "I have to inform you that according to the evidence now  before
           the Tribunal,  the  application  for  leave  to  appeal  to  the
           Tribunal was not submitted by 31 October 2002, the required date
           in  accordance  with  the  Procedure  Rules.   Subject  to   any
           representations you may make within 7 days  of  the  receipt  of
           this notice, the case must therefore be regarded as closed."


      No further representations were made, and  a  Vice  President  granted
      leave to appeal, giving no indication that he  had  noticed  that  the
      application was out of time or that he was exercising  any  discretion
      in relation to time.

KT

 13. KT appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  24th
     April 2002 to direct his removal as an illegal entrant to  Sri  Lanka,
     the country of which he is a national.  His appeal  was  heard  by  an
     Adjudicator, Miss C M Bell, and allowed on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds.  The Secretary of State applied for leave to appeal, being in
     this case also one day late.  Again, the letter  in  form  TRIB06  was
     served on him. Again, no further representations were received  and  a
     Vice President granted leave to appeal, making  no  reference  to  any
     problem in relation to time.

The proceedings before the Tribunal

 14. These three appeals evidently raise similar procedural issues  and  we
     heard them together.  In AK's case, there was before  the  Tribunal  a
     formal written application for extension of  time.   That  application
     referred to the Court of Appeal's direction that the Tribunal consider
     the question whether such  an  application  could  now  be  made  and,
     assuming that that issue was to be decided in the Applicant's  favour,
     gave the following reasons for the extension of time:

           "The application was only one day out of time, this  due  solely
           to an administrative error on the part of  the  Home  Office  in
           respect of calculating the period allowed for  appealing.   Such
           delay is de minimis;


           With the benefit of hindsight, the Secretary of  State's  appeal
           must have had  strong  merit  in  that  the  Tribunal's  quashed
           determination could not be faulted by the Court on its  approach
           to the merits of the case;


           There is no prejudice to AK as a result of the delay."


 15. It was assumed, for the purposes of these appeals, that the  Secretary
     of State's submission in support of an extension of time in the  other
     two cases was or would be in similar terms.

 16. We heard oral argument from Mr Jorro, Ms O'Rawe and  Mr  Saville:   we
     are grateful to them  all  for  their  help.   During  the  course  of
     argument, reference was made to Akewushola v SSHD [1999] Imm AR 594, R
     v IAT ex parte Nelson [2001] Imm AR 76, R v IAT ex parte Mehta  [1976]
     Imm AR 38, and R v Bloomsbury and Marylebone  County  Court  ex  parte
     Villerwest Limited [1976] 1 WLR 362.

When can an application for extension of time be made?

 17. The first question we have to consider is  whether  the  Secretary  of
     State's application for an extension of time can  be  entertained  now
     and, more generally, what are the restrictions on the  time  at  which
     such an application can be made.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  things,
     particularly in a jurisdiction such as this one,  where  formal  steps
     have to be taken by the parties within very short  time  limits,  that
     any application for an extension is likely to  be  made,  if  at  all,
     after the expiry of  the  time  limit  in  question.   No  process  is
     envisaged, within Rule 18, for an application  for  the  extension  of
     time to be made separately from the application for  leave  to  appeal
     itself.  It is thus extremely likely, indeed virtually axiomatic, that
     the application for extension of time would be an accompaniment to  an
     application for permission to appeal which was out of  time.   It  has
     not been suggested to us that an application for extension of time can
     be made only when the time in question has not expired, and we know of
     no authority suggesting that that is the case.

 18. It appears to us, therefore, that an application for the extension  of
     time is not excluded by the fact that  the  original  time  limit  has
     already expired.  Is there, then, any other period outside which  such
     an application cannot be made?  Given  the  variety  of  reasons  that
     there may be for the original time  limit  having  been  exceeded,  it
     would be extremely dangerous, in the absence of any  clear  authority,
     to lay down any rigorous rule.  What is clear is that  the  later  the
     application is made, the better the reasons for the lateness will have
     to be.  In particular, a party who ignores an invitation  (whether  in
     form TRIB06 or not) to supply reasons supporting  an  application  for
     extension of time is extremely unlikely to be able to show at a  later
     date that he should be heard advancing such reasons.

What reasons can there be for extending time, and how should a  decision  on
this issue be made?

 19. It would of course be impossible to provide a list of  what  might  be
     "special circumstances" making it  just  for  the  time  limit  to  be
     extended.  We do, however, take the view that the strength of  grounds
     of appeal cannot by itself be a ground  for  extending  time.   If  it
     could, a person who had strong grounds of appeal would never  need  to
     comply with any time limits.  That is not to say that the strength  of
     the grounds is  always  irrelevant.   Where  there  is  some  "special
     circumstance" having some relevance to the  passage  of  time  or  the
     missing of deadlines, the strength of the grounds of  appeal  advanced
     will  be  clearly  relevant  in   deciding   whether,   in   all   the
     circumstances, it is right for time to be extended.

 20. The extension of time is an exercise of discretion by  the  member  of
     the Tribunal determining the issue.   It  is  difficult  to  see  that
     failing to notice that the  application  was  out  of  time  could  be
     regarded as exercising that discretion.  It is even more difficult  to
     see how (if a resultant grant of  leave  was  to  be  challenged)  the
     member  of  the  Tribunal  could  be  deemed  to  have  exercised  his
     discretion and done so on reasonable grounds.

What is the effect of a grant of leave on an out-of-time application?

 21. This is a matter of some difficulty, for two reasons.   The  first  is
     that the Tribunal has no inherent power to set aside its own decisions
     (Akewushola, Nelson).  The second is that a situation in which a final
     determination of the Tribunal (or perhaps of a higher Court on  appeal
     from the Tribunal) could be set aside, perhaps after many  months,  on
     the ground that the application for leave to appeal  to  the  Tribunal
     was out of time, would be, to say the least, very inconvenient.

 22. Bearing in mind the fact that time can be  extended  where  there  are
     special circumstances, the position must be that a grant of  leave  to
     appeal made on an out-of-time  application  is  one  which  is  merely
     irregular.  For that reason, if neither party takes  the  point  about
     time before the Tribunal issues  its  final  determination,  then  the
     irregularity is simply waived and it is too late for an  objection  to
     the Tribunal hearing the matter on the ground that the application was
     out of time.  The absence of objection by the Respondent to the appeal
     proceeding,  itself  constitutes   special   circumstances   for   the
     Tribunal's implicit extension of time.

 23. Where the Respondent does take the  point  about  time,  however,  the
     grant of leave to appeal can be seen as conditional  upon  time  being
     extended.  It is an indication of what the decision on the application
     would be if it were  in  time.   If  the  applicant  demonstrates  the
     existence of special  circumstances  and  persuades  the  Tribunal  to
     extend time, then the grant of leave to appeal  stands.   If,  on  the
     other hand,  there  are  no  special  circumstances  or  the  Tribunal
     declines to exercise its discretion  to  extend  time,  the  grant  of
     permission  is  ineffective.   But  the  Respondent  cannot  waive  an
     irregularity he may now nothing about.  So his mere inactivity  up  to
     the time of the Tribunal's final determination is unlikely of its  own
     to conclude this point against him.

Decisions on the cases before us

 24. We therefore proceed to consider whether time should  be  extended  in
     any of the appeals before us.  In AK, as we have indicated, there  has
     been a formal application for extension on grounds which we  have  set
     out above.  Mr Saville made vigorous submissions in support  of  those
     grounds.  He referred in particular  to  Mehta,  where  the  Court  of
     Appeal held, in a case where an application  was  late  because  of  a
     failure by the Applicant's solicitor, that the Tribunal was  wrong  in
     finding that the solicitors' failure  could  not  amount  to  "special
     circumstances", and wrong  in  declining  to  take  into  account  the
     strength of the grounds  of  appeal.   Mehta,  however,  was  a  quite
     exceptional case.  As the Court  held,  the  solicitors'  mistake  was
     "quite understandable".  In particular, although  the  solicitors  may
     have been ill-advised in not making an in-time application, they  were
     far from inactive.  The reason they did not make the  application  was
     that they were engaged in a one-sided  correspondence  with  the  Home
     Office:  one-sided because the Home Office  seems  to  have  found  it
     impossible to reply to their letters.  In other words, the solicitors'
     failure was not a pure failure or a mere failure,  it  was  a  failure
     which could be regarded as special circumstances.   It  is  true  that
     Lord Denning MR observed, in the course of his judgment that,  in  the
     Court of Appeal, "we never let a party suffer because  his  solicitors
     make a mistake and are a day or two late in giving notice  of  appeal.
     We always treat it as a ground for extending the time".  It  seems  to
     us, however, that, in a specialised jurisdiction,  where  the  parties
     (both  claimants  and  Government)  are  frequently   represented   by
     organisations who  have  the  conduct  of  immigration  appeals  as  a
     considerable part of their business, and where the clear intention  of
     the Statute is that matters should be pursued vigorously, any case  of
     failure to  observe  a  proper  time  limit  ought  to  be  considered
     separately on its merits.

 25. We entirely reject the Secretary of State's submission that one  day's
     lateness is to be regarded as de minimis.  The time limits in  appeals
     of this nature are very short.  Under the 2000  Procedure  Rules,  the
     time limit in an asylum appeal is ten  days  after  the  Adjudicator's
     determination.  A day's lateness extends the time  by  ten  per  cent.
     Ten per cent cannot be regarded as a minimal amount.

 26. The assertion that in AK's case the delay was due  to  "administrative
     error" adds virtually nothing to the case.  Nobody supposed  that  the
     delay was deliberate.  On the other hand, the Secretary of State  does
     not advance any explanation or excuse for the "error".

 27. As Mr Saville pointed out, the fact that the  Vice  President  thought
     that the grounds were arguable shows something of their strength, but,
     as we have indicated earlier, the strength of grounds cannot by itself
     be a reason for extending  time.   The  assertion  that  there  is  no
     prejudice to the Claimant as a result of the delay  is  simply  wrong.
     On the expiry of the time limit, the Claimant's position, as a  person
     whose appeal  had  been  allowed,  became  very  much  stronger.   The
     Adjudicator's determination could now  only  be  upset  if  time  were
     extended.  It clearly puts her at a disadvantage if the time limit  is
     essentially to be ignored.

 28. For the foregoing reasons, we have reached the view that there  is  no
     basis for the extension of time in this case.  The Secretary of  State
     has simply asserted that he made a mistake  in  calculating  the  time
     limit.  That, without more, is not special circumstances;  and without
     any special circumstances relating to the time limit itself, it  would
     not be right to take the strength of the grounds into account.

 29. In the cases of SS and KT, the Secretary of State's position is weaker
     still.  Not  only  has  there  been  no  formal  application  for  the
     extension of time, but the Secretary of State made no response to  the
     form TRIB06 when it was sent out.  If the ground for the extension  of
     time were the same  as  in  K's  case,  we  should  have  refused  the
     extension for the same reasons, and  for  an  additional  reason:   no
     explanation has been given for the failure to deal with the matter  at
     a much earlier stage.

 30. In all these cases, therefore, we  decide  that  there  is  no  appeal
     before the  Tribunal.   The  consequence  is  that  the  Adjudicators'
     determinations stand.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

