


|Heard at Field House       |        |IJ (Article 3 - Return -    |
|                           |        |Country and Individual      |
|                           |        |Circumstances) Somalia      |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00071          |
|On 11 March 2004           |        |                            |
|Prepared 11 March 2004     |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|19 April 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Mr P Rogers JP                                                    |
|Mr G H Getlevog                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation

For the Appellant:           Miss T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ghaffer of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  determination  of  an
    Adjudicator, Mrs S M Walker, who allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds against a decision made on 10 January 2003 issuing
    removal directions.  In this determination the Tribunal will  refer  to
    the respondent of this appeal as the applicant.

2.    The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom with  his  wife  and  two
    dependent children  on  8  November  2002.   They  had  travelled  from
    Ethiopia on false Kenyan passports.  The applicant claimed asylum on 11
    November 2002.

3.    The basis of his claim is that he is  a  member  of  the  Tunni  clan
    (Shangammas sub-clan) from the lower Shabelle region.  He  had  been  a
    farmer but his farm was taken over by the dominant Hawiye clan in 1991.
     He was forced to work for them.  In 1998  the  farm  was  attacked  by
    another rebel faction from Kismayo.  He managed to get  away  with  his
    family taking with him $6,000 which the outgoing Hawiye had left behind
    at the farm.  He moved to Bulo Hawo for four years while he  worked  in
    Luuq, Gedo region preparing  cattle  for  export  to  Kenya.   He  left
    because of problems with armed gangs of the Ogaden  region.   At  times
    there would be cross-fire between these Somali gangs and the  Ethiopian
    authorities.  The applicant fled to Garbaharry.  One  one  occasion  he
    was detained by one of the gangs and they insisted that he should  join
    them in fighting the Ethiopians.  He refused but after two days he  was
    released.   This  incident  made  him  decide  to  leave  Somalia.   He
    travelled to Ethiopia where he stayed with his wife's uncle.  An  agent
    arranged for their travel to this country.

4.    The Adjudicator commented that there were some aspects of the account
    which were surprising but she found that the  applicant  had  given  an
    essentially truthful account.  On the evidence before her she  was  not
    able to determine whether the  Tunni  were  a  minority  clan  but  she
    accepted that he was from that clan and that his farm  had  been  taken
    over.  His description of finding the money  strained  credibility  but
    the militias had a reputation for looting and  it  was  not  impossible
    that money was hoarded.  She found it difficult to accept that  he  had
    been able to travel with the money and keep a substantial amount of  it
    for four years.  However, she found that  a  significant  part  of  his
    account was correct and that he did re-locate to Bula Hawa.   He  lived
    there for four years and was able to work.  The situation there led him
    to leave Somalia.  Life was not easy.  The  Adjudicator  accepted  that
    what motivated the applicant to leave was  his  detention  by  a  rebel
    group.  This was consistent with the background material which referred
    to the Al-Itihaad operating in Gedo.

5.    The Adjudicator said that although being of the Tunni clan  would  on
    the basis of the Operational Guidance probably bring him  within  those
    groups  of  asylum  seekers  deemed  to  be  likely  to   qualify   for
    international  protection,  she  had  to   look   at   his   individual
    circumstances.  He had relocated his family to what for them proved  to
    be a place where they did not suffer on  account  of  clan  membership.
    Such suffering as he incurred was because of the attempt to  force  him
    to join a rebel group.  This was not related to  clan  membership.   It
    was to  boost  the  ranks  of  the  rebels.   However  frightening  and
    unpleasant, this  did  not  constitute  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason.  On this basis the asylum appeal was dismissed.

6.    The Adjudicator went on to consider whether to return  the  applicant
    to Somalia would be a breach of Article 3.  The  situation  in  Somalia
    was extremely difficult and  there  must  be  a  likelihood  that  many
    returned asylum seekers would become displaced persons.  There was also
    a risk that the applicant and his family would  be  caught  up  in  the
    continuing conflict, lawlessness and  insecurity.   If  a  return  were
    contemplated, it would be to the  Gedo  area  or  the  lower  Shabelle.
    Although the information about the latter area in the CIPU  report  was
    very limited it did seem that the TNG may have some control over it.

7.    The Gedo region was relatively unstable.  The  Adjudicator  commented
    that it was accepted by the respondent that  there  were  currently  no
    flights to Mogadishu and the return of asylum  seekers  to  Somalia  at
    present seemed more of a theoretical concept than a  real  possibility.
    On the  evidence  available  and  looking  at  the  situation  of  this
    applicant and as a whole the Adjudicator found that to return  him  and
    his wife, particularly with two young children would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 3 because there must be a real  risk  that  they  would  suffer
    inhuman and degrading treatment.  The applicant's medical condition was
    one factor but not the only one which she weighed  in  looking  at  the
    impact of a return to Somalia at the  present  time.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds.

8.    In the grounds of appeal it is contended that the  Adjudicator  erred
    in law by failing to give adequate  reasons.   Having  found  that  the
    applicant  would  not  be  persecuted  for  a  Convention  reason,  the
    Adjudicator failed to explain what would lead to a breach of Article  3
    on return.  The Adjudicator had not identified any factors which  would
    put the applicant at greater risk than any other person in Somalia  nor
    had she explained how the general situation would itself breach Article
    3.  She had not addressed the Home Office refusal letter  which  stated
    that conditions of general lawlessness, poverty and lack  of  resources
    were not  sufficient  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  If the Adjudicator had not made these errors of  law,  she
    would not have allowed the appeal.

9.    Miss Hart adopted these grounds.   She  submitted  that  the  general
    situation in Somalia did not justify a finding that there  would  be  a
    breach of  Article  3.   The  applicant's  medical  condition  did  not
    approach the high threshold.  She  referred  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in N [2003] EWCA Civ 1369 .  Even when assessing the  risk  to
    the applicant in the area where  he  had  been  living  before  leaving
    Somalia she had referred to it as unpleasant and frightening.  This did
    not establish a risk of treatment which could be properly described  as
    inhuman or degrading.  Miss Hart referred to the Tribunal determination
    in J(Somalia) [2003] UKIAT 00147 and the Tribunal referred the  parties
    to the determination in W(Somalia) [2003] UKIAT 00111.

10.   Mr Ghaffer submitted that the Adjudicator had not just considered the
    general situation in Somalia but  the  applicant's  own  circumstances.
    She accepted that he was a member of the Tunni clan who  had  relocated
    within Somalia.  If he went back to that area there  was  a  continuing
    risk that he would again be targeted by the rebel groups.  He  referred
    to the report of Professor Lewis at B3-7 and to the US State Department
    report at C37 on the issue of internal flight.

11.   In W(Somalia) the Tribunal considered whether the security  situation
    in Somalia in general and in Mogadishu  in  particular  was  such  that
    returning failed asylum seekers generally to Somalia would be a  breach
    of Article 3.  The Tribunal concluded that although  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu was far from settled or satisfactory there were some signs of
    hope.  It concluded that the general security situation  was  not  such
    that it could properly be said that a  return  to  Mogadishu  would  by
    itself constitute a breach of Article 3.  In  J(Somalia)  the  Tribunal
    were dealing with whether the Tunni were a majority tribe.  It came  to
    the view that it was impossible to say that  membership  alone  of  the
    Tunni clan was sufficient without more to show a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return.  It also held that the Adjudicator was  entitled
    to conclude that the applicant in that case could relocate in safety to
    areas where there was effective local administration.


12.   There  is  no  challenge  to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  that  the
    applicant would not be at risk of persecution for a  Convention  reason
    in Bula Hawa.  The issue is whether she was entitled to  conclude  that
    there would be a risk of a breach of Article 3 on  return  to  Somalia.
    The factors relied upon by the Adjudicator were that the  situation  in
    Somalia was extremely difficult and that there  must  be  a  likelihood
    that many returned asylum seekers would become displaced  persons   She
    identified a risk that they  would  be  caught  up  in  the  continuing
    conflict and the general lawlessness and insecurity.  The situation  in
    both the lower  Shabelle  and  the  Gedo  region  were  unstable.   The
    applicant had a young family.  His medical condition was a matter to be
    taken into account.

13.   In so far as the  Adjudicator  based  her  decision  on  the  general
    situation on return to Somalia, the Tribunal are satisfied that she was
    wrong to find that those conditions would amount to a breach of Article
    3.  It would only  be  in  the  most  exceptional  cases  that  general
    conditions would amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  3.   The  fact  of
    lawlessness,  insecurity  and  instability  does  not  reach  the  high
    threshold required for a breach of Article 3.  The applicant's  medical
    condition is that he has been diagnosed with hypertensive disease, non-
    insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and obesity.  He is  on  medication
    to treat the blood pressure and diabetes.  In the light of the guidance
    of the Court of Appeal in N, the applicant's medical condition does not
    add anything of substance to the Article 3 claim.

14.   Mr Ghaffer argued that the Adjudicator had taken the applicant's  own
    circumstances into account and that at the heart of  her  determination
    was the risk to this applicant from rebel groups in Bula Hawa area.  On
    his own account the reason why he left Somalia was because he had  been
    detained for two days by such a group.  When he refused to join he  was
    released.  The Tribunal are not satisfied that even on the basis of his
    own account the applicant was subjected to persecution by this  action.
    We are not satisfied that there is any real risk of it recurring.   The
    applicant's  individual  circumstances  do  not  add  to  the  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3 on return.

15.   It follows that in the judgment of  the  Tribunal  the  Adjudicator's
    assessment of the risk of a breach of  Article  3  was  wrong  and  not
    properly  open  to  her  on  the  evidence.   On  the  basis   of   the
    Adjudicator's findings of fact set against the background evidence  the
    Tribunal is not satisfied that there  would  be  a  real  risk  of  the
    applicant being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3.

16.   Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.


                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT









