
H-WEC-V2

|                           |        | AA and NA (Concession on   |
|                           |        |DNA Testing - Bangladesh)   |
|                           |        |Bangladesh [2004] UKIAT     |
|                           |        |00180                       |
|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 17 June 2004            |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|........05th July 2004..........                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen (Vice-President)                                     |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Mr A P Richardson                                                 |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANTS                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA                                   |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellants appealed to the Tribunal with permission  against  the
    Determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C E Roberts, who  dismissed  their
    appeals against the Respondent's decision on 20 June 2000, refusing  to
    grant entry clearance.

2.    The hearing before us took place on 17 June 2004.   Mr  A  Bashir  of
    Bashir Consultancy appeared on behalf of  the  Appellants,  and  Mrs  L
    Prince appeared on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

3.    The Appellants are half-brothers who seek to join their father  Israk
    Ali as his  over-aged  dependant  relatives.   The  refusal  was  under
    paragraph 317 of HC 395.  In addition the matter was considered outside
    the Immigration Rules and the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  was
    maintained.

4.    In a clearly structured Determination the  Adjudicator  set  out  the
    relevant issues.  These were firstly the age of Amir Ali, secondly  the
    nature and impact of the 1989 Concession on DNA  testing,  and  thirdly
    the situation under the Immigration Rules.

5.    The first of these issues was relevant because  the  1989  Concession
    enables a person whose application for entry clearance was refused when
    that person was under 18 years of age to have their case given  special
    consideration on account of the fact that a number  of  cases  involved
    refusals of persons who were children at the time  when  there  was  no
    satisfactory evidence as to relationships but where  such  evidence  in
    the form of DNA evidence may now be available.   The  Adjudicator  gave
    careful consideration to the issue of the age of Amir Ali  since  there
    were discrepancies as to his  date  of  birth,  and  concluded  on  the
    evidence that she was not satisfied that his date of birth was  9  June
    1959 as claimed and therefore concluded  that  there  was  no  credible
    evidence before her to  show  on  balance  that  he  was  an  under-age
    applicant when he made his original application for entry clearance  in
    1974.  He therefore did not fall within the  Concession.   Nesar  Ali's
    date of birth was agreed to be 2 January 1967 and  therefore  his  case
    fell for consideration within the Concession.

6.    The Adjudicator went on to consider the circumstances  in  which  the
    Concession was to be applied, and concluded that as it was a policy  of
    special consideration that it was wholly unreasonable some  nine  years
    after the first time  when  its  application  had  been  considered  in
    relation to the Appellants to expect the Secretary of  State  again  to
    give  special  consideration  to  the  Appellants'  application.    She
    therefore did not go on to consider the evidence necessary to determine
    whether Nesar Ali's case fell within the provisions of  the  Guidelines
    since she  did  not  accept  that  she  was  empowered  to  review  the
    Respondent's decision or as she described it more properly, his lack of
    it, in this regard.

7.    Thereafter  she  went  on  to  consider  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    concluded that neither Appellant satisfied the  stringent  requirements
    of paragraph 317 of HC 395.

8.    The grounds of appeal expressly do not challenge the dismissal of the
    appeal under paragraph 317.  It is however contended that her  decision
    was unlawful and, as it was put to us by Mr  Bashir,  ultra  vires,  in
    deciding not to make findings.

9.    Mr Bashir's argument in his grounds which he amplified before  us  is
    that there was nothing in the wording of  the  Concession  to  indicate
    that the Secretary of State could or should not be expected to consider
    a subsequent application for consideration under the Concession.  It is
    also argued that the Secretary of State did consider the application as
    could be seen from paragraph 3.5  of  the  Explanatory  Statement,  but
    applied the wrong test in that he referred  to  "sufficient  compelling
    and compassionate circumstances" whereas the wording of the  Concession
    refers to  "compassionate  circumstances"  only.   The  government  had
    published a policy to which had not adhered when it was required to  so
    there was an error of law in not considering it.

10.   In her submissions Mrs Prince argued that the  Adjudicators  findings
    were open to her and it was unreasonable to  expect  the  Secretary  of
    State to reconsider on every occasion  when  a  fresh  application  was
    made.  It might be different  if  there  were  a  real  change  in  the
    circumstances and fresh evidence but their situation had not materially
    changed.  In any event the matter had been considered by the  Secretary
    of State at paragraph 3.5 of the Explanatory Statement, and Mrs  Prince
    accepted that there was an error in the terminology employed,  but  the
    matter had been considered.  If the Secretary of State did not have  to
    consider the matter then there could not be an error of law if he chose
    to do so.

11.   By way of reply Mr Bashir argued firstly that it was not  clear  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer had sent to the Secretary of State all  the
    relevant information to consider under the  Concession  and  there  was
    nothing to show the factor that had been taken into account.  There had
    been a significant change in the circumstances  over  the  years.   The
    land had been divided; the number of people concerned  had  risen  very
    significantly, and they were living at a very poor level.

12.   The Concession referred to is to be found in a statement made  by  Mr
    Hurd, the then Secretary of State for the Home Department, on  14  June
    1989.  In that he stated that he was prepared to consider  waiving  the
    requirements of the Rules in certain  circumstances.   He  went  on  to
    state that to be eligible for such consideration a re-applicant aged 18
    or over would have to show:

    (a)    that he was refused entry clearance as a child  on  relationship
         grounds;


    (b)    that DNA evidence establishes that he was, after all, related as
         claimed;


    (c)    that he is still wholly or mainly dependent on  his  Sponsor  in
         the United Kingdom; and


    (d)     that  there  are  compassionate  circumstances  in  his   case.
         Thereafter the Secretary of State went on to  set  out  particular
         aspects forming part of the circumstances of the case  that  would
         be relevant including the nature and degree of the dependency, the
         extent and nature of  the  compassionate  circumstances,  the  re-
         applicant's present age and marital status,  whether  other  close
         family members such as siblings were already settled in the United
         Kingdom and the lapse of time between the original application and
         re-application.  In considering the compassionate circumstances of
         the case the Secretary of State would  attach  greater  weight  to
         compassionate circumstances relating to the situation of  the  re-
         applicant abroad than he would to those relating to the  situation
         of his Sponsor in the United Kingdom.


13.   The appeal is concerned only with the issue of the Concession in this
    case.  There is no challenge to the Adjudicator's finding that Amir Ali
    had not been shown to be  an  under-age  applicant  when  he  made  his
    original application, and that therefore the Concession did  not  apply
    to him.

14.   We can see no indication that the relevant information was not passed
    on by the Entry Clearance Officer to the Secretary of  State  prior  to
    the issuing of  the  Explanatory  Statement  on  17  March  2003.   The
    evidence is clearly set out there in particular at paragraphs  3.2  and
    3.3 of that document.  It is also clear from  paragraph  3.5  that  the
    Secretary of State considered the applications outside the  Immigration
    Rules but was not satisfied that there were sufficient  compelling  and
    compassionate circumstances justifying him exercising discretion in the
    Appellants' favour.  It is in our view  sufficiently  clear  from  that
    that the Secretary of State, although he did not specifically state  as
    much, was considering these cases within the context of the Concession.
     It cannot therefore in our view properly be argued that he did not  do
    so, and if he did do so then we consider that that is clearly  arguable
    that he would have to take into account the relevant criteria  set  out
    in the Concession Statement of June 1989.  Should he choose not  to  do
    so, then that is a matter for the Secretary of State, but in this  case
    he clearly did do so and it is therefore appropriate for us to consider
    whether the consideration of these cases under the Concession or rather
    this case under the Concession can be said to be flawed.

15.   In this regard Mrs Prince  properly  accepted  that  the  terminology
    employed at paragraph 3.5 of the  Explanatory  Statement,  including  a
    requirement that the compassionate circumstances had to be "compelling"
    did not accord with the wording used in the Concession itself.  In that
    regard the consideration of this case under the Concession is  arguably
    flawed.  Although one should be wary  of  treating  the  wording  of  a
    Concession of this kind as a statutory language, it is  entirely  clear
    from our reading of the Concession that the  various  factors  set  out
    that have to be established in order to be eligible  for  consideration
    are in no sense alternatives but all have to be satisfied.  It is clear
    from paragraph 3.4 of the Explanatory Statement that the  Secretary  of
    State had concluded that  the  Appellants  were  not  mainly  dependent
    financially on the Sponsor.  The Adjudicator assessed the evidence  and
    concluded at paragraph 41 of her Determination that she agreed with the
    Secretary of State that the Appellants had not  shown  that  they  were
    mainly dependent financially on relatives in the United Kingdom.   This
    conclusion was not challenged in the grounds of appeal.  Accordingly it
    is clear in our view that the Secretary of  State  in  considering  the
    application of  the  Concession  to  this  case  clearly  came  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant did not come within it because he had not
    satisfied the dependency requirement of the Concession.  Although there
    is  an  arguable  flaw  in  his   assessment   of   the   compassionate
    circumstances, for the reasons that we have stated above,  we  consider
    that since these requirements all have to  be  satisfied,  that  it  is
    clear that this  particular  requirement  of  the  Concession  was  not
    satisfied and the Adjudicator agreed with that and her  conclusion  has
    not been  challenged.   The  only  appeal  before  us  relates  to  the
    situation of Nesar Ali under the Concession, and we conclude  that  his
    appeal for the reasons set out above is not made out.

16.   This appeal is dismissed.






                                                             D K Allen
                                                              Vice President









