
LSH
|Heard at Field House       |        |PA (Home office Policy_     |
|                           |        |Consideration of) Nigeria   |
|                           |        |[2004] UKIAT 00014          |
|On 20 January 2004         |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|Corrected transcript of decision given at hearing                 |
|                                                                  |
|Signed:           22.01.2004                                      |
|Issued:            05.02.2004                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Freeman (chairman)                                           |
|Mr D J Parkes (acting vice-president)                             |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |CLAIMANT                    |


Miss J Sigley for the Secretary of State
Miss N Braganza (counsel instructed by  D'Angibau Willmot, Bournemouth) for
the claimant

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   This is a Home Office appeal against the decision of an adjudicator,  Mr
   B Lloyd, sitting at Birmingham on 6 February 2003, allowing an appeal by
   a citizen of Nigeria against refusal of leave to remain on human  rights
   grounds. The claimant says he arrived in 1980.   The Home Office have no
   trace of him before 1986, when he agrees he last entered  this  country.
   We do not regard any difference there may  be  on  that  as  having  any
   substantial effect on the proper result of the case.

2. The next thing that happened was that  the  claimant  was  convicted  of
   handling stolen goods, and sentenced to 18 months imprisonment in  1988.
    In 1989 a deportation order was signed; but, owing to what can only  be
   regarded as gross incompetence on the  part  of  the  Home  Office,  not
   served before he was released.  We do have before  us  a  report  by  an
   immigration officer which relates some unsuccessful efforts to trace him
   after that, followed by further police interest  after  which  again  he
   "proved elusive".  No details are given of any  further  attempts  there
   may have been to trace him.

3. However, during that time, the claimant was not lying so  very  low.  He
   married in 1990,  apparently  in  his  own  name,  a  lady  called  Lola
   Akinisiku, whose name suggests that she was originally from Nigeria, but
   is a British citizen; and in 1991 they had a son called  Ben.   Each  of
   them has two other children in this country; but those do  not  form  an
   important part of the story, because Lola's sons are  grown-up  and  the
   claimant's children are teenaged and living  with  their  mothers.   Ben
   however, was found by the adjudicator  to  have  been  living  with  the
   claimant as his main carer from 1993 when he and Lola  split  up,  until
   2001 when the claimant was sent to prison again for 18 months, this time
   for claiming benefits under a false name.

4. That sentence was completed on 18 June 2002 following which the claimant
   remained in custody under immigration powers: eventually the Home Office
   served the 1989 deportation order on 28 June 2002.  That led to a notice
   of appeal from the claimant in the form of a one-stop  notice  dated  13
   August 2002.    The Home Office responded to that in two refusal letters
   dated 14 August, which was remarkably quick, and 25 September.  However,
   the claimant was released from immigration detention on 10 December 2002
   since when as the adjudicator found he,  Lola  and  Ben  have  all  been
   living together as a family.

5. At some point in the past, and, it seems from  what  Lola  said  to  the
   adjudicator, before they got back together, Ben was  placed  on  the  at
   risk register by the local authority.   The suggestion before  us  about
   the claimant was that this was because of  Lola's  psychiatric  problems
   and drug dependency.   However, we have seen the letter from Ben, before
   the adjudicator, in which he refers with considerable  understanding  to
   some minor episodes of what may be sympathetically  described  as  over-
   correction by the claimant; and we think it more likely  than  not  that
   those had something to do with his being placed on the at risk register.

6. Whatever the cause for that entry,  the  adjudicator  accepted  that  it
   would prevent Ben from being  removed  from  this  country  without  the
   consent of the local  authority.    The  adjudicator  received  no  help
   whatsoever from the Home Office by way of a presenting officer;  but  he
   made very careful findings of  fact  at  paragraphs  14  to  17  of  his
   decision and ended as follows:

   18.      I concluded the appellant has established a stable and enduring
         family life in the United Kingdom which focuses  in  particular  on
         his young son Ben who is presently aged 11.   I  believe  that  the
         relationship between the appellant  and  his  son  is  genuine  and
         developing one from which both parties have derived and will derive
         a large measure of personal support and security.   I  believe  the
         appellant  when  he  says  that  he  wishes  to  provide  the  best
         opportunity for his young  son  for  the  future  and  that  he  is
         prepared to do what he can to achieve that in  both  financial  and
         emotional terms.

   19.      I conclude the removal of the appellant to Nigeria will have  a
         devastating  interference  with  the  family  life  that  has  been
         established.   Although the decision of  the  respondent  taken  in
         this case indeed in accordance with the law.  It is  necessary  for
         me to decide  whether  such  interference  is  quite  necessary  in
         democratic society".  It  is  not  sufficient  that  it  is  merely
         desirable.  I am not satisfied that there is a pressing social need
         that gives rise to the interference in this  case  or  that  it  is
         necessary in the interests of protection of public order, health or
         morals.

7. At this point the adjudicator referred in particular to the decision  of
   the Court of Appeal in Amjad Mahmood [2001] INLR 1. He went on:


         Having regard to the findings that I have made on the circumstances
         of the appellant's family life or in particular of  his  young  son
         Ben and reminding myself also of the balancing exercise that  I  am
         required to conduct under Article 8, I come to the conclusion  that
         I must attach more weight to the rights of the appellant to  pursue
         a family  life.   I  have  regard  to  the  major  upheaval  indeed
         devastation that he would undoubtedly be caused if he were forcibly
         to be removed to Nigeria and also if his wife and  young  son  were
         forced as a consequence to leave their home environment  to  embark
         on the uneventful  task  of  building  a  completely  new  life  in
         Nigeria.  The appellant and his wife moreover would be  faced  with
         the prospect of uprooting a special needs child to a wholly unknown
         environment.  The "at risk" registration of Ben creates prohibition
         in itself but further the prospect  of  removal  of  the  appellant
         would frustrate the aims and ambitions of  the  appellant  and  his
         wife for their young son.


   The adjudicator accordingly allowed the appeal before him on  the  basis
   that the appellant's removal  would  be  disproportionate  in  terms  of
   Article 8(2) of the Human Rights Convention.

8. The Home Office appealed on various grounds: first, that the adjudicator
   had not properly applied the proportionality test.  As  the  passage  we
   have quoted makes reasonably clear the adjudicator did have in mind that
   this was a balancing exercise, and the aims laid down by  article  8(2).
   Subject to one other point, to which we shall come later, we do not  see
   anything in that ground.    The Home Office went  on  to  challenge  the
   adjudicator's findings as to Lola's problems, and the facilities for her
   and for Ben in Nigeria, as being speculative.   There was evidence about
   Ben's problems before him  from  two  speech  and  language  therapists.
   There is then a challenge as to whether there was any  evidential  basis
   for the "at risk" register point.

9. Ms Sigley realistically did not suggest  before  us  that  the  claimant
   after all this time should now be required to return to Nigeria to apply
   for a family reunion visa from there.  She put it as a  straight  choice
   between whether he should be allowed to stay in this country; or whether
   Lola and Ben could reasonably be expected  to  join  him  on  return  to
   Nigeria.  There is a further point which she raised before us  which  is
   the one we referred to earlier as to whether the adjudicator should have
   upheld the Home Office decision in terms of the judgment of the Court of
   Appeal in Blessing Edore [2003] EWCA Civ 716   as  within  the  possible
   range of decisions open to them. She  made  clear  of  course  that  the
   adjudicator could not have been expected to take account  of  that  case
   (at least of the Court of Appeal decision) because it had not  come  out
   by the time he gave his; but we of course must do so.

10. It is quite clear that this appellant got remarkably  little  help  from
   his solicitors.  There is, as  we  have  mentioned,  evidence  from  two
   speech and language therapists.  On our assessment of what they  had  to
   say about Ben, his problems, while they  need  attention,  are  not  too
   serious.   He  does  not  seem  to  be  in  a  special  school,  as  the
   adjudicator was persuaded  to  accept,  because  one  at  least  of  the
   reports, dated 18 July 2002 by Miss Annabel Mathias, is headed as  being
   conducted by the "mainstream schools  team"  of  the  local  NHS  Trust.
   There is no evidence of any independent kind as to Lola's problems;  and
   so there is a gap in the adjudicator's decision, for which  he  was  not
   entirely responsible.

11. However, adjudicators are not prohibited from using their  knowledge  of
   the world in general; and we do not think the adjudicator can be  blamed
   for inferring, in general terms, that  there  would  be  less  effective
   facilities for either Ben or Lola to the extent they made need  them  in
   Nigeria.   Bearing in mind that the question before him was, in terms of
   the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Mahmood  at  paragraph  55(4),
   whether two British citizens could be reasonably  be  expected  touproot
   themselves to a foreign country, we take the view that he  was  entitled
   to take a broad approach to this question.

12. Turning to the "at  risk"  register  point,  there  was  no  independent
   evidence from an official source,  such  as  we  might  reasonably  have
   expected from any  solicitors  doing  their  job  properly,  before  the
   adjudicator or us about this. However, the Home Office too, whose appeal
   this is, could easily have  made  enquiries  from  the  local  authority
   themselves (full details have been given of Ben's school in  the  speech
   and language therapists' reports) as to whether he is on the  "at  risk"
   register; and whether the effect of that would be to prevent his removal
   from the jurisdiction.

13. We think the adjudicator was entitled to find as he did  on  this  point
   too. While the prohibition on removal in the at risk register might  not
   countervail the needs of immigration control in dealing with a child who
   is not a British citizen, Ben is; and that  was  clearly  a  significant
   consideration in dealing with the question of whether his  mother  could
   reasonably be expected to take him to Nigeria to join the claimant.

14. Turning to the effect of Edore, the  Home  Office  refusal  letters  are
   very short of detail.  It is true that  they  were  provided  with  very
   little, once again, by the claimant's solicitors; but  they  could  have
   made further enquiries themselves; if necessary, setting a  strict  time
   limit for a reply.   What the Home Office conspicuously failed to do was
   to consider, in either of those decision letters, first  the  effect  of
   the length of time the claimant had spent in this  country;  and  second
   the age of Ben, who had always lived here.

15. We confirmed with Ms Sigley that what used to be known  as  the  14-year
   policy is still in effect.  That means that an overstayer who  has  been
   in this country for 14 years, lawfully or  not,  will  not  normally  be
   deported.  The position in this case of course  is  slightly  different,
   because the decision which originally led to this appeal was the service
   of a 1989 deportation order.  Nevertheless, by the time the Home  Office
   actually did anything effective about that, this appellant on  any  view
   of the situation had been in this country for about 16 years; and in our
   view the Home Office should have at least  given  some  thought  to  the
   question of how far his removal at this stage  was  in  accordance  with
   their general policy.

16. Then there is Ben's age.  In the case of children who are  not  citizens
   of this country, there is what is known as a  7-year  policy:  in  other
   words, children who have spent those formative years in this country are
   not normally to be required to leave, nor are orders to be made  against
   their parents which would have that effect.  Here again, the policy  was
   not directly in point; but we have no doubt that any reasonable decision-
   maker at the Home Office would have borne it in  mind,  and  shown  that
   they had done so.

17. In our view, all these factors taken together would have led any  right-
   thinking person to regard it as far too late, whether in 2002, or at the
   date of  the  adjudicator's  decision,  or  now,  to  enforce  the  1989
   deportation order.   This  adjudicator  came  to  a  very  thorough  and
   comprehensive decision. We have no doubt that he was entitled to  decide
   the case as he did; so the Home Office appeal is dismissed.
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                John Freeman
                                                                  (chairman)
