
ar
    KK (Under 12 Policy - in country implications) Jamaica [2004] UKIAT
00268

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                              Date of Hearing : 8 April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                               .....23rd September 2004.....

                                   Before:


                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                             Miss J M Braybrook



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representatives Mr  J.  Jones,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  for  the
appellant; Mr I Thrilling, Legal representative  of  Nottingham  Law  Centre
for the respondent (hereafter "the claimant").



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, the Secretary of State, appeals against a determination
      of Adjudicator, Ms E. Dubicka, allowing the  appeal  of  the  claimant
      against a refusal to vary leave to remain in the UK.

   2. The claimant arrived aged ten in the UK from Jamaica on 28 August 2000
      as a visitor, to see his mother. He then made an  in-time  application
      for settlement as a dependant. She had indefinite leave to  remain  in
      the UK, granted in 1996 on the basis of marriage. The application  was
      refused on 13 October 2001 under  paragraph  300  (with  reference  to
      (i)(c) and (d) and paragraph  298 (with reference to (iv)).

3.    The reasons  for  concluding  that  the  mother  had  not  shown  sole
      responsibility for the  claimant  or  that   there  were  serious  and
      compelling family or other considerations  which  made  his  exclusion
      from the UK undesirable were as follows: the claimant had  lived  with
      his grandmother  in Jamaica since 1993 and there was  no  evidence  to
      support a claim that she had been taken ill;  there  was  no  evidence
      that the claimant was in poor health  or that his  circumstances  were
      unusually difficult;  the evidence was that the claimant's mother  had
      been happy to leave  the claimant with the grandmother  (her  mother);
      the original evidence was that  the claimant's  father  visited  every
      fortnight and provided the financial support required;  and  that  the
      sponsor was unemployed and had not shown  she  could  accommodate  and
      maintain the claimant without  recourse to public funds.

4.    The appeal notice to the Adjudicator raised Article  8  and  also  the
      Under 12 policy. It is a matter of some  concern  that  despite  being
      lodged on 23 October 2001 the appeal was not  forwarded  to  the   IAA
      until 3 February 2003, over two years three months later.

5.    The Adjudicator found the sponsor credible.

6.     In  consequence  she  concluded  that  the  claimant  met  the   sole
      responsibility requirement, at the date of  decision.  Her  assessment
      was that by that time the grandmother had  relinquished responsibility
      and the father had taken no  real  responsibility  for   his  son.  We
      consider that this was a sustainable decision.

7.    The Adjudicator further concluded that the  accommodation  requirement
      was met.

8.    However she found  (and indeed this was  conceded  by  the  claimant's
      representative)  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  maintenance
      requirement under paragraph 298(v) of HC 395.

9.    The reason why the Adjudicator did not accordingly dismiss the  appeal
      was that she considered that "my jurisdiction in  respect  of  a  s.61
      appeal is to allow an appeal if I  consider  the  decision  or  action
      concerned was not in accordance with the law or with  any  Immigration
      Rules applicable to the case : s.21 Sch 4 of  Part  III  of  the  1999
      Act."

10.   She did not consider that the decision was  "in  accordance  with  the
      law" in the light of the Court of Appeal judgment in D S Abdi  Imm  AR
      [1996] 148, which required the Secretary of State to apply in relevant
      cases applicable  Home Office policy. In this case, despite the  Under
      12  Policy  being  raised  by  the  claimant's  representatives,   the
      Secretary of State had refused to consider the claimant's position  by
      reference to this policy. Although the Secretary of State  had  sought
      to justify this refusal in terms of it being a policy applied in entry
      clearance cases, in fact the policy  could not  be  so  confined.  She
      stated:

             "There existed at the date of  decision  the   'Under  Twelve'
             policy which only required the adequate accommodation criteria
             to be met. The sole responsibility test does not apply. In the
             first  paragraph  it  relates  to  entry  clearance  decision.
             However, there is a reference to waiver of an entry  clearance
             requirement which  at  least  suggests  the  policy  might  be
             considered in-country. It is ambiguous, not least as there  is
             no overriding entry clearance requirement in  country,  except
             where  there  was  perhaps  no  extant  leave   at   date   of
             application."

11.   The Adjudicator went on  to  allow  the  appeal   "to  the  extent  of
      remittal for reconsideration only, on this ground."

12.   She also allowed the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.  Her  reasons
      for doing so were that  she  did  not  consider  it  was  (within  the
      meaning of Article 8(2)) "in accordance with the  law"  and   secondly
      she  considered  that  the  decision  constituted  a  disproportionate
      interference with the right to respect for family life.

13.   The grounds of appeal challenge  both  the  Adjudicator's   conclusion
      that the  decision was not "in accordance with the law" (under  Sch  4
      of the  1999 Act) and her conclusion that the decision was contrary to
      the claimant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

14.   We shall deal first of all  with  the  D.S.  Abdi  point.  The  'Under
      Twelve Concession', the grounds submitted, has only  ever  applied  to
      entry clearance cases and so it was incorrect of  the  Adjudicator  to
      find  this claim was submitted 'belatedly' at the hearing.

The Under 12 Concessions Issue
15.   At the hearing Mr  Jones was not able to give us chapter and verse  on
      the history of the Under 12 concession.  However, he did undertake  to
      furnish a written statement from the Home Office concerning whether or
      not the Under 12 Concession had  been  applied  in  practice  to  "in-
      country' applications. Mr Jones duly forwarded a letter from  Mr  Paul
      Summer of the Home Office IND Policy  Directorate  attaching  guidance
      notes on the  Under 12 Concession.

16.   In this  letter it we noted that the  concession  was  withdrawn  with
      Ministerial consent of 29 March 2003.  Since the decision in this case
      was made on 13 October  2001  when  this  policy  still  existed,  its
      further details are relevant to this case.

17.   The letter  identified  the  relevant  guidance  for  entry  clearance
      officers as being given in  DSP  Vol  1  Ch  14.16  and  the  relevant
      guidance for in-country  caseworkers  as  being  in  the   Immigration
      Directors Instructions (IDIs) at  Ch 8 Family Members in Annex M.

18.   It is perhaps best if we set out the full text of the  relevant IDIs.

         '12. The Under 12 Concession
            Where an application is made for a child under the age of 12 to
            join a single parent in the United Kingdom but  the  provisions
            of paragraphs 297-313 of HC 395 are  not  satisfied,  an  entry
            clearance for settlement may  nevertheless  be  granted,  on  a
            concessionary basis, provided that:


              . There is adequate accommodation


            The "Sole responsibility" test, outlined in paragraph 5  above,
            should not be applied.


            Although this concession does not imply a waiver of  the  entry
            clearance requirement, it should always be borne in  mind  when
            dealing with cases involving children in this age a group.


         12.1 Circumstances where the concession should be withheld.
              If the above requirements are met, it will be  appropriate  in
            most  case  to  apply  the   concession.   In   the   following
            circumstances, however, it may be appropriate to  withhold  the
            concession:


               . where there is professionally  confirmed evidence that  the
                 parent in this country is so severely handicapped as to  be
                 incapable of properly caring for the child;


               . where there are one or more siblings of a higher  age  (see
                 below);  or


               . where the child's mother is  polygamously  married  to  his
                 father and she does not qualify to come here  either  as  a
                 polygamous wife under  the  Immigration  Act  1988  or  the
                 Immigration Rules or in her own right in another capacity.


         12.1  Applications involving both over and under 12
            The application of the concession may give rise  to  difficulty
            where there are, in the family, children both  over  and  under
            the age of 12.    It is not possible to lay down rules for  all
            cases, but the principle underlying any decision should  be  to
            preserve the  unity  of  families  and  for  this  reason,  the
            children of a family should be considered as a group.


            Where the application of the concession  would  result  in  the
            admission of one or more young children and  the  exclusion  of
            one or more older children, it will be  necessary  to  consider
            the consequences of splitting the group.  If the group is  well
            established in its present home and it would cause no  hardship
            to them to be excluded  from  the  United  Kingdom,  the  right
            course might be not to admit any of them, including those under
            12.


            If the circumstances are such that the  normal  application  of
            the under 12 concession seems right for the  younger  children,
            it will be necessary  to  consider  whether  the  circumstances
            justify admitting older children under 18.


            The decision can only relate to the particular circumstances of
            each case, but the following considerations will be relevant:


                . the numbers of children on either  side  of  the  dividing
                  line (it would not be  right,  for  example,  to  allow  a
                  number of children of working age, or approaching  it,  to
                  gain admission because  one  child  under  12  is  seeking
                  admission; on the other hand, it might cause hardship to a
                  single older child if the admission of a group of siblings
                  under 12 were to leave him alone in his own country);


              . whether or not the children have been living together  as  a
                group;  and


              . the adequacy of accommodation  available in this country and
                the arrangements for caring for the children.


            12.3 Refusal
            Where it is decided that a child should not benefit  from  this
            concession, the application should be refused under  Paragraphs
            300 or 303, as appropriate, but the reasons for refusal  should
            be accompanied by a covering letter giving  an  explanation  of
            the reasons why the Secretary of  State  was  not  prepared  to
            apply the concession (see guidance  contained  in   Chapter  9,
            Section 1, "Adverse decisions - General Guidance")'

19.   Commenting on these the letter from Mr  Summers continues:-

             "The  Immigration  Directorate   Instructions   outlined   the
             concession that Entry  Clearance  Officers  were  expected  to
             apply but did not make clear the extent to  which  caseworkers
             should apply the concession  themselves.   The   IDIs  on  the
             Under 12 Concession stated in the first paragraph  that it was
             a concession that only Entry Clearance Officer 'may' apply and
             that caseworkers should not imply it 'waived entry clearance'.
              Caseworkers were instructed to bear the  concession  in  mind
             and have accordingly taken the concession  into  consideration
             in the past".

             On 13.10.01 when the case in question was decided  the   Under
             12 Concession appeared in the IDIs for caseworkers to bear  in
             mind whilst making their decisions. The   Instructions  stated
             that the  Concession should not be exercised if the  applicant
             did not satisfy the   Accommodation  requirement  about  which
             there may have been doubt in this case."

20.   What we glean from this letter is  this.   At  the  date  of  decision
      there existed instructions to "in-country " caseworkers      regarding
      the Under 12 Concession. Although framed in terms of  entry  clearance
      applications for settlement and "admission", the very fact  that  they
      existed as instructions for in-country caseworkers indicates  that  it
      was to be borne in mind in in-country  cases.  Furthermore,  the  last
      paragraph directs decisions to be made under paragraphs  300 or 303 of
       HC 395, both of which  are  "in-country  "  provisions.  Mr  Summer's
      letter confirms that it was applied in practice in in-country cases.

21.   Plainly, therefore, the first ground of appeal was  wrong  in  stating
      that  "The concession applies only to entry clearance case".

22.   It is common ground that the  Concession was not  considered  in  this
      case.

23.   It may well be, as Mr  Summers suggests, that it was  not  applied  in
      this case because at that point in time it was not accepted  that  the
      claimant  met  the  accommodation  requirements   of  the  Immigration
      Rules: see pages 3-4 of the Home Office Explanatory Statement dated  3
      February 2003.  It must also be said that the text and format  of  the
      relevant  IDI does suggest that the concession is not  to  be  applied
      unless the accommodation requirement is met:  see  the first  sentence
      of 12.1.  Nevertheless, the  letter  of  appeal  from  Nottingham  Law
      Centre dated 28 October 2001 had expressly raised the  matter  of  the
      Under 12 Concession and, in such circumstances,  we  consider  it  was
      incumbent on the Secretary of State in  his Explanatory  Statement  to
      at least explain that the applicability of the   Concession  had  been
      considered  but that it had  been  decided  by  reason  of  doubts  on
      accommodation not to apply it.  Albeit somewhat at odds  with  earlier
      passages, paragraph 12.3 of the  IDI appears to enjoin that  where   a
      child does not benefit from this  concession the reasons  for  refusal
      "should be accompanied by a covering letter giving an  explanation  of
      the reasons why  the Secretary of State was not prepared  to apply the
      concession..."

24.   In any event, the Adjudicator found that at the date of  decision  the
      accommodation requirement was met and the Secretary of State  has  not
      issued a respondent's notice or made any other any challenge  to  that
      finding. The legal effect of that finding is thus that as at the  date
      of decision no accommodation-related reason existed so as to   justify
      not considering the claimant's case under this concession.

25.   In addressing  the issue of  whether  the  Adjudicator  was  right  to
      apply D S Abdi principles to this case, we did consider   whether  the
      Under 12 Concession could  properly  be  classified  as  a  structured
      policy. This was not a point raised directly in the grounds of  appeal
      but both Mr  Jones in his very clear submission and Mr Summers in  his
      helpful letter touched on it. We acknowledge that  the  Concession  is
      not  worded in mandatory terms. Mr Summers has highlighted the use  of
      the word "may" in the opening sentence and  similar  wording  is  used
      elsewhere.   At the same time, however, it clearly states  that  where
      the accommodation requirement is met "it will be appropriate  in  most
      cases to apply  the  concession".  Later  on  there  is  reference  to
      circumstances  justifying  its  "normal  application".   It  is   also
      implicit in paragraph  12.3  of  the   IDI  that  this  concession  is
      treated as a provision parallel to the relevant Immigration Rules.  We
      also bear in mind that  D S Abdi principles have never  been  confined
      solely to concessionary policies in mandatory terms,   although  there
      has always been a dividing line drawn between such  policies  and  the
      residual or unstructured  discretion  which  the  Secretary  of  State
      continue to possess under a  number of provisions of the   Immigration
      Acts.

26.   Accordingly, we consider that the Adjudicator  was   correct  to  find
      that the decision in this case was not "in accordance with the law" by
      virtue of failing to consider the claimant under an applicable policy.
      She correctly limited her allowance to the extent it remains  for  the
      Secretary of State to reconsider his decision  in the  light  of  this
      policy.

The Article 8 issue
27.   Was the Adjudicator also correct to allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds? In our view she was.

28.   Her first reason was that the decision was  not  "in  accordance  with
      the law" within the meaning of those words  as  contained  in  Article
      8(2) ECHR.  It has been the cause of some confusion, since the  advent
      of the Human Rights Act 1998, that the same wording -  "in  accordance
      with the law" is employed both in the Immigration Acts and in the text
      of under Article 8.  This is not the place to analyse  the  extent  to
      which they have different meanings. What matters here is that  in  the
      context of Article 8(2) the words impose on public authorities a  duty
      to  ensure   not  just  that   their  decisions  are  allowed  by  the
      Immigration Acts or UK law generally, but  that  the  law   itself  is
      sufficiently  accessible  and  precise  to  enable  the   citizen   to
      regularise his or her conduct. As set out by  the  European  Court  of
      Human Rights in Silver v UK [1983] 5 EHRR 347, Hashman and Harrup v UK
      [2000] Crim LR 185, to conform with the requirement  of  accessibility
      and  precision, a law conferring discretion must  indicate  its  scope
      and set out the way discretion is  to  be  exercised.   The  words  in
      Article 8(2)  apply  to  subordinate   legislation  and  concessionary
      policies: see Barthold v Germany  [1985] 7 EHRR 383 and  Malone  v  UK
      [1984] 7 EHRR 14.

29.   As already noted the  Under 12 Concession has now been withdrawn,  but
      since it continues to arise in cases involving decisions made earlier,
      we shall  put matters in the  present  tense.  Plainly  the  Under  12
      Concession, by virtue of being one of the published IDIs, has been and
      is accessible. However, we do not consider  that  it  is  sufficiently
      precise. That is not merely  because  even  the  Home  Office  in  the
      grounds of appeal to the Tribunal erroneously thought  it  applied  in
      entry clearance cases.  It is  because  the  Concession  is  seriously
      ambiguous as to whether or not a person who claims to fall within  its
      terms but is found not to is entitled to receive an explanation of why
      he does not benefit from it.   Significantly, in our view  the  letter
      from Mr Summers of the  IND  Policy  Directorate  implies  that  if  a
      decision-take considers one of the  requirements   is  not  met  (e.g.
      accommodation) then there is no obligation  on  him  to  consider  its
      application.  As  already   noted,   this   position   sits   somewhat
      uncomfortably  with the last paragraph of the  IDI, which  appears  to
      enjoin that an explanation be given to anyone  who  does  not  benefit
      from the concession as to why not.

30.   We see sense in some areas of discretion being left to  the  Secretary
      of State as to whether to consider a  case  under  a  policy  at  all,
      particularly where no specific application has been made under it  and
      there are obvious reasons why it would not apply. But in our view  the
      Under 12 policy should more precisely  (and unambiguously) state  that
      when an application has been made under the concession,  an  applicant
      is entitled to an explanation as to whether or not  it  is  considered
      applicable.

31.   Bearing in mind, therefore, that we have  found  the  Adjudicator  was
      right to allow the  application  on Article 8 grounds,  by  virtue  of
      the failure of the decision to be "in accordance with the law"  within
      the meaning of Article 8(2), it is not strictly necessary  for  us  to
      address whether she was right to allow it for the  second  reason  she
      gave, which  was based on  disproportionality  grounds.  However,  for
      completeness we shall address the situation insofar as  it  arises  in
      the context of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

32.   The first point raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal   concerning  this
      other aspect of Article 8 was that the Adjudicator wrongly viewed  the
      decision as one relating to removal rather than refusal to vary leave.
      However, as Mr Jones conceded, this point was not sustainable  in  the
      light of the starred Tribunals determination in  Kehinde  (01/TH/2665)
      and the Court of Appeal judgment in Kariharan  [2003]  ImmAR  163.   A
      direct consequence of the decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain
      was that the claimant was in the UK without leave and was required  to
      leave promptly.

33.   The next ground advanced  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  was  that  the
      Adjudicator did not explain which essential  facts  she  found  to  be
      different to those on which the Secretary of State based his decision.
      The grounds continued:

             'Following   Razgar [in the Court of Appeal] it  fell  to  the
             Adjudicator to have deferred  to  the  respondent's  position;
             having made no findings of fact that differed to  (sic)  those
             relied upon by the respondent.'

34.   We would accept that the Adjudicator should have  taken  greater  care
      to identify in the one place what different findings of fact she made;
      but a simple comparison between  the  Explanatory  Statement  and  the
      determination  enables a ready identification to be made. For example,
      the Adjudicator found that by the date of decision the grandmother has
      ceased for valid reasons to have responsibility for the  claimant  and
      that the father had never had any responsibility in key senses of  the
      words:  see paragraph 18.  For example again,  she found at  paragraph
      28 that the claimant had real ties in  the UK.  Contrast  on  both  of
      these matters paragraphs 3.2 and 4 of the Explanatory Statement.

35.   Thus it was simply incorrect  of  the  grounds  to  go  on  to  state:
      'Having made no findings of fact that differed ...'.

36.   As regards the point  made about deference, it may be that the  author
      of the grounds  had in mind the points set out in  Edore  [2003]  INLR
      361 and in M (Croatia) [2004] UKIAT  00024  starred.  However,  whilst
      these decisions do enjoin deference on an Adjudicator, they do  permit
      him or her to exercise it by reference to different findings of fact.

37.   The only possible flaw we can see in the  Adjudicator's  determination
      was  in  her  treatment  of  the   issue   of   whether   there   were
      insurmountable obstacles to the claimant being expected to  return  to
      Jamaica and apply for entry clearance under the  Under  12  Concession
      from there.  It is not immediately obvious to us that there were  real
      obstacles to the claimant's  mother  arranging  through  relatives  in
      Jamaica for them, or someone on their behalf to  ensure  care  of  the
      claimant whilst he applied from there for entry clearance. However, we
      do not think the Adjudicator's apparent laxity over  this  matter  led
      her into any fundamental error. That is because she rightly identified
      as two very significant factors that the claimant  whilst  still  very
      young had come to re-form strong family life bonds with his mother and
      brother and that the Secretary of State  delayed  over  two  years  in
      sending the appeal papers to the   IAA.  Whilst  normally  such  delay
      would not be a factor creating  disproportionality,  especially  since
      there  was no obvious detriment to the claimant's family  life  caused
      by it, the factor of delay  in this case  has to be put side  by  side
      with the  fact  that  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule  (dealing  with
      indefinite leave to remain) does not stipulate that entry clearance is
      a mandatory requirement. And the  concession  specifically  refers  to
      possible waiver of entry clearance.

38.   For the above reasons we dismiss  the  appeal  on  both  of  the  main
      grounds on which it has been brought.

 39.  Whether as a  result of our decision the Secretary  of  State  decides
      to afford the claimant the benefit of the  Under 12 Concession remains
      entirely a matter for him. His only error of law in this  respect  has
      been in failing to  give  consideration  to  its  application.  Given,
      however, that we have upheld the Adjudicator's allowance of the appeal
      on Article 8 grounds, it would seem to us (in order to  ensure  effect
      is given to the Adjudicator's determination and in order to ensure  an
      effective remedy is afforded under s.8 of the Human Rights  Act  1998)
      that at the very least some period of leave to remain  is  appropriate
      in this case.  However, as regards its duration only the Secretary  of
      State  is in a proper position  to  assess  whether  long-term  family
      reunion in the  UK  is  apt.   Whilst  one  possible  course  for  the
      Secretary of State to take is to grant ILR, it would be  quite  wrong,
      indeed ultra vires, for us to give a direction that  ILR be granted.




                                 H.H. STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT




-----------------------
      7


