
LSH
|Heard at: Field House      |        |EA (GBTS info _ Speculative |
|                           |        |Reasons) Turkey [2004] UKIAT|
|                           |        |00050                       |
|On 25 February 2004        |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|23 March 2004                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|His Honour Judge N Ainley (Chairman)                              |
|Mr R Hamilton                                                     |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

                           DETERMINATION OF APPEAL

1.    This is an appeal by the claimant from the determination of  Mr  Ward
      sitting as an Adjudicator on 14 January 2003.

2.    The claimant is a Turkish citizen and is female.    The basis of  her
      claim is that her late husband was a PKK supporter who was  taken  by
      the authorities and tortured on a number of  occasions.    Eventually
      he was shot and killed by them.   She came to the United  Kingdom  in
      July 2002 and claims that if she  were  to  be  returned  to  Turkey,
      because of her family's associations with the PKK, she  would  be  at
      risk of persecution.

3.    The Adjudicator found that her accounts of her husband's mistreatment
      and of the dangers that she would face on return were untrue  and  he
      dismissed her appeal.

4.    There are two matters before the Tribunal.   One  is  an  application
      for this hearing to be adjourned to produce further evidence and  the
      other, should that application fail, is that  the  matter  should  be
      remitted to be reheard by another Adjudicator.

5.    In order to deal with the application  and  indeed  with  the  appeal
      itself, it is necessary to go into the facts.

6.    In her statement the  claimant  said  that  her  husband  was  a  PKK
      supporter and this led to raids on the house.   She said she did  not
      know how often the raids occurred as she was bad with dates  and  was
      uneducated.  She said that on one occasion her husband  was  tortured
      so badly that he had to remain at home for 3 months, never  making  a
      full recovery from his ill-treatment.   She said that her husband was
      also visited by HADEP members and they would discuss politics.

7.    She said that she remembered how her husband died.   Their house  was
      raided by Gendarmes who kicked down the wooden door attacked her  and
      made as if to rape her.   She was told to lie on the  floor  but  her
      husband jumped on top of her.   She heard a  gun  shot  and  fainted.
      When she came round she was in hospital and found out later that  her
      husband had been killed.  She mentioned that she had some injuries to
      her chest,  right arm and head.

8.    After this happened she returned to the village but  discovered  that
      her three sons had left home and were missing.   They had  gone  away
      having heard what had happened to their parents.   She  did  not  see
      them again until she came to the United Kingdom in  July  2002  where
      one of them was already living and where  another  has  since  joined
      her.

9.    Her statement was supplemented by a psychiatric report compiled by Dr
      Clark.   He interviewed her on 9 January 2003 and she told him of the
      account of what had happened to her.   He came to the conclusion that
      she was severely distressed and that also she was not in a fit  state
      to give evidence because this might precipitate a panic attack or  an
      acute asthmatic attack.

10.   Some of the facts that were given to the psychiatrist  are  different
      from those that were eventually given in evidence.  She stated to the
      psychiatrist that her husband had been  taken  and  mistreated  on  a
      number of occasions but that the final occasion  was  in  early  2002
      when the Gendarmes came  to  the  house  while  her  sons  were  out,
      attempted to rape her and shot him while her husband  was  trying  to
      protect her.   She stated that two of her sons had  already  fled  to
      England and after her release  from  hospital  she  stayed  with  her
      sister-in-law until she could travel to England.

11.   In her evidence which, according to the Adjudicator,  she  was  quite
      able to give, showing no difficulty in answering the  questions  that
      were asked her, she said when examined that her husband had  died  in
      1999; in other words, rather more than 3  years  before  the  hearing
      date instead of the few months that  would  have  elapsed  since  his
      death if the account she had given to the psychiatrist were  correct.
      This discrepancy on its own is capable of casting  serious  doubt  on
      the account the claimant gave and her risk on return because if  what
      she was saying in evidence were true she had obviously been living in
      Turkey for a  period of 3 years since her husband died without having
      any trouble from the authorities at all.  One would then be  entitled
      to ask what the precipitating event that led  to  her  leaving  could
      possibly have been if it was connected with any persecution inflicted
      by the authorities.

12.   The Adjudicator found that there were other aspects of  her  evidence
      that were unsatisfactory.   She was asked what  her  husband  did  to
      assist  the  PKK  and  said  that  she  could  not  remember.     The
      Adjudicator said that he found that not possible  to  follow  because
      she would be bound to ask her husband, as in  ordinary  human  nature
      one would, why the house was being raided or why he was  being  taken
      away when those events occurred.    She also gave evidence  that  was
      different from what she said earlier  in  respect  of  her  children.
      She was asked who  looked  after  her  when  she  was  released  from
      hospital and said that her children  looked  after  her.    She  then
      contradicted that evidence saying that the children  had  fled  after
      her husband was killed and that her brother-in-law looked after  her.
       There again, the Adjudicator found it difficult to  see  that  there
      could be an honest explanation  for  that  discrepancy.    What  also
      troubled the Adjudicator considerably was that  there  was  no  death
      certificate for her husband and he could not understand why  one  had
      not been obtained.   There  is  no  question  but  the  lack  of  the
      existence of the death certificate was a factor in his assessment  of
      credibility.   He was further troubled by the fact that although  two
      of the claimant's sons were in the United  Kingdom  neither  of  them
      came along to corroborate her account.    Although  corroboration  is
      not necessary the fact that the sons were not called did seem to  him
      to call for some sort of explanation.

13.   In short the Adjudicator held that the whole story was  made  up  and
      that the claimant had nothing to fear from the authorities.

14.   Since then the death certificate has come to light and it was  placed
      before us.   No one challenges its authenticity.  What it shows is in
      our judgment of considerable support  to  the  conclusions  that  the
      Adjudicator had came to without seeing it.    The  certificate  shows
      that the claimant's husband died on 5 May 1999 at 9.30 am of  natural
      causes.  We can think of no reason why, if the authorities thought he
      was a terrorist and had shot him there  should  be  any  reason  they
      should feel any need to conceal the fact that  his  death  was  as  a
      result of a clash with the  security  forces.    Indeed  there  is  a
      specific code for death in a clash with security forces provided  for
      in Turkish death certificates.    The position would  therefore  seem
      to be according to an  authentic  document  that  the  story  of  her
      husband's murder is a fabrication and  that  he  died  several  years
      before she left Turkey of natural causes;  nothing  to  do  with  the
      authorities at all.

15.   It is against that background that we are  invited  to  adjourn  this
      matter, so that we can receive fresh evidence.  The new evidence that
      the claimant's current solicitors say  is  available  and  should  be
      received is evidence from a man called Bugday who  is  now  a  United
      Kingdom citizen although originally Turkish.  He fled to this country
      some time in the early 1990s and obtained indefinite leave to  remain
      in or about 1993.   The solicitors say that it was impossible to have
      his evidence to hand and in front of the Adjudicator because  no  one
      on the claimant's side knew that he was  in  the  country  until  the
      middle of 2003, some months after the hearing had  taken  place.   No
      notification of the existence of  this  man  was  given  between  his
      discovery and now because the person  handling  the  matter  for  the
      previous solicitors was incompetent.   As to this latter point  there
      seems to be little doubt that this person  was  incompetent;  he  was
      sacked by the former solicitors for gross misconduct.

16.   The evidence of Mr Bugday would apparently be to the effect  that  he
      was detained with the claimant's husband  in  either  1980s  or  very
      early 1990s and saw the claimant's husband being  mistreated  by  the
      authorities.  We were invited to adjourn so that his  evidence  could
      be placed before the Tribunal or alternatively to remit  this  matter
      so that his evidence could be heard by another Adjudicator.

17.   We consider that  there  are  no  good  reasons  for  admitting  this
      evidence.   First, we do not know what Mr Bugday would actually  say,
      because there is nothing other than the solicitors opinion of what he
      would say before us and nothing in writing from him  whatever.    The
      current solicitors have only very recently taken  over  the  file  in
      this case.  We should say that in our judgment we consider that  they
      have advanced every point in favour of their client that  they  could
      possibly have been expected to advance   but we consider that  it  is
      extraordinary that in the months since Mr Bugday has surfaced no  one
      thought to take a statement  from  him  and  nor  did  he  proffer  a
      statement.   It would appear that there  is  no  record  of  what  he
      proposes to say at all.   We must therefore view  with  some  caution
      any assertion made that he will say certain things that  are  thought
      crucial to this  appeal.    For  that  reason  alone  we  would  have
      declined the adjournment on the grounds that the adjournment is based
      on little more than speculation as to what a witness would say.   But
      we would go further than that because it seems to us that even if  it
      were the case that a decade or more ago the  claimant's  husband  had
      been detained and mistreated by the authorities this is not a  matter
      that would be likely to cause her any problems at all  on  return  to
      Turkey because on arrival at  Istanbul  airport  there  would  be  no
      record linking this claimant with separatist activities.

18.   The Tribunal has recently received a note via the Embassy  in  Ankara
      dealing with what  is  actually  recorded  on  the  Turkish  national
      computer the GBTS at Istanbul airport.  It would  seem  that  someone
      who has been treated as the claimant's late husband was would not  be
      someone who would ever have been registered on this computer  because
      he never formally entered into the judicial system.   People who  are
      merely detained and mistreated and then released  without  charge  do
      not appear on the computer.   It  is  only  when  they  are  formally
      arrested by warrant  or  have  been  formally  charged  or  proceeded
      against that they do.    In any event, data on a  person  are  erased
      upon that person's death even if they have been convicted of a crime.

19.   The Solicitors for the claimant helpfully put before us e-mails  that
      had gone between them and a Miss Denise Graf of Amnesty International
      in Switzerland.  These e-mails date from the end of January 2004  and
      deal with what is on the computer.  Miss Graf wrote

       "It is true that during my 20 years activity on Turkey, I  have  met
      only one case of a person against whom no arrest warrant was released
      and whose has never been judged and whose record has  been  found  on
      the GBTS computer all the same.  Usually, only persons against whom a
      judicial procedure has been opened or who are wanted  by  the  police
      have records on this computer.  Persons who are only  wanted  by  the
      police or the military police are not recorded on the GBTS  computer,
      because no formal arrest warrant has been released against them".

20.   She went on to say that other records on persons of adverse  interest
      to the authorities did exist elsewhere and  were  now  likely  to  be
      computerised and thus accessible.

21.   Even if one were to assume that there were or had been records on the
      claimant's husband in the province from which she  comes  that  would
      not alert the authorities in any way at Istanbul airport because  all
      they would be faced on the return of this claimant  was  a  returning
      failed asylum seeker.    The authorities do not assume  that  because
      someone is a  failed  asylum  seeker  they  are  someone  of  adverse
      interest in Turkey.  Their normal assumption is that this is a person
      who has made up a story to try and make a better life for  themselves
      in the west.   There would be nothing on this claimant,  who  has  no
      political profile at all. In such circumstances they would  not  look
      for any evidence from elsewhere because they would not be alerted  to
      any need to do so.

22.   In all the circumstances, it seems to us that for the reasons we have
      given these applications for an adjournment  and  for  remittal  must
      fail.

23.   The application for an adjournment  is  too  speculative  as  is  the
      application for a  remittal  even  if  it  were  the  fact  that  the
      claimants husband had been ill-treated a very long time ago.    There
      is clear evidence to show that he was not killed  in  1999  but  died
      then and there is also material to show that the fact of his  earlier
      involvement with the PKK, if it is existed, would not be such  as  to
      put this claimant at any real risk on return even if the evidence  of
      Mr Bugday were to be accepted in its entirety.

24.   Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.



                                        His Honour Judge N Ainley
                                        Vice President
