

                RK (Obligation to investigate) DRC CG [2004] UKIAT 00129 | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                            Date of Hearing: 16th April 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                               7th June 2004

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice President)
                                Mr D C Walker

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT



For the Appellant:           Miss Chandran, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr Buckley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from the determination  of
     an Adjudicator, Mrs N Birch.  She  dismissed  the  asylum  appeal  but
     allowed the human rights appeal of the Appellant before her,  whom  we
     shall call the Claimant, in a determination dated 31st July 2003.  The
     Claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo who left the
     Democratic Republic of Congo for Congo Brazzaville  on  29th  November
     2002 and after two and a half weeks there left for the United  Kingdom
     where she claimed asylum.  Once again the Adjudicator's task was  made
     more difficult than it should have been because the Secretary of State
     was not represented before her.

  2. The Claimant's story was  that  she  had  to  gone  to  Gombe  in  her
     employer's car to change some money for her, but, on the way, a  large
     group of people shouted to some soldiers that the people  in  the  car
     wanted to kill President Kabila;  she realised that she was in the way
     of a presidential procession.  It was expected that everyone stop  for
     the President.  She was allowed to leave the car to urinate  and  took
     the opportunity to escape.  She was seven and a half  months  pregnant
     at the time.  The soldier guarding her  had  been  distracted  by  the
     passage  of  the  presidential  car.   She  made  her   way   to   her
     grandmother's house.  She was telephoned there by a neighbour who said
     that soldiers had arrested her mother whose  address  must  have  been
     given to them by the driver of her employer's car.  Her employer  told
     her to travel to Brazzaville with the money she had gone to change and
     she left there later with the help of a businesswoman.

  3. The Adjudicator rejected that story as not credible, either as to  the
     way in which a procession would be managed or as to her  escape.   She
     rejected the asylum claim.  However,  she  allowed  the  human  rights
     appeal on the  basis  that  as  the  Claimant  had  left  the  country
     illegally without an exit visa, her return to the Democratic  Republic
     of Congo, which was in a very unsettled condition, would expose her to
     a  serious  risk  of  imprisonment  in  harsh  and  life   threatening
     conditions.  The Adjudicator referred to the  unofficial  presence  of
     security forces at  Kinshasa  airport,  to  the  human  rights  abuses
     committed by the security forces and to the absence of an  independent
     and effective  judiciary.   A  UNHCR  letter  raised  questions  about
     whether failed asylum seekers could be returned without undue risk.

  4. The Secretary of State contended in his Notice  of  Appeal  that  this
     determination ignored the up  to  date  background  material  and  the
     Tribunal's assessment of it, which showed that failed  asylum  seekers
     were not at risk if they were returned with valid travel documents.

  5. By the time this appeal came on before us, the Tribunal, chaired by Dr
     Storey, had already delivered a detailed  and  comprehensive  judgment
     dealing with the current position in relation to the return of  failed
     asylum seekers to the Democratic Republic of Congo and considering all
     the Tribunal decisions which, whilst generally of the view  that  such
     returns could take place safely, also included  two  which  adopted  a
     different approach.  The Tribunal heard argument in October  2003  and
     in the light of some  further  material,  heard  further  argument  in
     December 2003.  Its determination was notified on 28th  January  2004;
     VL (DRC) (CG) [2004] UKIAT 00007.

The decision in VL

  6. This determination considered the CIPU Report, the UNHCR material, the
     practice and experiences of other European  governments,  two  Reports
     from Dr Kennes, the material produced by BIDS  relating  to  returnees
     and other evidence.  It considered an argument that the United Kingdom
     Government ought to have made more enquiries about what  had  happened
     to certain people to whom BIDS referred.  It noted the  importance  of
     recent changes in HO policy whereby no-one would be  returned  without
     valid travel documents which would reduce greatly the risk of  adverse
     attention and extortion on return to  Kinshasa,  which  was  the  only
     place to which people were returned.  In Dr Kennes' later  report,  he
     resiled from his previous position and  accepted  that  failed  asylum
     seekers per se were not now at risk  on  return.   He  concluded  that
     failed asylum seekers were not at risk of a breach of Article  3  upon
     return merely because they had made an asylum claim abroad.

  7. The case of VL also related to a young woman with a young  child.   It
     concluded that that did not create a risk factor.  Nor  did  the  fact
     that she was a low level member of the  UDPS.   There  were  two  risk
     categories:  those with an actual or  perceived  hostile  nationality,
     particularly Rwandan,  and  those  having  a  perceived  political  or
     military profile (which did not mean just having been a soldier  or  a
     member of a political party).  Three other potential  categories  were
     identified.

  8. None of  the  actual  or  potential  risk  categories  apply  to  this
     Claimant.  The Adjudicator's determination did not take account of the
     background material available to her at the time or of the  Tribunal's
     assessment of it, although the Adjudicator would have undoubtedly been
     assisted by proper representation by the Secretary of State.   On  the
     basis of that decision, without more, the outcome of  the  appeal  was
     inevitably that it would be allowed.   Miss  Chandran  did  not  argue
     otherwise.

  9. She said that the decision in VL should not be followed because of  an
     argument which she wished to raise about the obligation on the  United
     Kingdom to investigate allegations which had been made by  BIDS  about
     certain  returned  asylum  seekers  which  she  said  United   Kingdom
     authorities had agreed to, but had not  carried  out.   This,  it  was
     said, meant that the return of the  Claimant  would  be  a  breach  of
     Article 3, which, like  Article  2,  contained  an  implicit  duty  to
     investigate credible allegations of a breach  in  order  to  make  the
     Convention rights effective.  This was an argument which was  akin  to
     and a development of one which was considered in VL and drew upon much
     of the same material which it considered.

 10. We can introduce the material by reference to the Tribunal decision in
     VL:

           "41.  For proper reasons  largely  to  do  with  concerns  about
                 continued detention of  a  number  of  failed  DRC  asylum-
                 seekers,  the  Bail  for   Immigration   Detainees   (BIDS)
                 organisation whose  co-ordinator  is  Mr  Tim  Baster,  has
                 entered into correspondence with the Home Office, with CIPU
                 and a number of other bodies.  Towards the end of 2003  key
                 parts of this correspondence  together  with  a  number  of
                 other documents  were  published  by  the  Immigration  Law
                 Practitioners Association (ILPA).  We  do  not  propose  to
                 itemise all of it in the text  of  this  determination.  It
                 will suffice  to  say  that  it  broadly  covers  materials
                 considered relevant by  BIDS  up  to  and  including  their
                 letter to the Home Office dated 25 November  2003.   It  is
                 necessary also to say that much of it raises  issues,  e.g.
                 the continued  detention  of  failed  asylum  seekers,  the
                 history of Home Office failure to respond to BIDS'  request
                 for further enquiries, which are not our concern.  However,
                 insofar as it constitutes relevant  new  evidence  meriting
                 Tribunal  assessment,  its  essential  particulars  can  be
                 summarised as follows:


            42.  The November 2003 BIDS' letter asserts that  on  12  March
                 2002 a charter flight was organised by the Resettlement and
                 Co-ordination Unit (RESCU)  to  Kinshasa.  It  included  13
                 passengers who were nationals  of  the  DRC.  According  to
                 first and second hand information given to  BIDS,  all  but
                 one of the 13 passengers concerned met with  detention  and
                 ill treatment upon return. As for the only one who was not,
                 he had been returned straightaway to the UK. Another of the
                 passengers who had eventually been released  had  made  his
                 way back to  the  UK  and  claimed  asylum.  An  anonymised
                 statement  setting  out  his  experiences  on  return   was
                 contained in the bundle before us.


               43.     The same BIDS letter asserts  that  it  knows  of  3
                 further DRC  nationals  who  have  been  removed  since  10
                 October, 2003, two of whom - AB and DE  -  appear  to  have
                 ended up in the Central Prison in Makala.


             44.  Marrying this information together with that  supplied  by
                 the Home Office regarding the number of person returned  in
                 2002-2003, BIDS contends (in its 25 November  2003  letter)
                 that:


                         'Even assuming that all  DRC  nationals  who  were
                         removed from  the  UK  between  January  2002  and
                         November 2003 were actually sent to Kinshasa, then
                         of  38  (adding  the  2002   statistics   to   the
                         provisional statistics for January  -  March  2003
                         and the three recent removals that  we  are  aware
                         of) there is evidence that 15 of  these  returnees
                         were  imprisoned  on  arrival  in  Kinshasa.  This
                         represents a rate of detention of some 40% of  all
                         known returnees over a two year period.'


            45.  The BIDS' bundle also includes materials from a  Congolese
                 NGO with an office in the  Netherlands  called  'DocuCongo'
                 which indicates that this body has learnt of DRC  nationals
                 removed  from  other  European  countries  who  have   been
                 detained and ill treated on return. The  position  of  this
                 organisation on the subject is mainly set out in  a  letter
                 dated 26 September 2003. It summarises two cases of persons
                 said to have been returned from the Netherlands to Kinshasa
                 in November 2002 and two in June 2003. Mention is also made
                 of another person said to have  been  detained  on  arrival
                 having been removed by  Germany  in  September  2003.   The
                 author also refers to "a  source  in  the  DGM"  (Direction
                 Generale  de  Migration)  giving  an  account  of  frequent
                 mistreatment on return."

 11. The principal  allegations  giving  rise  to  a  duty  to  investigate
     concerned the two who it is said returned from the charter  flight  of
     March 2002, and the two who ended up in Makala prison.

 12. The Tribunal commented on the assertion made by BIDS  that  the  UNHCR
     position and the practice and experiences of other European  countries
     supported its concerns.  It pointed out that  UNHCR  neither  endorsed
     routine returns of failed asylum seekers nor considered that they were
     at risk per se either.  It was simply incorrect for BIDS and others to
     argue that the UNHCR supported their position  and  they  should  stop
     doing so. It said that the letter from the British Ambassador  to  the
     Democratic Republic of Congo of November 2002  that  he  had  seen  no
     evidence  that  failed  asylum  seekers  were  persecuted  on  return,
     although unsourced, could reasonably be inferred to have been made  by
     reference to real checks in Kinshasa.  The position of the  Dutch  and
     Belgian Governments, the former of which had set up a  procedure  with
     the Democratic Republic of Congo for return and the  latter  monitored
     returns, led the Tribunal to conclude that there  was  strong  support
     for the view that returned failed asylum seekers per se  were  not  at
     risk.  The Tribunal was critical of the "denunciatory tone" of some of
     the BIDS material.

 13. The  Tribunal  then  turned  to  the  BIDS  letters  relating  to  the
     individuals. It pointed out that there was little evidence about  them
     and that their details had not even been furnished to the Home  Office
     for it to check.  It continued:

           "78.  The case  in  relation  to  which  BIDS  have  adduced  an
                 anonymised statement concerns a DRC national who claims  to
                 have been one of the passengers on the March  2002  charter
                 flight, He avers in that statement  that  upon  arrival  in
                 Kinshasa he was detained and ill-treated before  eventually
                 being released. BIDS states that upon return to the  UK  he
                 made a claim for asylum. We raised with the parties at  the
                 December hearing our receipt of unverified information that
                 an asylum seeker who claimed to have been on the March 2002
                 flight had appealed and that an Adjudicator  had  dismissed
                 his appeal quite recently. However, despite  their  raising
                 no objections, we decided  not  to  take  steps  to  direct
                 further inquiries or to  seek  to  obtain  a  copy  of  any
                 determination. Thus we make no judgment as to whether  that
                 dismissal, if one has been made, relates to the  author  of
                 the statement submitted by BIDS. What  we  can  state  with
                 certainty, however, is that there is no evidence before  us
                 to show that this statement's author has been  accepted  as
                 credible by  either  the  immigration  authorities  or  the
                 appellate authorities. Doubtless if this person is found to
                 be credible as a result of his  asylum  application  and/or
                 appeal, that would put matters in a very different light.


           79.   The same observation applies to the  evidence  of  another
                 person said by BIDS to have been on this flight but to have
                 been 'bounced' straight back. BIDS states that he has  also
                 claimed asylum. His evidence too can only be  described  as
                 being as yet unaccepted by any UK authority.


           80.   BIDS elsewhere refers to other information it has received
                 relating to persons who were  on  the  March  2002  charter
                 flight, but since nothing is specified, we can only  assume
                 it viewed such information as less significant  than  those
                 items of evidence it has particularised.


           81.   That brings us to the two cases referred to by BIDS as  AB
                 and DE respectively. The BIDS letter describes  the  former
                 case thus:


                       'AB' was removed from Heathrow in  October  2003,  by
                       flight to Nairobi and thence to Kinshasa. His partner
                       in the UK received a very distressed phone call  from
                       him at Kinshasa airport, in which he stated  that  he
                       had already been arrested  and  was  on  his  way  to
                       prison. A traveller  at  the  airport  witnessed  his
                       arrest and beating and also phoned his partner.'


           82.   The BIDS letter goes on to state that based on  the  above
                 information, it approached human rights  organisations  for
                 help in tracing and confirming AB's  whereabouts.  It  then
                 outlines the contents of a statement from someone described
                 as a 'reputable witness, known to a number of international
                 human rights organisations' who visited AB and  heard  from
                 him about his detention and ill treatment.

           83.   BIDS' account of the case of DE was as  follows.   DE  was
                 removed  in  late  October  2003.   His  solicitor  was  so
                 concerned about his fate that she (unusually) gave him  her
                 mobile number immediately before removal and asked  him  to
                 phone her on arrival in Kinshasa.  He did not call her from
                 Kinshasa for some two weeks after his removal, but, when he
                 did, he said he was calling from Makala prison where he had
                 been incarcerated and ill-treated.

           86.   A further matter we have to  bear  in  mind  is  that,  in
                 respect of AB and DE, the accounts as given  are  far  from
                 self-evidently plausible. Believing AB's account would mean
                 accepting as reasonably likely  that  the  DRC  authorities
                 would have  permitted  him  to  phone  after  he  had  been
                 arrested and was being escorted to prison.  Believing  DE's
                 account would mean accepting  that,  whilst  inside  Makala
                 prison, DE would still have had access to money he had with
                 him when he arrived and would have been able to use  it  to
                 bribe a prison official to call his solicitor  in  the  UK.
                 Both accounts described the calls as having been cut off or
                 terminated. Given that both had said they had been  granted
                 access to a phone, this was a further oddity. AB's  account
                 involved acceptance, further, of the coincidence  that  not
                 only was his arrest witnessed by a traveller at the airport
                 but a traveller who was able to  elicit  straightaway  from
                 the policeman who had beaten AB in front of him the address
                 of where AB was going. This traveller also happened to know
                 AB and so was able to phone his partner in the UK  who  had
                 earlier received the phone call from AB himself.   IF  AB's
                 account had indeed been verified by a  'reputable  witness,
                 known  to  a   number   of   international   human   rights
                 organisations', then we would have expected  that,  between
                 October and the date of  hearing  in  December  2003,  some
                 specific report from such organisations not only confirming
                 the visit but  giving  reasons  why  this  person  attached
                 credence to AB's account would have been forthcoming."

 14. After making some general comments about the  evidence,  the  Tribunal
     said:

           "88.  Another thing we have to bear in mind is that  it  is  not
                 known precisely why any of the individuals concerned in the
                 BIDS and DocuCongo dossiers, even assuming  their  accounts
                 were found after fuller examination to be true,  fell  foul
                 of the authorities. Was it simply because they were  failed
                 asylum seekers or was it something related to other matters
                 such as perceived political profiles or failure to  perform
                 civic obligations? Was it because  they  were  regarded  as
                 having a nationality of a country hostile to  the  DRC  (eg
                 Rwanda, Uganda) or a political or military profile  opposed
                 to the regime? Certainly in some of the cases mentioned  we
                 simply do not know. Mr Aziz's response, again echoing BIDS,
                 was that all that matters in relation to AB and DE is  that
                 these were people whom the UK authorities had found not  to
                 have any asylum-related problems  on  return.  However,  in
                 point of fact we have no evidence in proper  form  even  to
                 show that the individuals concerned  had  made  claims  for
                 asylum and were not, for example, persons returning from  a
                 family or business visit. Furthermore, even  assuming  each
                 had  made  claims  for  asylum  and   been   refused,   the
                 conclusions reached by UK authorities  about  their  asylum
                 claims  can  only  have  been  based  on  the  evidence  as
                 furnished by those individuals; it cannot be assumed  those
                 concerned necessarily gave the same account  of  themselves
                 upon return to the DRC authorities.

           89.   These shortcomings in the evidence presented in  the  BIDS
                 materials lead us to seriously  question  their  contention
                 that there is a UK rate of detention of  some  40%  of  all
                 known DRC returnees over a two year period. Of  the  figure
                 of 38 removed between Jan 2002 - March 2003,  we  have  not
                 found satisfactory the evidence relating to any of  the  13
                 persons mentioned as being returned on a charter flight  in
                 March 2002 or the evidence relating to the two cases of  AB
                 and DE. Put bluntly, that means that we have not found  the
                 evidence satisfactory in relation to the claims made  about
                 any of the 38 mentioned."

 15. The  Tribunal  considered  an  argument  in  relation  to  a  duty  to
     investigate as is shown by what it said in paragraphs 91-92:

           "91.  That brings us to BIDS` argument that the Home Office  and
                 CIPU view about failed asylum seekers  would  be  different
                 had they undertaken proper inquiries into relevant matters,
                 including the evidence relating to the March  2002  charter
                 flight. It is not for us to pass judgment  on  Home  Office
                 procedures in respect of removals. However, insofar as  the
                 BIDS argument raises the general  point  that  more  active
                 steps should have been taken by UK authorities  to  monitor
                 returns, we  would  concur  with  the  point  made  in  the
                 Tribunal  determination  in  the  case  of  S  (Serbia  and
                 Montenegro - Kosovo) [2003] UKIAT 00031 that  the  Tribunal
                 is bound by the principles set out in the  House  of  Lords
                 judgment in Abdi  and  Gawe  [1996]  1  WLR  298  regarding
                 disclosure of evidence within accelerated procedures. There
                 is no duty on the Secretary of  State  to  embark  upon  an
                 investigation into  evidence  not  in  his  hands  for  the
                 preparation of country bulletins or reports,  in  order  to
                 assist appellants in making their cases.


           92.   We note the reference in the BIDS  letter  to  an  Amnesty
                 International (Netherlands) letter to the Dutch  Government
                 dated 8 July 2003  reporting  intimidating  behaviour  from
                 security  services  following  removals  from  Holland   to
                 Kinshasa by charter flight.  In one  respect  the  accounts
                 they mention do  not  support  BIDS`  contention  that  all
                 asylum  seekers  are  routinely  detained  on  arrival   at
                 Kinshasa, since those concerned mention no problems at  the
                 airport beyond being asked to give their name and  address.
                 In another respect, however, the evidence does suggest that
                 in these cases the security services  began  within  a  few
                 days systematically and repeatedly visiting these addresses
                 in order to make inquiries. As  such  it  does  raise  some
                 concerns. However, we consider (as did the  Tribunal  in  M
                 00051 at para 11.13) that there would need to be much  more
                 substantial  evidence  indicative   that   this   type   of
                 harassment was routine, before it demonstrated a real  risk
                 of  persecution  or  serious  harm.  Furthermore,  if  this
                 behaviour were routine, we would have expected  that  UNHCR
                 and European governments who  conduct  returns  would  have
                 made known concerns about it. Clearly the Dutch  government
                 considered this evidence but did not decide to  change  its
                 policy in the light of it."

 16. Miss Chandran provided an update in relation to two  matters  referred
     to by the Tribunal.  First, she said that  the  case  referred  to  in
     paragraph 78 had not yet  been  determined  by  the  Home  Office  and
     second, that AB and DE were asylum seekers and that  AB  had  returned
     and made a fresh asylum claim.

 17. It is important, before  we  examine  the  material  upon  which  Miss
     Chandran relies, that we record that her argument  was  not  that  the
     decision in VL was wrong on the evidence before it, nor was it that we
     should on the evidence before us reach a different  conclusion  as  to
     whether the Claimant would face a risk of a breach of her human rights
     upon return;  it was rather that the obligation  under  Article  3  to
     investigate allegations of ill-treatment meant that,  in  its  absence
     there would be a breach of Article 3 in this country through a  return
     of the claimant to DRC.

The correspondence

 18. In April 2003, Mr Baster, the BIDS co-ordinator, wrote to  ReSCU,  the
     Removal Strategy Co-ordination Unit, asking for an investigation  into
     what had happened to DRC nationals sent back on the March 2002 charter
     flight,  in  the  light  of  information  that   contradicted   CIPU's
     information that ten had simply been checked and  released;   it  said
     that one had been detained and ill-treated but was  now  back  in  the
     United Kingdom and that  another  had  returned  straightaway  to  the
     United Kingdom.  He said that they had not made enough enquiries to be
     sure of the safety of those whom they returned.

 19. In July 2003, Mr Baster wrote to Mr Jeffries, Director General of  the
     IND, seeking the suspension of all removals to the Democratic Republic
     of Congo. He said that CIPU had agreed to look at the safety of return
     to Kinshasa, and that ReSCU had undertaken  to  investigate  what  had
     happened to those returned on the charter flight of  March  2002.   Mr
     Jeffries said that he would try to find out more information about the
     treatment of failed asylum seekers.

 20. CIPU replied on 1st August 2003 to the letter to IND  saying  that  it
     was not aware of any corroborated or objective evidence of the serious
     or systematic abuse of returned failed  asylum  seekers,  nor  of  any
     international agency or national or international NGO  reporting  such
     abuse.  Such abuse as had been reported  related  to  those  who  were
     sought for rebellion and plotting assassination, (a distinction  which
     BIDS does not always refer to).   This  was  CIPU's  response  to  the
     concerns raised.  It explained its position to the UNHCR.

 21. BIDS wrote a  further  long  letter  enclosing  much  of  its  earlier
     correspondence to Mr Jeffries on 25th September  2003.   The  Tribunal
     hearing VL had this before  it.   It  repeated  many  of  its  earlier
     points, which were later to be ruled on in VL, including concern about
     the  documentation  activities  of  a  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
     official about whom sinister allegations were made, and later rejected
     by the Tribunal.  One appendix was an unsigned statement purporting to
     be from the unnamed individual who on return on the charter flight had
     been detained and ill-treated but who had been assisted to escape by a
     prison officer who felt  sorry  for  him  after  which  he  had  again
     returned to the United Kingdom. (See paragraph 78 VL).  Mr Baster said
     that this showed either that the Democratic Republic of Congo knew all
     about political activities through the activities of its officials  or
     that  no  failed  asylum  seeker  was  safe.   He  asked  for  further
     information about those who had been returned  and  for  investigation
     into allegations made by other NGOs  who  were  providing  information
     about returned asylum seekers.

 22. Mr Jeffries replied, saying that  CIPU  did  not  accept  that  failed
     asylum seekers would be at  risk  simply  as  failed  asylum  seekers,
     repeating the position which  he  had  previously  adopted.   Although
     ReSCU might not be the  relevant  body  for  an  examination  of  what
     happened in detail on the ground in the Democratic Republic of  Congo,
     it was unaware of any harsh treatment experienced by returnees.  There
     had been an issue as to  the  documentation  which  was  available  to
     returnees and as to whether retuning by charter marked them out in any
     way.

 23. BIDS next letter of 25th November 2003, also before  the  Tribunal  in
     VL, related to AB and DE.  (See paragraphs 81-83 of VL).  Mr Jeffries'
     reply of 5th December 2003 was in a similar vein to his earlier reply.
      The Tribunal had dealt with all this material in its determination in
     VL.

 24. The new material before us consisted of the US State Department Report
     on the Democratic Republic of Congo human  rights  practices  and  two
     more letters.  The former adds nothing;   Miss  Chandran  referred  to
     what it says about Makala  prison  conditions  but  that   information
     would not have been new to the Tribunal.  BIDS letter  of  15th  March
     2004  recorded  Mr  Baster  being  told  by  CIPU  that  it  had   not
     investigated what had happened to AB and DE.  There was no  IS  policy
     to monitor returns and so no research or  resources  were  devoted  by
     CIPU to that end.  It had no first hand researchers  and  relied  upon
     sources such as the FCO, UNHCR and NGOs in Kinshasa. The  decision  in
     VL meant that there was no  reason  to  investigate  the  position  in
     Kinshasa anyway.  The reply confirmed what was set out  in  the  BIDS'
     letter.  There is in reality very little material which was not before
     the Tribunal in VL, and dealt with by it.

Submissions

 25. The legal framework for Miss Chandran's submissions  was  provided  by
     three ECtHR decisions.  She submitted that it was a breach of  Article
     3 for the United Kingdom Government to fail to carry out the  promised
     investigations into the situation revealed by the  evidence.   It  was
     also a breach of Article 3 for a returning  state  party  to  fail  to
     investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment  committed  by  a
     receiving state to which it  was  proposed  to  return  failed  asylum
     seekers.

 26. In Aksoy v  Turkey  26th  November  1996,  the  ECtHR  considered  the
     obligations of the Turkish authorities in investigating the  death  of
     someone who, it was  alleged,  was  tortured  in  police  custody  but
     against  whose  assailants  no  civil  or  criminal  proceedings  were
     brought.  It said (paragraph 61) that  where  an  individual  in  good
     health was taken into custody but was injured  whilst  there,  it  was
     "incumbent on the State to provide a plausible explanation as  to  the
     causing of the injury failing which a clear issue arises under Article
     3 ...".  The nature of the rights under Article 3 meant  that  Article
     13 imposed an obligation on the State to  carry  out  a  thorough  and
     effective investigation of incidents of torture, as part of the notion
     of an "effective remedy".

 27. The same approach was applied in Aydin v Turkey 25th September 1997 to
     an inadequate investigation  of  an  essentially  similar  case.   The
     public prosecutor failed to use his  legal  powers  and  resources  to
     gather the necessary evidence.

 28. Finally, in Assenov v Bulgaria 28th  October  1998  the  ECtHR,  again
     dealing with claims of ill-treatment by the police  of  a  suspect  in
     custody, held that "where an individual raises an arguable claim  that
     he has been seriously ill-treated by the police or other  such  agents
     of the State unlawfully and in breach of  Article  3,  the  provision,
     read in conjunction with the State's general duty under Article  1  of
     the Convention to 'secure to everyone within  their  jurisdiction  the
     rights and freedoms defined in  ...  [the]  Convention,'  requires  by
     implication that there should be  an effective official  investigation
     ... capable of leading to the identification and punishment  of  those
     responsible ...".  If this were  not  the  case  the  prohibitions  in
     Article 3 would be ineffective in  practice  and  State  agents  could
     "abuse  the  rights  of  those  within  their  control  with   virtual
     impunity";  paragraph 102.  The  lack  of  a  thorough  and  effective
     investigation into the arguable claim of ill-treatment by the  police,
     led to the finding of a breach of Article 3.

 29. Miss Chandran developed her argument by pointing out that in a  number
     of ECtHR and domestic decisions, Article 3 had been extended so as  to
     preclude a State removing someone to another country where he would be
     at a real risk of treatment which  breached  Article  3;   substantial
     grounds have to be shown for reaching that conclusion.   She  referred
     to paragraph 76 of the ECtHR decision in  Cruz  Varas  v  Sweden  20th
     February 1991, which concerned a person returned from Sweden to  Chile
     who claimed that Article 3 had been breached through the risk that  he
     would once again be tortured by the Chilean authorities and because of
     the trauma he faced in being returned to a country where previously he
     had been tortured.  It said:

           "76.  Since the nature of the Contracting States' responsibility
                 under Article 3 (art.3) in cases of this kind lies  in  the
                 act of exposing an individual to the risk of ill-treatment,
                 the existence of the risk must be assessed  primarily  with
                 reference to those facts which were known or ought to  have
                 been known to the Contracting State  at  the  time  of  the
                 expulsion; the Court is not precluded, however, from having
                 regard to information which comes to  light  subsequent  to
                 the expulsion.  This may  be  of  value  in  confirming  or
                 refuting  the  appreciation  that  has  been  made  by  the
                 Contracting Party or the well-foundedness or  otherwise  of
                 an applicant's fears."

 30. The Court, we observe, was primarily concerned in  that  paragraph  to
     establish that in its examination of whether a  removal  had  breached
     Article 3, it was not confined to an appraisal of the  material  which
     was before the returning State.  Miss  Chandran  emphasised  that  the
     assessment of risk by reference to facts which "ought to be have  been
     known to the Contracting State at the time of  the  expulsion"  showed
     that the State was obliged to carry out an investigation into arguable
     claims before returning someone, in order to avoid a breach of Article
     3.

 31.  In  Kacaj  (O1/TH/00634)*,  19th  July  2001,  the  then   President,
     commenting on the positive obligation on a State  to  take  preventive
     measures to protect an individual whose life might be at risk from the
     criminal acts of others, pointed out that the same approach as applied
     to Article 2 applied also to Article 3.  He noted that the ECtHR in  A
     v UK [1998] 27 EHRR 611 had referred to  the  steps  to  be  taken  in
     respect of a risk to life  "of  which  they  have  or  ought  to  have
     knowledge."  He continued: "The duty to protect against  a  real  risk
     can readily be equated to a duty not to expose to a real risk."   Miss
     Chandran put some weight on that last point.  That  case  was  however
     concerned with  establishing  that  there  was  no  requirement  on  a
     claimant to establish facts beyond a reasonable doubt:  the  test  was
     one of real risk.

 32. Miss Chandran submitted that the correspondence showed the  following.
     BIDS had provided evidence, before the decision in VL, which  required
     an investigation which CIPU had said it would undertake.  It  was  not
     rational now, after VL, to refuse to carry out that investigation.  VL
     was being used as an excuse for the absence of investigation.  It  was
     no answer for the IS to say that the IS did not monitor returns or for
     CIPU to say that it could  not  carry  out  such  research.   Relevant
     evidence had been provided sufficient to justify an investigation into
     the future of the March 2002 Charter flight returnees and  of  AB  and
     DE.   That  investigation  had  in  effect  been  promised,  but   not
     undertaken. The United Kingdom  authorities  were  in  a  position  to
     undertake that investigation and to establish or disprove  the  claims
     made about specific returnees to the Democratic Republic of Congo.

 33. Miss Chandran contended that the information about the two  groups  of
     returned asylum seekers required  the  United  Kingdom  Government  to
     investigate their circumstances before returning the Claimant and that
     the reasonableness  of  her  point  was  reinforced  by  the  apparent
     acceptance of the Secretary of State that he would do so.  He had  the
     resources to do so or other relevant government  departments  had  the
     resources to do so, which refugee charities did  not.   He  could  not
     shut his eyes to what had been  said  and  claim  that  there  was  no
     evidence in reliance on his failure to carry out an investigation  nor
     could he rationally say that the IAT determination in VL resolved  the
     matter because his failure to investigate  had  deprived  the  IAT  of
     information which might have led to a different decision.  The  United
     Kingdom  had  to  investigate  because  it  was  responsible  for  the
     expulsion.  The names and  port  reference  of  AB  and  DE  had  been
     supplied to the Home Office before the second hearing in VL which  the
     IAT ought to have been told by the Secretary of State.  It had details
     of who were on the March 2002 charter flight.  There was  no  evidence
     that the FCO had been asked to investigate by the Home Office.

 34. The Tribunal's reliance in VL paragraph 91, upon R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
     Abdi and Gawe[1996] 1 WLR 298 HL, was mistaken;  that  case  concerned
     the existence or otherwise of a duty on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
     disclose material which he had relating to conditions in a safe  third
     country and turned on specific provisions as to  disclosure.   It  did
     not deal with any duty to obtain  information  through  investigation.
     Similarly, the Tribunal decision in S (Serbia and Montenegro - Kosovo)
     [2003] UKIAT 00031 did not relate to the same duty to investigate.  It
     concerned the absence of a duty to look for  material  which  had  not
     been part of his decision and  of  which  he  was  not  aware,  albeit
     couched as a duty to disclose.

 35. Although Miss Chandran referred to a letter written to  her  by  UNHCR
     United Kingdom in February 2004, it did not advance matters beyond the
     position as set out in VL.  Nationality of those returned  had  to  be
     carefully ascertained and there were some areas to which returns could
     not safely  be  made.  Certain  profiles  also  required  particularly
     careful consideration.

Conclusions

 36. We take the view that Miss Chandran's submissions  are  wrong  and  in
     general we prefer those of Mr Buckley for the Secretary of State.   We
     start from the position that on the  evidence  available  to  us,  the
     Claimant has failed to make out the case that she would be at  a  real
     risk of treatment which breached Article 3 were she to be returned  to
     the Democratic Republic of Congo.  The assessment of the  position  as
     set out in VL applies to her and remains sound, there having  been  no
     relevant changes of conditions there. The assessment of  the  evidence
     in VL relating to the two  groups  whose  circumstances  are  said  to
     warrant investigation is not  controverted  by  other  material  newly
     placed before us and we agree with the assessment of it  in  VL.   The
     only new point is that the Home Office, though not Mr Buckley knew  of
     certain details by the time for the second hearing in  December  2003,
     but the IAT were unaware of that.  But we do not see that  that  leads
     to a change in the  assessment.   Indeed,  the  whole  basis  of  Miss
     Chandran's submission is that we should  not  make  an  assessment  of
     whether the return of the Claimant to the Democratic Republic of Congo
     would expose her to treatment which would breach Article 3;  her  case
     is that there is  an  antecedent  breach  of  Article  3  through  the
     failure, it is said, to investigate, and that the carrying out  of  an
     investigation might reveal  material  which   could  lead  to  such  a
     conclusion. There is in effect a tacit recognition that the claim must
     fail judged on the currently available evidence.

 37. This is not a case either where  there  is  any  suggestion  that  the
     Secretary of State or  the  Government  more  generally  has  relevant
     information which it is withholding deliberately.  Although  Abdi  and
     Gawe does not deal with a duty to  investigate  in  the  human  rights
     context, the decision reflects the limits on the duty of disclosure on
     the Secretary of State, now contained in Rule 9 of the 2003 Rules.

 38.  The  duty  thoroughly  and  effectively   to   investigate   credible
     allegations of ill-treatment which breaches Article 3 is  implicit  in
     Article 3 in order to make the right in Article 3 effective.  The duty
     has been held to arise, in the cases relied on by Miss Chandran, where
     State agents were the subject of the credible allegations.  The  State
     was obliged to investigate the acts of its agents.  If it did  not  do
     so, the right would be ineffective because it was the State agents who
     had charge over the victim and who could otherwise breach  his  rights
     with impunity.

 39. In our view, the duty to investigate is not  necessarily  confined  to
     those  precise  situations;   there  might  be  an  obligation  on   a
     contracting State to have a system of  investigation  and  prosecution
     where credible allegations were made of criminal offences amounting to
     torture or other acts amounting to degrading treatment  being  carried
     out by non-state  actors.

 40. We consider that the circumstances in which the existence  of  such  a
     duty is recognised may be quite broad  but  that  its  application  or
     content should be sensitive to  types  of  circumstances  and  to  the
     specific facts in any  case.   So,  a  duty  to  investigate  credible
     allegations of treatment which breaches Article 3 can be implied  into
     Article 3 in circumstances which do not closely parallel those in  the
     three cases to which Miss Chandran referred, but where the recognition
     of such a duty is necessary in order for the rights in Article 3 to be
     effective.

 41. The distinctions, between the  cases  cited  to  us  and  the  present
     circumstances, relied on by Mr Buckley, are real enough  but  they  do
     not remove, circumscribe or  define  the  relevant  principle.   Those
     distinctions are relevant to the question of whether in any given  set
     of circumstances a duty to investigate  arises  and  if  so  what  its
     content is.

 42. Where a removal is contested on the ground that it  would  breach  the
     ECHR because of the anticipated act or omissions of State agents,  the
     burden is on a claimant to show a real  risk  of  treatment  breaching
     Article 3 on return.  This is the  lower  standard  of  proof.   If  a
     claimant is unable to show that real risk, there is no  reason  why  a
     refusal or failure on the part of the removing  state  to  investigate
     his allegations should amount to a breach of Article  3.   We  do  not
     suggest that that standard of proof is necessarily  the  same  as  the
     level required for the inception of the duty to investigate  as  might
     arise in respect of credible allegations of ill-treatment  in  custody
     by State  agents.   A  distinction  can  properly  exist  between  the
     threshold of  proof  applicable  to  those  cases  where  a  State  is
     responsible for the acts of agents, where  it  is  the  only  body  in
     reality capable of mounting an investigation, where  the  claimant  is
     the victim of identifiable past  acts  and   the  threshold  of  proof
     applicable to those cases where it is alleged that it is another state
     which has directly breached the  rights  of  someone  other  than  the
     claimant, as part of the claimant's case as to the existence of a real
     risk to him.

 43. We do not consider that the reference in Cruz Varas to assessing  risk
     in part by reference to facts which "ought to have been known" to  the
     State at the time of removal, is  a  basis  for  imposing  a  duty  to
     investigate of the sort contended for Miss Chandran.  It reflects,  as
     does the use of that phrase in other Article 3  or  indeed  Article  2
     cases, the point that the State cannot  evade  its  obligations  under
     Article 3 by shutting its eyes to the obvious or by failing to put  in
     place a reasonable system to enable it to know whether acts  breaching
     Article 3 have occurred where a reasonable State would appreciate that
     there was a real risk that they would do so.

 44. We do not consider it necessary, in order for  the  Article  3  rights
     available to someone to prevent their removal to be effective, for any
     duty to investigate allegations that a foreign state has mistreated  a
     third party to arise, unless the claimant has already  shown  that  he
     would be at a real risk of having his Article 3 rights  breached  upon
     his return.  That standard may  be  well  be  higher  than  the  level
     envisaged by "credible allegations" of ill-treatment by  State  agents
     of the State upon which the investigatory duty is then imposed.

 45. But whether it is or not higher than such a duty, once that real  risk
     has been shown, it becomes irrelevant whether or not there has in fact
     been  an  investigation,  because  the  claimant  will  have   already
     succeeded in his claim, by reference to the lower  standard  of  proof
     which his case has to achieve.

 46. Any other approach would amount to a reversal of the burden  of  proof
     or to a lowering of the standard of proof.  This standard  is  already
     different from that applicable  to  the  ascertainment  of  an  actual
     breach of Article 3 through past acts.  In practical terms this  lower
     standard reflects the difficulties of proving  the  degree  of  future
     risk or the nature of the future risk which  would  be  run,  and  the
     difficulties of proof and disproof of the allegations which, by  their
     nature, underlie claims for protection under both Conventions.   These
     appeals and the original decision which gives rise  to  them  are  not
     inquisitorial by nature, even though an obligation to  co-operate  and
     assist each other can be spelt out  from  the  very  circumstances  in
     which protection is sought and offered.   That  leads  to  a  mutually
     owed,  two-way,  obligation.   It  is  not  aptly  described   as   an
     accusatorial  system  either.   The  lower  standard  of  proof,   and
     obligations of fair  dealing  and  co-operation  where  one  party  is
     possessed alone of almost all the relevant personal knowledge and  the
     other is better  placed  to  deal  with  general  country  conditions,
     dictate together that this is a unique jurisdiction.  Neither label is
     apt.  The lower standard of proof best reflects that;  but  it  should
     not be diluted further.  The provision as to the burden  of  proof  is
     specifically contained in the 2003 Rules, at Rule 49.

 47. It is for the Claimant, to the lower standard, to prove her case.  She
     cannot do so.  She cannot then say that the  material  which  she  has
     produced suffices to require an investigation of her  material  which,
     if not carried out, itself demonstrates a breach of Article 3.  If she
     can do so, then any claimant who cannot succeed, can  argue  that  the
     material is nonetheless sufficient  to  require  an  investigation  of
     claims which that claimant may make about himself or others and  until
     then a breach is shown by the  failure  to  investigate.   That  would
     either involve putting the burden of proof on the Secretary  of  State
     or permitting a lower standard of proof than is currently applied.

 48. We do not see that such an approach is necessary for the rights  under
     Article 3 in respect of someone being removed from the jurisdiction to
     be made effective.

 49. In any event, the background to that judgment is not one in which  the
     contracting  party  is  removing  a  non-national  into  the  complete
     unknown.  There is  information,  whatever  criticisms  of  detail  or
     methodology can be made of it, in the form of  the  CIPU  Reports  and
     those of other similar governmental agencies  such  as  the  US  State
     Department.  The Secretary of State  co-operates  with  the  appellant
     through the provision of such information;  it does not and should not
     simply require an appellant to produce the general background material
     relevant to the case.  There may  be  undisclosed  and  unsourced  FCO
     material from United Kingdom Embassy  diplomats.   There  is  material
     from other countries which return failed asylum seekers, one of  which
     monitors what happens at least at the  airport.   The  UNHCR  has  its
     sources on the ground in the Democratic Republic of Congo which inform
     its letters and assessments.  There are NGOs,  international  such  as
     Amnesty International, or more domestically based, which  can  and  do
     provide  information  relevant  to  individual  cases  or  as  to  the
     situation more generally which the Secretary of State  can  take  into
     account, whether through CIPU or not.   The  IAT  certainly  does  so.
     This too differentiates it from those situations in  which  the  State
     alone, or virtually alone, is realistically capable of  providing  the
     relevant information, and where the information is simple, factual and
     probably uncontentious information.  Here, the investigation requested
     concerns what may be highly contentious in terms of what  happened  to
     individuals and its more general significance.  The Secretary of State
     is not required to investigate so as to provide, or prove or  disprove
     the quality of, the components of an appellant's case.

 50. At a more specific level, there is nothing in the material provided to
     the Tribunal which can be said to call for an  investigation,  failing
     which the rights of this Claimant under  Article  3  would  have  been
     negated.  We agree with the assessment of its fragility  as  carefully
     analysed in VL.

 51. Although there has  been  a  little  more  material  provided  to  the
     Secretary of State in relation to AB and DE  and  there  has  been  an
     update on AB, none of that amounts to a significant  advance,  whether
     as demonstrating a real risk to the Claimant on return or as  creating
     a requirement for an investigation.

 52. We do not consider that the correspondence before the Tribunal  in  VL
     or its further stages, which we have set out, alters the position.  We
     agree  with  Miss  Chandran  that  if  there  were  an  obligation  to
     investigate before, it is not satisfied by the decision in VL.  But we
     do not attribute to the correspondence  the  significance  which  Miss
     Chandran does.  It is not clear whether  CIPU  had  agreed  itself  to
     investigate  the  claims  or  that  any  agreement  went  beyond   the
     undertaking of the sort of country assessment it does anyway.   It  is
     not an investigatory body in any other sense anyway;   it  is  not  an
     investigatory arm of the Home Office, IS or FCO.  Paragraphs 20 and 22
     show there to  be  no  outstanding  promise  to  BIDS  to  investigate
     matters, at least in the sense in which the Secretary of State  agreed
     to undertake enquiries.  We do not see  him  as  conceding  any  legal
     obligation to make such enquiries.  It is for the Tribunal  to  decide
     whether there was such a legal duty, and whether it has been breached.
      Mr Buckley was unaware of anything more having been  done.   But  the
     material provided to IND was sparse, and  of  rather  doubtful  weight
     anyway.

 53. BIDS and other NGOs also have some ability to  investigate  themselves
     and to produce evidence, particularly if it is said that  the  persons
     in question have returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.   We  are  wholly
     unpersuaded by suggestions that weight should be attached  to  unsworn
     written material of such vagueness.  There are obvious limitations  of
     feasibility,  even  were  resources  unlimited   and   resourcefulness
     unbounded,  in  monitoring  returns  in   certain   countries;    such
     attentions may be unwelcome even to those returned.

 54. All of this is reflected in the standard of proof.  It leads  us  back
     to the essential reason why Miss  Chandran's  submissions  are  wrong.
     She cannot surmount the lower  standard  of  proof  on  the  available
     material and cannot do so by asserting that unproven  assertions  have
     not been investigated and disproved.  If an allegation  is  proven  or
     appears well- founded in respect of a third party, that  becomes  part
     of the material which  has  to  be  assessed  in  making  the  overall
     judgment as to risk.
 55. Accordingly, for those reasons we reject her submissions and allow the
     Secretary of State's appeal.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY

                                                                   PRESIDENT



