


|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 23 September 2004       |        |KK (Ahmadi - Unexceptional -|
|                           |        |Risk on Return) Pakistan    |
|                           |        |[2005] UKIAT 00033          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|.......04.02.05..........................................         |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Freeman (Vice President)                                     |
|HH Judge Huskinson (Vice President)                               |
|Mrs G Greenwood                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms Pal (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Lewis (Counsel - instructed by Thompson & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Secretary of State appeals to the Tribunal, with permission, from
    the determination  of  Professor  Rebecca  M  M  Wallace,  Adjudicator,
    promulgated on 6 February 2004 whereby she allowed  on  asylum  grounds
    and human rights grounds the appeal by the Respondent (hereafter called
    "the Claimant") against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum to the Claimant and to refuse him  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and to propose to  give  directions  for  the  removal  of  the
    Claimant to Pakistan.

2.    This case was listed with a view to it being a country guidance  case
    and it may be treated as such.  It is however important to notice  that
    the matters which we decide in this determination are  limited,  having
    regard to the facts of this particular case.  This case was listed  for
    hearing together with certain other cases involving Claimants who  were
    members of the Ahmadi faith where  various  other  points  arose,  i.e.
    points other than those arising in this present case.  At  the  hearing
    on 23 September 2004, having regard to the time available for  argument
    and the number of matters raised in  these  other  cases,  these  other
    cases (save for those which were capable  of  being  immediately  dealt
    with and which were decided by a  remittal)  were  adjourned  and  this
    present case was the only case argued before us.  We  are,  of  course,
    concerned only to decide so much as  is  necessary  to  determine  this
    present case.  Insofar as points emerged in the argument which are  not
    needed to be decided in the present case, but which may be  central  in
    other cases as yet un-argued, we leave those points to  be  decided  in
    the future cases.

3.    In summary, and as is explained in greater detail  below,  this  case
    raises the question of whether there is a real risk of  persecution  or
    Article 3 infringing treatment on return to Pakistan for a  person  who
    is a member of the Ahmadi faith but who is otherwise unexceptional  and
    who we will, for convenience, refer to as  an  "unexceptional  Ahmadi".
    By this expression we mean, in relation to the present Claimant, a  man
    who is of the Ahmadi faith but:

    (i)    has no record of active preaching and is not a person in respect
         of whom any finding has been made that there is a real  risk  that
         he will preach on return;


    (ii)   has no particular profile in the Ahmadi faith;


    (iii)  has no history of persecution or other ill-treatment in Pakistan
         related to his Ahmadi faith; and


    (iv)   has no other particular feature to give any potential added risk
         to him (e.g. by being a convert to the Ahmadi faith).


      In summary the present Claimant is a  member  of  the  Ahmadi  faith,
    whose home area is Rabwah, but as regards whom there are no  additional
    risk factors specific to him beyond the mere fact that he is  a  member
    of the Ahmadi faith from Rabwah.

4.    It is not necessary to set out the Claimant's account on the basis of
    which he claimed asylum because, save for the fact that the Claimant is
    of the Ahmadi faith, the  Adjudicator  did  not  believe  his  account.
    There has been no cross appeal by the Claimant  against  this  finding.
    The Adjudicator did however accept that the Claimant was  a  member  of
    the Ahmadi faith.  She would also appear to have accepted (and  it  was
    on  this  basis  that  the  case  was  argued   before   us   by   both
    representatives) that the Claimant's home area was Rabwah where he  had
    lived from his birth (20 November 1977) until about 1999 when  he  went
    to Lahore.

5.    The Adjudicator not only rejected  as  not  credible  the  Claimant's
    account as summarised by her in paragraphs  5,  6,  9  and  10  of  her
    determination, but she also found that, even if the Claimant's  account
    was to be accepted as true, he  had  only  narrated  two  incidents  of
    problems and that the alleged ill-treatment was not such as constituted
    persecution.  Notwithstanding this finding,  however,  the  Adjudicator
    then went on to examine certain objective evidence in paragraphs 24  to
    26 of the determination including provisions of the penal code, various
    matters referred to in the CIPU Report on Pakistan, evidence  regarding
    Khatma Nabuwat, and also Article 18 of the United Nations 1966 Covenant
    on Civil and Political Rights.  She referred to Pakistan's  failure  to
    sign the Covenant which she concluded reinforces the  vulnerability  of
    minority  religions  in  Pakistan.   She   concluded   there   was   an
    insufficiency of protection and that the police  do  not  intervene  to
    prevent violence.  She referred to the application of Ordinance  XX  as
    being ad hoc and as being on the statute book and she  stated  that  it
    can and has been applied with rigor and that when it is this amounts to
    persecution on the basis of religion and to treatment which is contrary
    to Article 3.  In paragraph 27 of the determination  she  reached  this
    conclusion:

      "Accordingly, given the low standard of proof and given the Appellant
         is accepted as an  Ahmadi  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of  an
         engagement of the Refugee Convention in respect of  the  Appellant
         by virtue of his religion.  Ahmadis are at risk and  there  is  an
         insufficiency  of  protection  and  this   insufficiency   extends
         throughout the country."


6.    Accordingly the substance of the Adjudicator's determination is  that
    all Ahmadis, including all unexceptional Ahmadis  as  described  above,
    are at real risk of persecution throughout Pakistan, whether they  come
    from Rabwah or elsewhere.

7.    On behalf of the Secretary of State Ms Pal relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal which she developed in argument.  In summary she contended  that
    the Adjudicator erred in law in the following ways:

    (i)    She argued that, bearing in mind the findings of the Adjudicator
         in paragraph 23 of the  determination  (to  the  effect  that  the
         Claimant's account was not  credible  and  that  even  if  it  was
         credible the  Claimant  had  not  been  subjected  to  persecutory
         treatment in Pakistan) the Adjudicator  had  failed  to  give  any
         reasons which were sustainable in law as  to  why,  despite  these
         findings, the Claimant would be at real  risk  of  persecution  on
         return.  Bearing in mind  the  Adjudicator's  finding  that  every
         member of the Ahmadi faith would,  for  that  reason  alone,  face
         persecution on  return,  she  argued  that  clear  and  sufficient
         reasons for such a finding would be required.


    (ii)   She drew attention to a previous reported Tribunal determination
         of [2003] UKIAT 00198 A (Pakistan) notified on
         9 October 2003 which was therefore available to  the  Adjudicator.
         She argued that this case, which  was  a  stronger  case  for  the
         applicant in that case as compared to the present Claimant, showed
         that even if an applicant is an Ahmadi who has been found to be  a
         preacher, this will not necessarily result in that applicant being
         entitled to succeed under the Refugee Convention.  She referred to
         paragraphs 11.5 and 11.6 of the decision in 198 A and reminded the
         Tribunal that here there is no finding that  the  Claimant  either
         has preached or will preach.  She argued  that  the  Adjudicator's
         determination in the present case  is  contrary  to  the  Tribunal
         reasoning in 198 A.


    (iii)  She argued that as the Claimant is not a preacher  there  is  no
         real risk that he would even ever be identified as  an  Ahmadi  on
         return and for that reason alone would be at no  real  risk.   She
         relied on the Tribunal determination  in  [2004]  UKIAT  00139  MC
         (Pakistan) which she argued also showed that  there  was  no  real
         risk on return to someone merely because they were a member of the
         Ahmadi faith.


    (iv)    She accepted that Ahmadis were at risk of receiving some degree
         of societal harassment and discrimination, but she argued that  to
         assert that every Ahmadi faces  a  real  risk  of  persecution  is
         unsustainable.  She drew attention to the CIPU Report on  Pakistan
         of April 2004 especially at paragraphs 6.81 and 6.87 and she  also
         referred to the number of Ahmadis in Pakistan.  Paragraph 6.70  of
         the CIPU Report shows that four million Ahmadis live  in  Pakistan
         (about 2.7% of Pakistan's population).  This paragraph notes  that
         it is difficult to determine the actual size as Ahmadis  generally
         declare themselves to be Muslims.  It is recorded  that  the  most
         recent official census puts the number of Ahmadis in  the  country
         to be 286,000.  The four million figure is supported by the Ahmadi
         community itself.  Bearing in mind these high  numbers  she  draws
         attention to the lack of objective  evidence  of  any  substantial
         number of persecutory incidents  against  Ahmadis.   If  each  and
         every Ahmadi in Pakistan were at real risk  of  persecution  then,
         bearing in mind these large numbers, the objective evidence  would
         be full of numerous and  extensive  incidents  of  persecution  of
         large numbers of persons.


    (v)    She  argued  that  there  was  if  necessary  a  sufficiency  of
         protection for Ahmadis.


8.    Before coming to Mr Lewis' arguments it is useful first to notice the
    basis upon which he presented his case.  Bearing in mind  the  findings
    of fact made by the Adjudicator, Mr Lewis argued that once a person  is
    identified as an Ahmadi that person is at real risk of  persecution  or
    Article 3 infringing treatment and that  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection.  That being the general thrust of his  argument,  Mr  Lewis
    then developed the matter by reference to two bases,  namely  (a)  that
    the Claimant would return to Rabwah, and (b) that  the  Claimant  would
    return elsewhere.  Clearly it is  appropriate  first  to  consider  the
    question of a return to Rabwah, because that  is  the  Claimant's  home
    area.  As regards these two bases:

    (a)    Mr Lewis argued that if the Claimant were to  return  to  Rabwah
         and to become a resident in Rabwah it would be assumed against him
         by the general Muslim population that  he  was  a  member  of  the
         Ahmadi faith.  This is because it is estimated  that  95%  of  the
         population in Rabwah are Ahmadi.  Accordingly the  Claimant  would
         effectively identify himself as Ahmadi by returning to Rabwah and,
         once so identified, would be at real risk of persecution;


    (b)     If the Claimant were to return somewhere other than Rabwah then
         Mr Lewis accepted that, bearing in mind the Adjudicator's findings
         of fact, the Claimant may not  immediately  be  recognised  as  an
         Ahmadi.  Mr Lewis  did  not  feel  able  to  argue  that,  on  the
         Adjudicator's findings, the Tribunal had to proceed on  the  basis
         that the Claimant would attend an Ahmadi mosque or  would  act  in
         some overt manner identifying himself as an  Ahmadi.   However  Mr
         Lewis argued that sooner or later the fact that the Claimant is an
         Ahmadi would be bound to come out and that, once so identified, he
         would be at real risk of persecution.


9.    In support of his arguments Mr Lewis prepared a helpful and  detailed
    skeleton argument running to 27 pages, which dealt generally  with  the
    situation for Ahmadis and then dealt specifically with  four  cases  in
    which Mr Lewis is instructed and which were listed before the Tribunal.
    However it is only with the Claimant's case (AS/53707/03) with which we
    are at present concerned.  Mr Lewis  relied  upon  and  developed  this
    skeleton argument and advanced the following points.

10.   He drew attention to  the  circumstances  regarding  Rabwah  and  the
    question of who administers or is in control of Rabwah.  He argued that
    the Tribunal should revisit the analysis in the case of  139  MC  which
    had relied upon an earlier Tribunal determination in Mirza in which  it
    had been held that as  Rabwah  is  a  city  predominantly  occupied  by
    Ahmadis, all levels of authority would include  many  persons  who  are
    themselves of the Ahmadi faith, including members of the police  force.
    Mr Lewis referred to a Canadian Report at page 27 of bundle  C  stating
    that almost all government services including the  post  office,  local
    police and magistrates' offices, are staffed by non-Ahmadis.   He  also
    in this connection referred to a letter dated  11  May  2003  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK to Messrs Thompson & Co (bundle A  page
    106) stating that there are no Ahmadis  in  the  police,  judiciary  or
    other administrative offices at Rabwah and that this has  long  been  a
    deliberate policy of the government to disallow such postings even at a
    low level.  This letter also records attacks on Ahmadis in  Rabwah  and
    the adverse attention to Rabwah given by  fundamentalist  groups.   The
    letter suggests that Rabwah is in many  ways  a  less  safe  place  for
    Ahmadis than other towns in Pakistan and that the country's anti-Ahmadi
    religious laws are equally applicable there and that:

      "As a vast majority of the local population is Ahmadi,  there  is  no
         problem  for  Ahmadi-bashers  to  make  sure  that  the   targeted
         individual is an Ahmadi".


      Mr Lewis also referred to a State of Human Rights 2003 Report at page
    187 of the bundle in this connection.

11.   Having regard  to  the  foregoing  and  the  fact  that  95%  of  the
    population of Rabwah is Ahmadi Mr Lewis argued that the Claimant  would
    indeed be identified as being Ahmadi and would  indeed  be  seen  as  a
    potential target for those hostilely  inclined  to  Ahmadis  merely  by
    virtue of returning to Rabwah.  As regards the population of Rabwah  Mr
    Lewis drew attention to the fact that there  may  be  some  uncertainty
    (see paragraph 18 of his skeleton) as to the present  population  which
    may be somewhere between about 35,000 or 45,000 - he accepted  that  in
    any event it was a town with a population well into five figures.

12.   He argued that the question of whether or not an Ahmadi would  preach
    on return was not the determinative issue as  to  whether  that  person
    would be at risk.  Risk would arise if that person were  identified  as
    being Ahmadi.  Preaching is merely one way in which identification  may
    occur.

13.   Mr Lewis recognised the figure of four million  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan
    and that this was a substantial number.  However he drew  attention  to
    the discrepancy between this four million and the number shown  in  the
    census return (i.e. the number of persons who were prepared actually to
    declare themselves as Ahmadi on the census return) being only  286,000.
    He argued that this was an indication of the sense  of  repression  and
    risk which Ahmadis felt,  in  that  they  were  not  prepared  to  risk
    declaring themselves as such.

14.   Mr Lewis referred the Tribunal both  in  his  skeleton  and  in  oral
    argument to the reasons why the majority Muslim population  and  indeed
    the state itself are ill-disposed to the Ahmadi faith, see paragraphs 2
    to 10 of his skeleton where  he  emphasises  that  Islam  is  the  only
    religion acceptable and that Pakistan is an Islamic Republic  and  that
    there  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  Ahmadi  faith  and
    mainstream Islam and that mainstream Islam view  the  Ahmadi  faith  as
    denying the finality of the  Holy  Prophet  of  Islam  Mohammed,  which
    constitutes a direct challenge to the core and basic  tenet  of  Islam.
    He drew attention to the  provisions  of  the  Penal  Code  prohibiting
    Ahmadis  from  calling  themselves  Muslims  and  for   the   potential
    difficulties for Ahmadis under the provisions of the Penal Code.  There
    were also  difficulties  in  voter  registration  and  in  obtaining  a
    passport, where an Ahmadi may  be  required,  if  they  wish  to  avoid
    difficulties, to declare themselves as non-Muslim.

15.   Mr Lewis drew attention to the US Department of  State  International
    Religious Freedom Report 2003 at page 44 of the  bundle  regarding  the
    implementation of the blasphemy laws and indicating that blasphemy laws
    often target members of the Ahmadi  community  and  that  according  to
    Ahmadi sources 89 Ahmadis were charged formally in criminal cases on  a
    "religious basis" (including blasphemy) in 2002, compared to  70  cases
    in 2001 and 166 cases in 2000.  Mr Lewis accepted, so far  as  concerns
    these numbers, that bearing in mind there are four million  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan and 286,000 Ahmadis who declare  themselves  as  such  on  the
    census form, that he cannot argue that for any random Ahmadi there is a
    real risk of being charged under the blasphemy laws.  However he argued
    that bringing charges under the blasphemy laws is only one  example  of
    the manner in which Ahmadis are persecuted.

16.   He argued that  Ahmadis  face  other  forms  of  persecution,  beyond
    prosecution  under  the  blasphemy  laws,   by   virtue   of   societal
    discrimination and violence.  By way of  example  he  referred  to  the
    passage at page 54 of bundle A  recording  a  mob  storming  an  Ahmadi
    family's house but where  the  local  police,  although  aware  of  the
    gathering mob, did  not  intercede  to  protect  the  family.   Shortly
    afterwards the police arrived to arrest the Ahmadi family on  a  charge
    under Section 298C of the Penal Code.  This was an example first  of  a
    mob targeting an Ahmadi family and secondly of  the  persons  who  were
    being attacked getting no assistance from the authorities and, in fact,
    finding that they themselves were taken into custody by the authorities
    rather than the wrongdoers.  As regards  adverse  treatment  from  non-
    state actors Mr Lewis drew attention to  the  Khatam-e-  Nubuwwat,  see
    paragraphs 24 to 27 of the skeleton.

17.   Mr Lewis argued that, once a member of the Ahmadi  faith  is  in  the
    position of needing protection from the authorities  against  non-state
    actors, there is at least a real risk that that person will  be  denied
    such protection, and he referred to the matters in paragraphs 28 to  35
    of his skeleton argument.

18.   Accordingly and in summary Mr  Lewis  argued  that  if  the  Claimant
    returns to Rabwah he will be identified as an Ahmadi  and  will  be  at
    real risk of persecutory treatment, against  which  there  will  be  no
    sufficiency of protection.  If he goes elsewhere then, while he may not
    immediately be so recognised, he will be recognised as an Ahmadi sooner
    or later (e.g. upon getting into some dispute with  a  neighbour).   He
    argued that, once so identified, the Claimant would be at real risk  of
    persecutory treatment and, once again, there would be no sufficiency of
    protection for him.

19.   The Tribunal is unable  to  accept  Mr  Lewis'  arguments.   We  have
    concluded that the Secretary of State's appeal must  be  allowed.   Our
    reasons are as follows.

20.   In our Judgment the learned Adjudicator did, with respect, err in law
    in the manners identified by Ms Pal.  A decision that all Ahmadis  are,
    for that reason alone (i.e. solely because they are Ahmadis),  at  real
    risk of persecution on return  to  Pakistan  is  contrary  to  previous
    Tribunal decisions.  The Adjudicator therefore erred in law in reaching
    her conclusion without  taking  into  consideration  previous  Tribunal
    decisions, including in particular 198 A and she also erred in  law  in
    failing to give any sufficient and legally sustainable  reasons  as  to
    how she reached the conclusion she did reach in  paragraph  27  of  the
    determination to the  effect  that  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or Article 3 infringing treatment for the  Claimant  merely
    because he is an Ahmadi.

21.   In the  present  case  the  Adjudicator  disbelieved  the  Claimant's
    account.  She found that  he  was  an  Ahmadi  but,  beyond  that,  she
    rejected his  account.   Accordingly  the  Claimant  falls  within  the
    category of persons which we have, for convenience,  described  as  the
    "unexceptional Ahmadi", see paragraph 3 above.

22.   There are four million Ahmadis,  on  the  Ahmadis'  own  figures,  in
    Pakistan.  About 286,000 persons are sufficiently determined Ahmadis to
    declare themselves as such on the census return.  So  far  as  concerns
    the Claimant there is nothing before us to suggest that he  would  fall
    within the latter category rather than the former, and Mr Lewis did not
    advance any significant argument to the contrary.

23.   If there was a real risk of persecution for all of the  four  million
    Ahmadis in Pakistan merely because they  are  Ahmadis,  then  we  would
    expect  greatly  more  objective  evidence  detailing  widespread   and
    numerous events of persecutory treatment against Ahmadis.  Even if  the
    Claimant falls within the 286,000 Ahmadis who  would  actually  declare
    themselves as such on the Census Return, we once again conclude that if
    there was a real risk of persecution for each of these 286,000  Ahmadis
    merely because they are Ahmadis there would be greatly more reports  of
    persecution  in  the  objective  evidence.   Rabwah  is  a  city  whose
    population we are invited to take as  well  into  five  figures,  being
    perhaps 35,000 to 45,000.  The population is about 95% Ahmadi.  If  for
    any Ahmadi, including all unexceptional Ahmadis, in Rabwah there was  a
    real risk of persecution or Article 3 infringing treatment there  would
    once again be far more extensive reports of such matters  occurring  in
    Rabwah to be found in the objective evidence.

24.   Whether one looks at the matter on a countrywide basis or in relation
    to the city of Rabwah, there are a number of reports of  Ahmadis  being
    the subject of prosecutions under  the  Penal  Code  and  a  number  of
    reports of hostile action  (sufficiently  serious  to  be  persecutory)
    against Ahmadis by  non-state  actors.  However  bearing  in  mind  the
    numbers revealed in the objective evidence we see no real risk for  the
    Claimant that he will become the subject of a blasphemy charge  or  any
    other serious charge under the Penal Code by reason of being an Ahmadi.
     So far as hostile treatment by non-state actors is concerned, some  of
    these attacks are directed at persons of high profile (such  as  active
    preachers) within the Ahmadi community  -  and  the  Claimant,  on  the
    Adjudicator's findings, would not be at  risk  of  being  so  targeted.
    There may also be random attacks on Ahmadis of no  particular  profile,
    merely because they are Ahmadis.  The Claimant would face a possibility
    that he would be unfortunate enough  to  be  the  person  who  was  the
    subject of such a random attack.  However this would be no more than  a
    mere possibility.  Having regard to the objective  evidence  before  us
    this possibility falls well short  of  being  anything  that  could  be
    described as a real risk or a reasonable likelihood.

25.   Accordingly  we  conclude  that  for  the  unexceptional  Ahmadi,  as
    described by us above (into which category the Claimant falls) there is
    no real risk of persecutory or Article 3 infringing treatment on return
    to Pakistan (whether to Rabwah or elsewhere) merely by reason of  being
    an  Ahmadi.   This  is  the  limited  point  which  the  present   case
    determines.  Bearing in mind this finding there is no need  for  us  to
    make any further findings (and we expressly do not do so in the present
    case) on the question of whether, supposing there were a real  risk  of
    persecutory treatment from non-state actors  for  the  Claimant,  there
    would be a sufficiency of  protection  for  him  either  in  Rabwah  or
    elsewhere.  Nor do we make any finding regarding  whether  an  internal
    flight alternative to Rabwah is available to an  applicant  whose  home
    area is elsewhere and who  has  been  found  to  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to his home area.

26.   In the result the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.





                                                  HIS HONOUR JUDGE HUSKINSON
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT













