
           OB (Somalia - out of country appeal) Somali [2005] UKIAT00056 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  18 January 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                         .28th February 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Mr H J E Latter(Vice President)
                       Miss B Mensah (Vice President)

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Eicke, instructed by Treasury Solicitor



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal from the  determination  of  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  B
     Watkins CMG, promulgated on 29 March  2004.   It  had  given  rise  to
     unusual arguments about rights of appeal.

  2. The Appellants are a mother and her daughter, born  in  October  1994,
     who claim to be Somali nationals.  They arrived in the United  Kingdom
     from Germany on 25 March 1998.  The  mother  claimed  asylum  and  was
     granted temporary admission.  Germany  agreed  on  request  to  accept
     responsibility under the  Dublin  Convention  in  July  1998  for  the
     substantive  determination  of  the  claim.   On  30  July  1998,  the
     Secretary of State issued a certificate under section 2 of the  Asylum
     and Immigration Act 1996 stating that Germany was a safe third country
     to which the Appellants could be sent without breach  of  the  Refugee
     Convention  and   which   would   process   the   asylum   application
     substantively.  He  also  refused  leave  to  enter  and  set  removal
     directions for Germany.

  3. Judicial Review was sought of that certificate and the hearing of  the
     application was stayed pending the decision in  the  case  of  Adan  &
     Aitsegur v SSHD.  The House of Lords concluded on  19  December  2000,
     [2001] Imm AR 253, that Germany was not a safe third  country  because
     it did not at that time recognise that persecution by non-state agents
     came within the scope  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   It  upheld  the
     decision of the Court of Appeal in September 1999,  which  quashed  on
     Judicial Review the certificate that Germany was a safe third country.

  4. On 5 December 2001, the Secretary of State withdrew the certificate in
     this case and issued a fresh  certificate  under  section  11  of  the
     Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  which  from  2  October  2000  had
     reversed the decision of the Court of Appeal, and in  effect  that  of
     the House of Lords.  The letter of 5 December 2001  repeated  much  of
     what was in the 30 July 1998 letter, but relating it now to the recent
     statutory change, and the new certificate provisions.

  5. On 15 January 2002, the application for Judicial Review of the 30 July
     1998 certificate was withdrawn.  The Secretary of State had  tried  to
     persuade the Appellant to withdraw that application on the ground that
     she did not fall within the scope of Adan anyway because she  was  not
     Somali but Kenyan.  He explained in a letter of 31 July 2001  that  he
     had been satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that he had established
     the true identity and nationality of the Appellant, saying  that  "she
     is the rightful holder of the Kenyan passport which she  attempted  to
     destroy to conceal her true nationality and identity".

  6. He had made enquiries of the  passport  authorities  in  Kenya,  which
     confirmed that she was recognised as a Kenyan citizen  by  the  Kenyan
     authorities.  She was an indigenous Kenyan national, and in support of
     her application for a Kenyan passport had produced birth  certificates
     for parents and grandparents, recognised by the authorities  as  being
     Kenyan nationals.  The Secretary of State concluded that the  Judicial
     Review application  was  "founded  upon  a  deliberate  and  sustained
     deception as to her true identity and  nationality".   The  claim  for
     asylum would be properly dealt with in Germany.  A wasted costs  order
     was threatened.

  7. On 30 January 2002, the Appellant claimed that  removal  would  breach
     her human rights, but in March 2002 the Secretary of  State  certified
     that allegation as manifestly unfounded pursuant to  section  72(2)(a)
     of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   In  April  2002,  a  second
     application for Judicial Review was launched, this time in respect  of
     the manifestly unfounded certificate.  This application for permission
     was dismissed on oral renewal by Crane J on 15 January 2003.

  8. On 23 May 2003, shortly after fresh removal directions were given, the
     Appellants were removed to Germany and  on  the  next  day  lodged  an
     appeal.  We were told that they remain in Germany, having been granted
     humanitarian protection there as Somalis.

  9. No specific statutory provision was referred  to  in  the  grounds  of
     appeal which related to the asserted breach of Article 3  and  Article
     8.  The grounds contended that the Appellants were  Somali  Nationals.
     They were at risk of removal to Somalia, directly or indirectly.  They
     had lived in the United Kingdom with the rather younger sister of  the
     adult Appellant and removal of the Appellants was  a  disproportionate
     interference with the family life which they had established with  her
     since her arrival in the United Kingdom in December  2001.   (She  had
     been granted asylum in November 2002 as a Somali.  In her statement in
     support of her application of November 2002, the sister had said  that
     she did not really know her age but  she  was  then  probably  between
     sixteen and twenty.  In January 2003, the Secretary of State said that
     he intended to review the decision.)

 10. The Adjudicator held that the withdrawal of the certificate, issued in
     respect of the 1998 decision under the 1996 Act,  had  the  effect  of
     reinstating the right of appeal under section 13  of  the  Immigration
     Act 1971 against the refusal of leave to enter.  The  new  certificate
     issued under section 11 of the 1999 Act continued  to  have  the  same
     effect on the  section  13  appeal.   The  pre-conditions  in  section
     11(2)(a) were met.  There was no section 13 appeal before him.

 11. The appeal under section 71 of the 1999 Act  against  the  certificate
     issued under section 11 was not a valid appeal because the  conditions
     laid on such an appeal  were  not  met.   The  asserted  appeal  under
     section 65 of the 1999 Act  on  human  rights  grounds  could  not  be
     brought because the statement of 2 March  2002  by  the  Secretary  of
     State, that Germany was the responsible country for  the  purposes  of
     the Dublin Convention, did not generate appeal rights because  it  was
     not a refusal of leave to enter.  Even if there were an appeal  before
     him, the claim had been certified as  manifestly  unfounded  and  that
     certificate had been upheld on Judicial Review;  there was nothing  in
     the fresh  evidence  which  he  heard  which  undermined  the  judge's
     conclusions.  Nothing showed that the Article 8 claim made the removal
     decision disproportionate.

 12. The Adjudicator also said  that  it  was  not  for  him  to  determine
     nationality and that he had approached the issues as if the  Appellant
     were Somali as she claimed.

 13. The submissions before us on behalf of the Secretary of State  took  a
     different form from those addressed  to  the  Adjudicator.   Mr  Eicke
     accepted that the Adjudicator had erred in holding that there  was  no
     section 13 appeal before him;  those appeal rights were  not  excluded
     by  the  certificate  after  its  withdrawal  nor  by  the  1999   Act
     certificate.  There was an out of country  appeal  under  section  65.
     Notwithstanding those errors,  which  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
     submissions to the Adjudicator had encouraged, the appeal should still
     be dismissed on its lack of merits.

 14. It is worth briefly setting out the reasons for that change  of  view.
     The Secretary of State had power to withdraw  the  certificate  issued
     under section 2 of the 1996  Act  at  the  stage  when  he  did.   The
     certificate did not have to be  overturned  on  appeal  under  section
     3(1)(b) of the 1996 Act in order to lose its effect in  depriving  the
     Appellant of her right to appeal.  Her appeal was in time because time
     did not start to run until she had left the  country.   The  right  of
     appeal under section 13, notwithstanding its repeal and replacement by
     new appeal provisions in the 1999 Act, had been maintained in  respect
     of decisions to refuse leave to enter before 2 October  2000,  by  the
     6th Commencement Order to the 1999  Act.   The  1999  Act  certificate
     could only relate to decisions under that Act  and  did  not  restrict
     appeal rights under the 1971 Act.  She was exercising her rights to an
     out of country appeal under section 65 against the decision of 2 March
     2002 which "related to" her entitlement to  enter  or  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom.

 15. With the issues thus narrowed, we turn to the submissions of  Mr  Toal
     for the Appellant, and first to the submissions concerning section 13.

 16. An appeal could be brought under section 13 against  the  decision  to
     refuse leave to enter on the grounds set out in section 19 of the 1971
     Act:

           "13(1)      Subject to the provisions of this Part of this  Act,
                 a person who is refused leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
                 under this Act may appeal to  an  adjudicator  against  the
                 decision that he requires leave or against the refusal.


            (3)  ... and a person shall not be entitled to appeal against a
                 refusal of leave to enter so long as he is  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, unless he was refused leave at a port of entry and
                 at a time when he held a current entry clearance or  was  a
                 person named in a current work permit.


           19(1) Subjection to sections 13(4) and 16(4) above, and  to  any
                 restriction on the grounds of appeal, an adjudicator on  an
                 appeal to himself under this Part of this Act-
                 (a)   shall allow the appeal if he considers-
                       (i)   that the decision or action against  which  the
                            appeal is brought was not  in  accordance  with
                            the  law  or  with   any   immigrations   rules
                            applicable to the case;  or
                       (ii)  where  the  decision  or  action  involved  the
                            exercise of a discretion by  the  Secretary  of
                            State or an officer, that the discretion should
                            have been exercised differently;  and
                 (b)   in any other case, shall dismiss the appeal."

 17. The 9 August 1998 decision was not in accordance  with  the  law.   At
     that time, the law was that later found by the Court of Appeal in Adan
     and Aitsegur; Germany was not a country which could  be  certified  as
     safe because it would at that time have sent  the  Appellant  back  to
     Somalia.  Mr Toal emphasised that the task of the Adjudicator  was  to
     say whether or not the decision appealed against "was"  in  accordance
     with the law and not to examine whether it would now be in  accordance
     with the law.  The  change  made  by  section  11  of  the  1999  Act,
     reversing the effect of that decision, only took effect from the  date
     when that section came into force, 2 October 2000.   "Henceforth",  as
     Simon Brown LJ said in R (Ibrahim) v SSHD  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  519,  EU
     member states were deemed to be  safe.   There  was  no  retrospective
     provision for earlier decisions.

 18. Mr Toal draw support from R v SSHD ex parte Bugdaycay  [1987]  AC  514
     and R v SSHD ex part Sivakumaran [1988] 1 AC 958 which  he  said  held
     that the Convention had "for all practical purposes" been incorporated
     into United Kingdom law;  and so decisions which breached it  were  in
     1998 "not in accordance with the law".  The Immigration Rules in  1987
     then provided that leave to enter would  not  be  refused  if  removal
     would be contrary to  the  Convention.   The  remedy  was  by  way  of
     Judicial Review.

 19. The Secretary of State should also have exercised his discretion under
     the Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  345,  differently,  for  the  same
     reason:  to avoid a breach of the Refugee Convention.  There was  also
     a discretion argument under that paragraph pursued in connection  with
     the human rights appeal.  We deal with it later.

 20. Mr Eicke argued that section 13 did not help the  Appellant.   Germany
     is a safe third country, having granted humanitarian protection.   The
     Secretary of State's decision of August 1998  was  superseded  by  his
     decision of 5 December 2001 taken under the 1999 Act, and it was  that
     decision which was the effective decision behind removal in May  2003.
     No appeal had been brought against the 1998 decision  because  of  the
     certificate, and the certificate was not withdrawn until December 2001
     after section 11 of the 1999 Act had come into force in October  2000.
     The Judicial Review application had not led to the  certificate  being
     quashed, and in its turn had been withdrawn.  That left  the  decision
     2001 decision as the operative decision.

 21. Mr Toal responded that that was to misunderstand  the  effect  of  the
     withdrawal of the 1996 Act certificate and the effect of the  December
     2001 decision.  The withdrawal of  the  certificate  left  intact  the
     appeal rights under section 13.  There was no fresh decision to refuse
     leave to enter, but simply a new certificate in respect  of  the  1998
     decision, which deprived the Appellant of protection  against  removal
     under section 15.  The operative decision remained the 1998 decision.

 22. Mr Eicke also submitted that Mr  Toal  was  wrong  about  whether  the
     appeal grounds under section 19 of the 1971 Act enabled it be said  on
     appeal that a decision to refuse leave to enter was contrary to law or
     in breach of the Immigration Rules, when what  was  relied  on  was  a
     breach of  the  Refugee  Convention.   There  had  been  no  automatic
     incorporation of the Convention.  Appeal rights had been introduced by
     legislation in 1993 and maintained in subsequent statutes.

 23. The Tribunal raised the  effect  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Asylum  and
     Immigration Appeals Act 1993 on the scope of the appeal under  section
     13.  Schedule 2, paragraph 1, provides:

           "No appeal may be brought under Part II of the 1971 Act  on  any
           of the grounds mentioned in subsections (1) to (4) of section  8
           of this Act."

 24. Paragraph 4 provides that for the purpose of appeals under section  19
     of the 1971 Act, section 8 of the 1993 Act has effect as  if  it  were
     within Part II of the 1971 Act.
 25. Section 8(1) of the 1993 Act provides:

           "A person who is refused leave to enter the United Kingdom under
           the 1971 Act  may  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  a  special
           adjudicator on the ground that his removal in consequence of the
           refusal would be contrary to the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
           under the Convention."

 26. Subsequent provisions of  section  8  deal  with  other  decisions  eg
     refusal to vary leave, deportation decisions and appeals against  them
     on the grounds that removal in consequence would be in breach  of  the
     Refugee Convention.

 27. Mr Toal, in later written submissions which we invited, said that this
     provision had no application.  The section 13 appeal was  not  brought
     on the grounds to which section 8  of  the  1993  Act  referred,  even
     though the section 13 ground of appeal, that the decision "was not  in
     accordance with the law" was that the refusal of leave to enter was in
     breach of the Refugee Convention.  Section 8 by contrast was  said  to
     be prospective:   the  appeal  ground  was  that  removal  "would  be"
     contrary to the Convention.

 28. The section 13 ground of appeal that the discretion in  paragraph  345
     of the Immigration Rules ought to have been exercised differently also
     relied on the Refugee Convention:  the  discretion  should  have  been
     exercised differently so as to avoid a decision inconsistent with it.

 29. We reject Mr Toal's arguments on section 13.   First,  section  8  and
     Schedule 2 to the 1993 Act preclude a  section  13  or  19  appeal  on
     Refugee Convention grounds.  Section 13 of the 1971 Act sets  out  the
     decision which is relevant here, refusal of leave  to  enter.   It  is
     appealable on the grounds set out in section 19.

 30. It is clear that the only appeal grounds asserted under section 19 are
     that removal to Germany in consequence of  the  refusal  of  leave  to
     enter would be a breach of the Refugee Convention.  Mr  Toal  clutches
     at straws when suggesting that his ground  is  that  the  decision  to
     refuse leave "was" not in accordance with law, given that he  accepted
     that the argument that the consequential  removal  "would"  involve  a
     breach of the Convention was precluded by the 1993 Act.  The decisions
     could only be said to be not in  accordance  with   law  because  they
     would involve a breach  of  Article  33(1)  when  given  effect.   The
     distinction drawn by Mr Toal is non-existent.

 31. The 1993 Act in section 8 was  the  first  to  introduce  general  in-
     country rights of appeal in relation to the  Refugee  Convention;   it
     expressly excluded such grounds from the general appeal grounds,  "not
     in accordance with the law" or  breach  of  Immigration  Rules.   This
     would have been pointless were Mr Toal correct to distinguish  between
     a decision (section 19 of the 1971 Act) which "was" not in  accordance
     with the law ie the Convention, and a  removal  in  consequence  which
     "would" breach the Convention (section 8  of  the  1993  Act  and  its
     successors).  The former always precedes the latter.  The decision  to
     refuse leave to enter only becomes a breach of the Refugee  Convention
     when removal is contemplated.  United Kingdom law has generally  given
     effect to the Refugee Convention not by way of a status appeal but  by
     restrictions on removal.

 32. An alternative analysis to the same end is that the 1993 Act in effect
     introduced "restrictions" on the grounds  of  appeal  available  under
     section 19, and section 19 requires to be read, by its own  terms,  as
     subject to those restrictions.  Such restrictions on the scope of  the
     "not in accordance with the law" jurisdiction, which mean that Refugee
     Convention points have to be taken under specific statutory provisions
     concerning the Convention, appear in subsequent immigration and asylum
     Acts.

 33. Additionally, the position as to breach and  risk  of  refoulement  is
     judged within the appeal system not at the date of  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision but, on the error of law jurisdiction as at the  date
     of the Adjudicator's determination.  By that time  Germany  was  as  a
     matter of  fact  a  safe  third  country  regardless  of  the  deeming
     provisions in the 1999 Act.  There has been  no  contrary  suggestion.
     If the matter is before us because of the admitted errors of law which
     the Adjudicator made and which seem to us to be material, there is  no
     doubt but that Germany is a safe country as a matter of fact.

 34. The same points apply to this part of the  discretion  argument  under
     paragraph 345 of the Immigration Rules.  The basis upon which  it  was
     said that the discretion to consider the  asylum  claim  substantively
     had been wrongly exercised was simply that  Germany  was  not  a  safe
     country, and so removal would likewise breach the Convention.  This is
     very much the same point and is likewise excluded by Schedule 2 to the
     1993 Act.

 35. We do not entirely accept,  however,  Mr  Eicke's  argument  that  the
     decision of 1998 was superseded by the  December  2001  decision.   It
     seems to us that the refusal of leave to enter in 1998 was  maintained
     and not re-examined in December 2001.  There was  a  new  decision  to
     remove  the  Appellant  on  safe  third  country  grounds,  which  was
     certified, and fresh directions were later issued.  The  two  together
     operated as the basis of removal.  The withdrawal of  the  certificate
     leads to the revival of the section 13 right of appeal for  what  that
     was worth.  Its worth depended on the scope of the  appeal  provisions
     which do not cover the territory which Mr Toal contends for.

 36. For the reasons which we have given the first point in this appeal  is
     decided against Mr Toal.

 37. Mr Toal's second set of submissions related to the conclusions reached
     in the human rights appeal.  He also brought in the way in  which  the
     discretion under  the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  345,  had  been
     exercised in respect of the family of the Appellants.

 38. The decision at issue is that of 2 March 2002.  The Secretary of State
     said that the Appellant could be expected to live fully  independently
     of her  sister,  that  there  would  be  some  interference  with  the
     Appellant's  family life but that the mother  and  daughter  would  be
     able to establish a family life for themselves in  Germany,  and  that
     removal would be proportionate  having  regard  to  the  interests  of
     immigration  control.   The  human  rights  claim  was  certified   as
     manifestly unfounded.

 39. Part of the grounds  of  appeal  related  to  the  way  in  which  the
     Adjudicator dealt with the conclusions of  Crane  J  in  the  Judicial
     Review of that certification.   In  January  2003,  he  dismissed  the
     renewed oral application for permission to apply for Judicial  Review.
     He said that the question of where the Appellant and her  sister  came
     from was irrelevant;  the Secretary  of  State  had  treated  them  as
     sisters.  No significant degree of dependency between the two had been
     demonstrated so as to give rise to an arguable case that the Secretary
     of State's policy, of  dealing  substantively  with  some  safe  third
     country cases where family ties were involved, would  be  breached  if
     the Appellants were removed to Germany.  There was a dependency but it
     fell short of showing  that  the  case  would  be  a  disproportionate
     exercise of the powers of immigration control.

 40. The day before that hearing, the Secretary of State had sent a further
     letter to the Appellants dealing with the Article 8 policy point.   It
     set out the policy upon which Mr Toal relied before us in relation  to
     the Rules;  the relevant parts are as follows:

           "The policy on the exercise of discretion in safe third  country
           cases where family ties to the United  Kingdom  are  claimed  is
           that potential third country cases  would  normally  have  their
           asylum claims considered substantively in this country where:


                 (a)   an applicant's spouse is in the United Kingdom;
                 (b)   the applicant is an unmarried minor and a  parent  is
                       in the United Kingdom;
                 (c)   the applicant has an unmarried  minor  child  in  the
                 United Kingdom.
           ...


           Discretion may be exercised according to the merits of the  case
           where:
           ...


                 (f)   the family link was not one which would  normally  be
                       considered but there  was  clear  evidence  that  the
                       applicant was  wholly  or  mainly  dependent  on  the
                       relative in the United Kingdom and that there was  an
                       absence of similar support elsewhere.


           I would expect cases falling into this latter category (f) to be
                 rare.


           Factors which might influence  the  exercise  of  discretion  in
           these cases, such as language, cultural links or the  number  of
           family members in the United Kingdom may  have  a  bearing,  but
           there would need to be a compelling combination of such  factors
           to ensure the exercise of discretion in favour of an appellant.


           Cases citing family ties which would not normally be  considered
           and which did not display any of the features, which engaged the
           exercise  of  discretion,  would  not  normally  be   considered
           substantively.  This means that a brother, who was not dependent
           on his sibling(s) would not normally have  his  case  considered
           here, no matter how strong his cultural or linguistic links with
           the United Kingdom.


           The intention of  the  policy  is  to  re-unite  members  of  an
           existing family unit who, through circumstances outside of their
           control, had become fragmented.  However, I emphasise that where
           the relationship did not exist prior to the person's arrival  in
           the United Kingdom, the policy would only be applied in the most
           exceptionally compelling cases."

 41. The letter pointed out that the claim did  not  engage  any  provision
     other than (f), and that there was no evidence that the Appellant  was
     wholly or mainly dependent on her sister in the United Kingdom.

 42. Before the Adjudicator it had been accepted that what Crane J  had  to
     say was of persuasive authority, but with differing degrees  of  force
     and enthusiasm depending on the side taken.  Mr  Toal  had  emphasised
     that the situation had changed at least to the extent that  there  was
     now new evidence as to the strength of the  relationship  between  the
     two Appellants and the  sister/aunt.   There  was  a  social  worker's
     letter. This was summarised as follows by the Adjudicator:

           "In summary, they are that the appellant and her sister  in  the
           United Kingdom had an interdependent,  reciprocal  relationship,
           that the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom  would
           seriously damage family life, that the family life in the UK  as
           then enjoyed was particularly important  to  the  appellant's  9
           year old daughter (the second  appellant),  that  the  appellant
           would not cope well in Germany and was  likely  to  become  more
           depressed and to break down, that the mental health of both  the
           appellant and her sister had been  adversely  affected  by  past
           events and that  they  had  symptoms  of  post-traumatic  stress
           disorder."

 43. The Adjudicator continued:

           "Like the learned judge, I accept that the sisters did  rely  on
           each other.  There is no medical evidence  before  me,  however,
           that either the appellant or her sister in the United Kingdom or
           the 9 year old second appellant have  in  fact  suffered  mental
           stress of such an order as to cause a breakdown, moreover,  even
           if there were, there is no evidence before me that mental health
           treatment  and  medication  which  might  be  necessary  is  not
           available in Germany  and  it  is  certainly  available  to  the
           sister, should it be necessary, in the United  Kingdom.   As  to
           the post-traumatic stress disorder, with great respect  to  Miss
           Cohen,  she  is  not  medically  qualified.   As  to  the  child
           appellant, as Miss Anderson submitted, there is  nothing  before
           me from her or to show her rights have been infringed.   I  have
           to treat Miss Cohen's  report  with  caution.   Nothing  in  the
           report satisfies me that the conditions which were necessary for
           the learned judge to decide as he did on  judicial  review  have
           subsequently been undermined."

 44. He concluded that the appeal continued to be manifestly unfounded  and
     that even if there were anything in it the decision was proportionate.
      He said that he did not need to decide whether  the  Appellants  were
     Somali but that he had decided the case on the basis that they were.

 45. Mr Toal's first submission was that  the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
     exercise his own discretion and judgment when considering the  Article
     8 claim and had adopted a stance which was  too  narrow,  in  that  he
     examined only whether there had been anything to upset the findings of
     Crane J.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  Adjudicator  to  make  his  own
     assessment of all the relevant factors.  Mr Toal said  that  the  case
     had been put differently to the Adjudicator from the way it  had  been
     put to Crane J.  There had been the social  worker's  letter  and  the
     nationality issue, so-called, ie the impact of the background  to  the
     Appellants' family life here, had  not  been  before  the  judge.   He
     referred to two cases.

 46. M v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 146 concerned a deportation order made on the
     grounds that it would be conducive to the public good  but  which  was
     based  on  a  criminal  conviction  where   the   recommendation   for
     deportation had been  set  aside  on  appeal.   The  Court  of  Appeal
     rejected the argument that there was a presumption against deportation
     unless circumstances had changed or there  was  fresh  evidence.   The
     duty on the Secretary of State was to consider the prior reasoning  of
     the CACD and to say what he made of it and what his reasons  were  for
     disagreeing with it if he did.

 47. This need for independent evaluation of the facts  was  reinforced  by
     the decision in Djebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  804  which  considered
     the Devaseelan guidelines.  Mr Toal relied on paragraph  30  where  it
     was said that perhaps the most important feature of the  guidance  was
     that the fundamental obligation of every Adjudicator independently  to
     decide  each  new  application  on  its  own  individual  merits   was
     preserved.

 48. We do not take issue with what Mr Toal set out as the principles,  and
     he accepted that the decision of a High Court Judge on an  application
     for permission to apply for Judicial Review of a  certificate  that  a
     claim was manifestly unfounded, was capable of being persuasive.   But
     we can see nothing in the Adjudicator's approach which  suggests  that
     he regarded himself as  bound  to  follow  what  had  been  said.   He
     accepted the findings as to dependency because he agreed with them and
     he considered the effect of the new evidence and gave his  own  reason
     for rejecting it as of little weight.  He  took  account  of  the  new
     evidence in concluding that  there  was  a  relationship  between  the
     three.  Although he misquotes what Crane J  says  about  family  life,
     because he gives the impression that there was an explicit finding  as
     to family life when there was none, it is clear  that  he  thought  it
     implicit in what Crane J says, as is clearly  right.   Although  there
     was scope for debate about whether or not the Adjudicator had made any
     findings about the existence of family life, it  was  conceded  by  Mr
     Toal that he had reached the conclusion that there was family life  in
     existence.  He probably concluded that there was a family  life  of  a
     sort because they were now living together and there was an  emotional
     dependency.  The Secretary of State had done so.  We  ourselves  would
     so conclude had it been for us.  He then agreed with the  analysis  of
     Crane J as to proportionality.  The Adjudicator may  well  have  taken
     the judgment of Crane J as a starting point and have  then  looked  to
     see if there was anything which now undermined that  decision.   There
     is nothing in the decisions cited to us which suggests that that would
     have been wrong.

 49. The next limb of Mr Toal's submissions was that  the  Adjudicator  had
     failed to consider various factors relevant to the Appellants'  family
     life.  This argument took the  form  initially  that  the  Adjudicator
     ought to have determined the nationality  of  the  Appellant  because,
     said Mr Toal, that would be critical to whether account was  taken  of
     various  factors  which  went  beyond  the  simple  question  of   the
     relationship, which he accepted was there regardless  of  nationality.
     In reality, Mr Toal accepted that it  was  not  necessary  to  resolve
     nationality of itself;  what was necessary was to  take  into  account
     the factors which made the relationship what it was.

 50. The relevant points which it  was  said  had  been  ignored  were  the
     persecution of the Appellant in Somalia, the impact of the  civil  war
     on her family there, the  murder  of  her  mother,  her  consequential
     depression and PTSD, and  therefore  her  greater  dependence  on  the
     surviving members of her family in the United Kingdom who had a shared
     experience and to whom she would naturally look for greater  emotional
     support than might be normal between adult siblings.   The  impact  of
     removal to Germany would be a greater interference than would often be
     the case.  These are points which are  made  in  the  social  worker's
     letter which was before the Adjudicator.

 51. We do not think that this submission is made out.   We  cannot  ignore
     the fact that the Adjudicator said that he was making  the  assumption
     that the Appellants were Somali.  It follows that his analysis is  not
     of a family of Kenyan economic migrants but of  those  who  have  come
     from war-torn Somalia.  There is  nothing  in  the  substance  of  the
     determination and on p12 in particular to  suggest  that  a  different
     approach was in fact adopted.  He does not reject the social  worker's
     analysis on the basis  that  the  claim  is  untrue.   He  is  plainly
     accepting the report as one about Somalis and not about Kenyans.

 52. There are, it is true, no positive findings about the  sort  of  point
     which Mr Toal raises, which go to the strength of that family life  or
     to the degree of interference with it which removal would  entail  for
     the Appellants.  We  think  that  it  is  reasonably  clear  that  the
     Adjudicator accepted the conclusions of  the  social  worker's  report
     (p59 of the bundle).  Those conclusions take on board the points  made
     by Mr Toal as to the significance of the background.

 53. The Adjudicator does not decide the issue of nationality as a distinct
     issue and he is right not  to  do  so;   that  is  a  matter  for  the
     substantive claim.  He does not have to decide it  in  order  to  take
     into account the factors upon which Mr Toal relied.   His  refusal  to
     decide the nationality issue is beside the point as to whether or  not
     he took the family factors fully into account.  It is reasonably clear
     that he did.

 54. The real issue is as to  the  degree  to  which  the  interference  is
     proportionate in the interests of immigration control.   We  have  set
     out the policy which is applied to asylum seekers in this context.  It
     is   what   Crane   J   relied   on.    The   Adjudicator   considered
     proportionality, it is said,  on  the  false  basis  of  ignoring  the
     factors prayed in aid by Mr Toal, but we  have  rejected  that  point.
     The  Secretary  of  State  had  written  subsequent  letters  to   the
     Appellants after he had been sent  the  social  worker's  letter;   in
     March and April 2002  and  then  in  January  and  May  2003  when  he
     considered that letter he had maintained  his  view  that  removal  to
     Germany was proportionate.   He  specifically  considered  the  mental
     health claims made by the Appellants.

 55. Mr Toal submitted that his decision could not be relied on as a  sound
     decision as to proportionality because it had  been  informed  by  the
     irrelevant consideration that the  Appellant  was  a  Kenyan  who  was
     flouting the law and making a false asylum claim.  If it were relevant
     it could not be relied on until the truth or falsity of  it  had  been
     established.  True it is that the letter from the Secretary  of  State
     dated 31 July 2001, which asks for the Judicial Review of the  section
     2 certificate to be withdrawn because the Appellant is not  Somali  at
     all, refers to those matters and gives them as part of the reason  why
     the  Appellant  would  be  returned   to   Germany   for   substantive
     consideration of the claim.  However, the other  letters,  whilst  not
     resiling from the point that the Appellant is a Kenyan, say  that  she
     is not being returned because of those views as  to  her  nationality;
     her nationality was irrelevant to  that  and  that  it  would  be  for
     Germany to decide the issue as part of her claim.  It would of  course
     undermine the assertion that the claim was manifestly unfounded if the
     Secretary of State proceeded on  the  basis  that  he  could  make  an
     adverse credibility finding rather than take the case at face value.

 56. Even if the Adjudicator had failed to take into account  the  sort  of
     points about the family background which Mr Toal raised before us, and
     it is therefore for us to take them into account for the  first  time,
     we do not regard the removal as close  to  disproportionate.   Whether
     proportionality is a matter for our judgment in those circumstances or
     whether the Adjudicator's view, assuming no error  in  it,  is  to  be
     upheld, and whether or not the issue  is  one  to  be  tested  by  the
     reasonableness of the actual or potential range of views to which  the
     Secretary of State lawfully could come, or by reference to the  strong
     interests of immigration control to which exceptions will be rare,  it
     was plainly not disproportionate to remove the Appellants.  They  fall
     outside the scope of the policy which guides  the  way  in  which  the
     Secretary of State says that he will deal generally with  those  whose
     removal to a safe third country for the substantive  consideration  of
     their asylum claim may engage Article 8.   There  are  no  exceptional
     circumstances  which  dictate  another  conclusion.   The  degree   of
     interference with family  life  is  comparatively  slight.   The  main
     relationship is between adult siblings who have not lived together for
     many years until they, apparently by chance, found each other  in  the
     United Kingdom.  There is a degree of emotional dependence which  goes
     beyond that which adult siblings would normally experience because  of
     the shared experiences and bereavements which  would  make  them  more
     dependant on each other.  This would  not  be  uncommon  among  asylum
     seekers and their families and to which the  statement  of  policy  is
     directed.  It is not an intense one involving a carer for the mentally
     ill or other high degree dependency.  It is also one which  is  likely
     to end sooner rather than later as the  lives  of  adults  necessarily
     change as each sets up home with their  own  family.   The  niece/aunt
     relationship is new, quite short and of  value  to  both  but  has  no
     exceptional quality to it.

 57. We do not accept Mr Toal's point that because this case  differs  from
     that of Mahmood [2000] EWCA Civ 315, [2001] 1WLR 840,  there  is  more
     reason to find removal disproportionate.  Of  course,  there  is  room
     under the Immigration Rules, paragraph 345, for the Secretary of State
     to set out a policy for the exercise of the discretion  which  he  has
     done and that policy itself contains  scope  for  further  exceptional
     circumstances;  that can be distinguished  from  the  position  of  an
     illegal entrant and failed asylum seeker who is seeking to stay.   But
     it is not a persuasive point at all.  The claim simply  falls  outside
     the Rules, outside the policy for discretionary cases and it  exhibits
     no strong exceptional features;  it does not raise a category of  case
     for which the Rules and policy  exceptions  have  made  no  provision,
     which ought to be considered.  There is no other policy for this  type
     of asylum claimant.

 58. It is not surprising that  this  claim  was  certified  as  manifestly
     unfounded, and we do not regard the arguments put forward by Mr  Toal,
     as showing that the appeal should be allowed.  It  is  dismissed.   We
     report it because of the unusual arguments about section  13  and  the
     unusual nature of an out of country appeal human rights appeal.





                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
