
H-MH/11-V2

|Heard at Field House          |        |                            |
|On: 4 November 2004           |        |KH(Afghanistan - Bahai      |
|Prepared on: 4 November 2004  |        |faith) Afghanistan [2005]   |
|                              |        |UKIAT 00041                 |
|                                                                    |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                         |
|                                                                    |
|                                                                    |
|Date Determination notified:                                        |
|                                                                    |
|25 January 2005                                                     |
|                                                                    |
|                              |        |                            |
|                              |Before: |                            |
|                                                                    |
|His Honour Judge Huskinson (Vice President)                         |
|Mr C H Bennett                                                      |
|Mrs R Faux JP                                                       |
|Between                                                             |
|                                                                    |
|                                                                    |
|                                                                    |
|                              |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                              |        |                            |
|                              |and     |                            |
|                              |        |                            |
|                                                                    |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                          |
|                              |        |RESPONDENT                  |



Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr. Danny Bazini (Counsel - instructed by
                       Fisher Jones Greenwood).
For the Respondent:    Ms. Jane Sigley
                       (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 26 July  1982.   He
    appeals to the Tribunal, with permission, from the Determination of Mr.
    A.G. O'Malley, Adjudicator, promulgated on 6 January  2004  whereby  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  asylum  to  the
    Appellant and to give directions for the removal of  the  Appellant  to
    Afghanistan.

2.    The Appellant's account on the basis of which he claimed  asylum,  is
    summarised by the Adjudicator in paragraphs 10-16 of the  Determination
    in the following terms:

         "10.     The Appellant is a single man.  He is of Tajik  ethnicity
              and espouses the Ba'hai faith.  He lived with his parents and
              siblings in Kabul.  His mother taught English and he received
              a good education from her.  He gave evidence without the  aid
              of an interpreter.


          11.     His parents converted from Islam to the Ba'hai faith some
              time ago and the Appellant was brought up in that faith.  His
              father traded in Iran but his  business  suffered  when  they
              discovered he was not Muslim.


          12.     There were no other Ba'hais in the area  apart  from  the
              Appellant's own family and his uncle.  On the 15 July 2001  a
              problem arose when his father fought  with  a  villager  over
              religion and the villager  stabbed  his  father.   Five  days
              later thieves broke into the house.  They knew the  Appellant
              and his family were not  practising  Islam.   They  told  his
              family to leave otherwise they would tell the Taliban.


          13.     In August the family sold  its  land  having  decided  to
              leave.  Shortly  after  that  his  family  home  was  bombed,
              possibly by the Taliban.  Everyone in the  house was  killed.
              The Appellant lost his mother, brother, eldest sister,  uncle
              and uncle's family.


          14.     The Appellant was sent to Pakistan for safety.  There  he
              waited for his family to join him.   They  did  not  and  the
              Appellant has heard nothing from them since.


          15.     The Appellant  had  no  contacts  with  other  Ba'hai  in
              Pakistan and there was no freedom for  him  to  practice  his
              religion.  He had problems when it was discovered he did  not
              practice Islam.  Yaqoub, who had travelled to  Pakistan  with
              Appellant, was beaten as  a  consequence.   They  decided  to
              leave.


          16.     The Appellant left Pakistan at the end of April 2002.  He
              feared that if he returned to Afghanistan he would be  killed
              because he is not a Muslim."


3.    Certain challenges to the Claimant's credibility were raised  in  the
    Respondent's Reasons for Refusal letter, but the  Adjudicator  was  not
    impressed by these (see paragraph 19 of the  Determination).   Although
    the Adjudicator did not expressly make a positive  credibility  finding
    in relation to the whole of the Appellant's account, he  did  expressly
    accept that he was a member of the Bahai faith.  Bearing  in  mind  the
    terms in which the Adjudicator expresses himself in his  Determination,
    Ms. Sigley accepted (correctly in the  Tribunal's  judgment)  that  the
    Adjudicator's Determination should  be  read  on  the  basis  that  the
    Adjudicator was accepting as credible the Appellant's account of events
    in Afghanistan.  It follows from the  foregoing  that  the  Adjudicator
    accepted  the  matters  mentioned  in  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  the
    Determination.

4.    The Adjudicator concluded that the question of whether, as  a  Bahai,
    the  Appellant  faced  a  real  risk  of  persecution  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan was  not  an  easy  question  to  answer  there  being,  he
    observed, no information  at  all  in  the  background  evidence.   The
    Adjudicator drew attention to the fact that the Appellant's  claim  was
    that he was persecuted under the Taliban and that the Taliban have gone
    and that the administration of President Karzai has an avowed religious
    tolerance.  He stated that "There is no evidence that  Bahais  are  not
    tolerated in Afghanistan".  He ultimately  reminded  himself  that  the
    burden of proof  was  on  the  Appellant  and  he  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had not discharged this burden of proof in that  he  had  not
    established  that  Bahais  are  persecuted  in  Afghanistan  under  the
    Transitional Administration or that the Transitional Administration  is
    unable or unwilling to offer effective protection for those  persecuted
    for their religious beliefs.

5.    Mr. Bazini contended that the Adjudicator had erred in law in that he
    had failed to take into account an expert report which was  before  him
    from Mr. Peter Marsden MBE dated 7 December 2003 at pages 86-94 of  the
    bundle and also that the Adjudicator had failed to recognise  that  the
    grievous treatment suffered by the Appellant's  family  in  Afghanistan
    was at the hands of persons who either were not the  Taliban  (see  the
    events in paragraph 12 of the Determination) or of whom it  could  only
    be  said  that  they  were  possibly  the  Taliban.   Accordingly   the
    Adjudicator was said to have erred in law in directing himself that the
    Appellant's case was that he was persecuted  under  the  Taliban.   Ms.
    Sigley did not concede that the Adjudicator had made any error  of  law
    but she was unable to advance any significant argument in answer to Mr.
    Bazini's contentions.  The Tribunal is satisfied that  the  Adjudicator
    did indeed err in law in the manners contended for by Mr.  Bazini.   In
    the result the matter is therefore for the Tribunal to consider, on the
    objective evidence before us, as to whether the Appellant would face  a
    real risk of persecution or Article 3 infringing treatment by reason of
    his Bahai faith were he now to be returned to Afghanistan.

6.    Certain further preliminary points can be dealt with at  this  stage.
    First Ms. Sigley accepted (correctly in our view) that bearing in  mind
    the history of the Appellant's treatment in his home village in Paghman
    there would be a real risk of  severe  adverse  treatment  (capable  of
    amounting to persecution or Article  3  infringement)  if  he  were  to
    return to his home area.  She did not  feel  able  to  argue  that  the
    authorities would be able to provide for  him,  in  his  home  area,  a
    sufficiency of protection against such adverse treatment.   Accordingly
    Ms. Sigley accepted that the case involved the question of whether,  if
    the Claimant relocated to Kabul, he could do so without  (a)  being  at
    real risk of persecutory or Article 3 infringing treatment  there,  and
    (b) it being unduly harsh for him to do so.

7.    We can also at this stage dispose  of  one  strand  of  Mr.  Bazini's
    argument which was based upon the contention  that  the  Appellant,  on
    return to Afghanistan, would face a real risk of persecutory  treatment
    at the hands of the State itself  by  reason  of  being  viewed  as  an
    apostate.  Mr. Bazini accepted that the Appellant himself had not  been
    born a Muslim and had not himself converted away from Islam  so  as  to
    embrace the Bahai faith.  Instead  the  Appellant's  parents  had  both
    converted to the Bahai faith before the Appellant was born.  Mr. Bazini
    was unable to draw the Tribunal's attention to any  objective  evidence
    suggesting that a person in these circumstances, who  had  not  himself
    converted away from Islam, would nonetheless be viewed as  an  apostate
    upon whom the death penalty should (or could) be visited  under  Sharia
    law.  Mr. Bazini did however contend  that  nonetheless  the  Appellant
    might be accused of having converted and that he would then have  great
    difficulty in seeking to call evidence to show that it was his  parents
    who had converted before he was born rather than that he had converted.
     We do however view this as a speculative argument which we  could  not
    accept without evidence to the effect that  persons  could  be  accused
    under Sharia  law  of  being  an  apostate  notwithstanding  that  they
    themselves had been born outside the Muslim faith by  reason  of  their
    parents having converted before their birth.   The  fact  is  that  the
    Appellant on his own evidence is not an apostate.  In  the  absence  of
    the evidence we have mentioned, we cannot accept there is a  real  risk
    that the Appellant will be nonetheless accused of being an apostate and
    will be convicted of such (despite the fact that he is not an apostate)
    and will be sentenced as such and will have such sentence carried  out.



8.    We therefore turn to the other limb of Mr. Bazini's argument,  namely
    that the Appellant faces a real risk of persecution at the hands of non-
    state actors by reason of his Bahai faith and that there  would  be  an
    insufficiency of state protection  for  him  against  such  persecutory
    treatment.  In  support  of  this  argument  Mr.  Bazini  advanced  the
    following points.

9.    He contended that the fact that the Appellant is of the  Bahai  faith
    is bound to come out sooner or later, or (if this is not so)  there  is
    at least a real risk that it would come out.  It would come out because
    the Appellant would behave in a manner consistent with a member of  the
    Bahai faith and inconsistent with a practising Muslim.   In  particular
    he would not pray five times a day and would not keep the  fasts  which
    Muslims would keep.  He drew attention to  the  very  small  non-Muslim
    community in Afghanistan, see paragraph 6.55 of the CIPU Country Report
    on Afghanistan of April 2004 showing  that  about  84  percent  of  the
    population is Sunni Muslim, about 15 percent is Shia Muslim, and  other
    religions including Sikhs, Hindus and Jews make up less than 1  percent
    of the population.  It is also stated there is a  small  extremely  low
    profile Christian community "in addition to small numbers of  adherents
    of other religions".  Paragraph 6.56 records that most members  of  the
    Hindu, Sikh, Jewish and Christian community have left.  Paragraph  6.62
    refers to the fact that  sources  consulted  during  a  September  2002
    Danish Fact-Finding Mission to Afghanistan "had  no  knowledge  of  the
    possible existence of Bahais or  a  Bahai  community  in  Afghanistan".
    Accordingly Mr. Bazini contended that the Appellant would stand out and
    would inevitably soon be recognised as not being a Muslim.

10.   Mr. Bazini drew attention to what had happened to the  Appellant  and
    his family in 2001 when there was cause for  a quarrel with the  family
    as a result of which thieves broke into the  house  and,  subsequently,
    the house was  bombed  with  the  Appellant's  mother,  brother,  elder
    sister, uncle and uncle's family being killed because, it seems  clear,
    of their Bahai faith.

11.   Mr. Bazini drew attention to the fact that the tenets  of  the  Bahai
    faith are considered to be contrary to Islam.  He referred to page  283
    of the bundle which is taken from an ABC News article dated 21 May 2003
    regarding the position for Bahais in Iran:

      "The Bahai religion dates back to 1844, when a  young  Shiite  Muslim
         named  Bahaullah  in  what  is  now  Iran  announced  his   divine
         revelation of the spiritual unity of humanity and an  equality  of
         all faiths.  Today, there are an estimated  300,000  adherents  in
         Iran.

       But  while  religious  minorities  such  as  Christians,  Jews   and
         Zoroastrians are officially recognised in the Islamic Republic  of
         Iran and are granted official,  if  not  actual,  'equal  rights',
         Bahais are the non-people of Iran.

      It's an exclusion that comes with a host of subtle and often  not-so-
         subtle persecutions ranging from an inability  to  practice  their
         faith to a ban on any identifying structures on Bahai graves.

      The principal reasons for the  persecution,  some  experts  say,  are
         rooted in a narrow reading of theology. The fact  that  Bahai  was
         founded in 19th-century Persia by a young Muslim is viewed by some
         as a challenge to Islam.  Bahaullah's  teaching  is  seen  in  the
         Islamic state of Iran as an affront to the Prophet Mohammad, whose
         teachings, Muslims believe, were the last revelation."

      He also referred to an article at  page  271  and  following  of  the
    bundle describing the deep animosity for Bahais and recording that they
    are often viewed as having a Zionist connection, because  the  base  of
    the Bahai faith is in Haifa in Israel.  In this connection  Mr.  Bazini
    drew attention to the difficulties for Bahais in other Muslim countries
    in particular Iran, Egypt and Tunisia.

12.   Mr. Bazini accepted that he was  unable  to  draw  attention  to  any
    objective evidence specifically recording difficulties  for  Bahais  in
    Afghanistan.  However he submitted that that could not be fatal to  his
    argument.  The reason why there was no such evidence could be explained
    by the fact that there were exceedingly few Bahais in Afghanistan.   It
    was not a prerequisite of his argument succeeding that  there  must  be
    already some documented persecution of members of the  Bahai  faith  in
    Afghanistan.  Instead the Tribunal should examine the case as a  matter
    of principle as to what was reasonably likely to happen to the Claimant
    on return bearing in mind that he is a member of the  Bahai  faith  and
    bearing in  mind  the  attitude  in  Afghanistan  so  far  as  concerns
    religious tolerance.

13.    Mr.  Bazini  drew  attention  to  the  difficulties  for  Sikhs   in
    Afghanistan and contended that the recent  Tribunal  Determinations  in
    [2004] UKIAT 00150 IB and [2004] UKIAT 00258 KK were  of  relevance  as
    indicating both the  extent  of  religious  intolerance  and  also  the
    insufficiency of state protection against such  treatment.   He  argued
    that in fact the Appellant would be worse off than a member of the Sikh
    community because there was at least  some,  albeit  very  small,  Sikh
    community in Kabul, whereas the Appellant would in effect be on his own
    without the support of even such a community.
14.   Mr. Bazini drew  attention  to  continuing  human  rights  abuses  in
    Afghanistan as recorded in the document at 192  and  following  of  the
    bundle being the Human Rights Watch report entitled "Killing you  is  a
    very easy thing for us".

15.   So far as concerns the question of  sufficiency  of  protection,  Mr.
    Bazini drew attention to the  continuing  influence  of  the  Jamiat-e-
    Islami in Kabul in, among other organisations, the police, see page 201
    of the bundle.  He also reminded the Tribunal of the fact that when the
    Appellant was in Pakistan he specifically encountered difficulties from
    members of Jamiat-e-Islami, see the answers to  Qs.32  and  34  in  his
    interview.

16.   Mr. Bazini also relied on the expert  report  of  Mr.  Marsden  whose
    substantial experience and qualifications are set out at page  86.   At
    paragraphs 27-29 of his report he states as follows:

         "27.     It would not  be  an  option  for                      to
             return to  Kabul  as  he  would  be  in  a  highly  vulnerable
             position,  having  no  family  members  to  protect   him   or
             accommodation to  go  to.   It  is  difficult  not  to  arouse
             suspicion as a stranger in Afghanistan and questions would  be
             asked as to his origins and personal history.  The  population
             has lived under intense fear for  over  two  decades  under  a
             succession  of  regimes  which  have  relied  heavily   on   a
             combination  of  brute  force  and  the  use  of  intelligence
             services, with an associated use of imprisonment and  torture.
             The rumour mill is extremely powerful and stories can  quickly
             spread, arising from  the  threat  that  strangers  represent,
             which can put them at risk.


          28.     In any event, rents have risen in the past year or so way
             beyond the capacity of the average citizen to  pay  and  there
             have been high levels of  eviction  as  a  result,  with  many
             families having to take refuge in the homes of relatives, thus
             contributing to growing overcrowding.  If Mr.  Hisham  is  not
             able to find accommodation, he would be compelled  to  survive
             under conditions of destitution amongst the ruins of  southern
             and western Kabul.  Here, he would be in an  exposed  position
             in  relation  to  the  various  militia  forces  and  to   the
             surrounding population if it became clear that he  was  not  a
             practicing Muslim.


          29.     To summarise,             would be at risk  of  arbitrary
             violence, if he returned, from those who were responsible  for
             placing a bomb in his family home and to  any  others  amongst
             the various power holders and  the  population  at  large  who
             would find his abandonment of Islam unacceptable.  It is clear
             that this bomb attack, and the burglary that preceded it, were
             aimed to  intimidate  his  family  into  leaving  the  village
             because of their abandonment of Islam and were, therefore,  of
             a persecutory nature.  He cannot return  in  security  to  his
             village and is also in a situation in which there is no  other
             place in Afghanistan where he would  have  family  members  to
             protect him.   Without  such  protection,  the  individual  is
             extremely vulnerable throughout Afghanistan."

17.   In answer to Mr. Bazini's argument Ms. Sigley advanced the  following
    points.

18.   She contended that the Appellant would not "stand  out  like  a  sore
    thumb" as Mr. Bazini had suggested he would.   She  observed  that  the
    reason the Appellant would allegedly stand out is by reason of what  he
    does not do rather than what he does do - it is thus suggested that  he
    would stand out because he does not observe the fasts and does not pray
    five times a day.  However she argued that  there  must  inevitably  be
    many lapsed Muslims who, although still of the  Muslim  faith,  do  not
    observe the prayers and fasts as assiduously  as  their  fellows.   She
    contended there was no objective material  showing  that  such  persons
    were persecuted.   In  the  alternative  she  submitted  there  was  no
    objective evidence  to  show  that  effectively  every  Muslim  man  in
    Afghanistan dutifully observed all  the  prayers  and  fasts.   In  the
    absence of objective evidence upon one or other  of  these  points  she
    contended that the inference must be that there existed lapsed  Muslims
    who, although not observing the prayers and fasts, were not persecuted.
     She contended that there was therefore no more reason to conclude that
    the Appellant would be persecuted by reason of what he did not do.  She
    also contended, by reference to paragraphs 6.290 and 6.301 of the  CIPU
    Report, that the Appellant would be one of very many  people  who  were
    returnees to Kabul and that as  such  he  would  not  stand  out  as  a
    stranger.

19.   Ms. Sigley further contended that there was a climate  of  increasing
    religious tolerance in Afghanistan.  She referred to the CIPU Report at
    6.55 and following, especially at 6.63, 6.68, 6.74 (which she  referred
    to so as to draw an analogy with the treatment of Ismailis), and  6.76.



20.   She referred to the recent presidential elections in Afghanistan  and
    to the fact that President Karzai is not a member  of  Jamiat-e-Islami.
    She referred to objective evidence indicating that Jamiat-e-Islami  had
    handed in some of its weapons and she argued that it did not  have  too
    great an influence on matters such as policing.

21.   She argued that there was sufficient security in Kabul.  She  pointed
    out that ISAF were generally responsible for security and were doing  a
    good job and that the local  police  force  was  being  expanded.   She
    referred to the CIPU Report at  paragraphs  5,92,  5.95,  5.98,  5.103,
    5.126, 5.127, 5.163, 5.164 and 5.169.

22.   She also referred to the fact that the objective evidence shows  that
    attitudes towards women are improving and she  referred  to  paragraphs
    6.171 and 6.175 of  the  CIPU  Report.   Ms.  Sigley  argued  that  Mr.
    Marsden's report did not properly consider the improvements in security
    and the capabilities of ISAF and the Afghanistan police force.

23.   The Tribunal has decided that the Appellant's appeal must be allowed.
     Our reasons for so concluding are as follows.

24.   We accept Mr. Bazini's argument that it is inevitable sooner or later
    (and we think sooner) that it will become clear to the other members of
    the community in which the  Appellant  is  living  that  he  is  not  a
    practising Muslim and that he is of another faith - and once  this  has
    become clear the nature of his faith is also likely to be revealed.  We
    have in mind paragraph 6.65 of the CIPU Report which records  that  the
    government continued a policy of religious tolerance  "however,  custom
    and law required affiliation with some religion".  Once it  has  become
    clear, which it will do, that the Appellant is not a practising  Muslim
    then we consider it inevitable that it will be discovered, or  he  will
    be coerced into revealing, what his faith is.  We do not consider  that
    the analogy with a lapsed or non-practising Muslim assists Ms. Sigley's
    argument.  Such a person, albeit not assiduously following the  customs
    and practices of a Muslim,  would  be  known  as  a  Muslim  and  would
    doubtless be vouched for by other members of  the  family  as  being  a
    Muslim.  The opprobrium that may be levelled against a lapsed  or  non-
    practising Muslim is in our judgment of a different character from that
    which would be experienced by someone of a different faith  altogether,
    who is therefore seen to be outside the religion of Islam.

25.   We also accept Mr. Bazini's argument that it is  not  a  prerequisite
    for the Appellant to succeed in his appeal that he is able to refer  to
    objective  evidence  recording  persecutory  or  Article  3  infringing
    treatment for some identified Bahai in Afghanistan.   Bearing  in  mind
    the very few Bahai in Afghanistan, the  fact  that  there  may  not  be
    recorded incidents of persecutory treatment against  them  which  those
    writing the objective evidence have thought appropriate to record, does
    not mean that for an individual Bahai  returned  to  Afghanistan  there
    would be no real risk of  persecution.   Instead  the  matter  must  be
    viewed as a matter of principle  and  analysis  having  regard  to  the
    objective evidence and the question must be asked as to whether in  the
    light of all that evidence there is  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    Article 3 infringing  treatment  for  the  Appellant  on  return.   The
    absence of specific evidence on this point in relation to  Bahais  does
    not determinatively answer the question against the Appellant, although
    it is a point which we bear in mind.

26.   We are satisfied that for the Appellant returning alone to Kabul as a
    member of the Bahai faith and with no family and no Bahai community  to
    return to there would be a  real  risk  of  persecutory  or  Article  3
    infringing treatment.    We reach this conclusion having regard to  the
    following matters:

         (1)      The previous treatment, which was very  severe,  suffered
             by the Appellant's family in 2001 by  reason  of  their  Bahai
             faith.


         (2)      The general religious intolerance in  Afghanistan.   This
             is demonstrated, for example, by  the  treatment  received  by
             members of the Sikh community, see the cases of IB 150 and  KK
             258.


         (3)       The  treatment  received  by  Bahais  in  other   Muslim
             countries and the manner  in  which  they  are  there  viewed.
             Among other matters we bear  in  mind  the  perceived  Zionist
             connection.


         (4)      The report from Mr.  Marsden  in  which  he  specifically
             considers the Appellant's case and concludes that he would  be
             at risk of arbitrary violence if he returned.


27.   We also accept Mr. Bazini's argument that, as compared  with  members
    of the Sikh community, the Appellant would be likely to be less happily
    rather than more happily placed.  It is true that  as  regards  outward
    appearances it may be that a member of the Sikh community would be more
    immediately recognised as such and therefore as  not  being  a  Muslim.
    However while it may take longer for the Appellant to be recognised  as
    non-Muslim he would (as we have already found to be inevitable) soon be
    identified as not being a Muslim.  Once so identified we see no  reason
    to conclude why the Appellant could expect to  be  any  better  treated
    than a member of the Sikh community.  In fact we  accept  Mr.  Bazini's
    argument that, bearing in  mind  that  there  is  no  identified  Bahai
    community to which the Appellant could return (whereas there is a small
    Sikh community in Kabul) the Appellant would be  worse  placed  than  a
    returning member of the Sikh community.  However as regards a member of
    the Sikh community the cases of IB  150  and  KK  258  show  the  grave
    difficulties for them.  In IB 150 it was held by the Tribunal that  for
    the applicant whose home area was Jalalabad (where it was  accepted  he
    was at real risk of persecution) it would be unduly harsh  to  relocate
    to Kabul.  In KK the Tribunal concluded on the evidence before it  that
    there would be a real risk of persecutory treatment for  the  applicant
    as a Sikh on return to Kabul.  We conclude that  there  would  for  the
    Appellant be a  real  risk  of  persecutory  or  Article  3  infringing
    treatment on return.

28.   This persecutory or Article 3 infringing treatment would  be  at  the
    hands of non-state actors.  However we do not consider that there is  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in Kabul.  We have in  mind
    the analysis in IB 150 at paragraph 34 which records that ISAF  has  no
    mandates to intervene in relation to human rights violations without  a
    request from the government and that ISAF  cannot  be  regarded  as  of
    itself being able to provide a sufficiency of security  to  individuals
    in the Sikh community, notwithstanding that ISAF's presence may have  a
    generally calming effect in Kabul.  We also have  in  mind  KK  258  at
    paragraph 34 where the Tribunal concluded that  there  was  nothing  to
    show any specific commitment either by the international forces or  the
    Afghan authorities to the protection of  minorities  generally  or  the
    Sikhs in particular.  We also have in mind the passage at page  201  of
    the bundle recording the fact that many of the most powerful police and
    army commanders in Kabul today come  from  parties  within  the  former
    Northern Alliance, including the Jamiat-e-Islami.  We also have in mind
    the Appellant's evidence, recorded above, as to the  adverse  treatment
    he received in Pakistan from members of Jamiat-e-Islami  by  reason  of
    his Bahai faith.  We do not consider in these circumstances that  there
    would be a sufficiency of state protection for  the  Appellant  against
    the real risk of persecutory or Article 3 infringing treatment from non-
    state actors which the Claimant would face because of his religion.

29.   Even if, contrary to the foregoing conclusions, the  Appellant  could
    find sufficient safety in Kabul, this would involve an internal  flight
    alternative because the Appellant's home area is not Kabul  and  it  is
    accepted (and certainly we find) that the Appellant would  be  at  real
    risk of persecution or Article 3 infringing treatment in his home  area
    and there would not be a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  him  there.
    Accordingly even if the Appellant found sufficient safety in Kabul,  it
    would be necessary to consider whether it was unduly  harsh  to  expect
    him to relocate there.  Bearing in  mind  the  matters  raised  in  Mr.
    Marsden's report at paragraphs 27 and 28 and also to the analysis in IB
    150 at paragraph 43 and  bearing  mind  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning as a lone Bahai with no Bahai community to join in Kabul,  we
    consider that it would be unduly harsh to expect  him  to  relocate  to
    Kabul.

30.   In the result therefore the Tribunal allows  the  Appellant's  appeal
    both under the Refugee Convention and under Article 3 of the ECHR.




                                                  HIS HONOUR JUDGE HUSKINSON
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT



