

|                                                                      |
|SS (False nationality appeal) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00059              |





                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  22 February 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                3 March 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                    Mr D J Parkes (Acting Vice President)
                   Mr M W Rapinet (Acting Vice President)

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and





                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Elks, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Choudhery of Asghar & Co



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Mr Vaudin d'Imecourt, promulgated  on  26  February
     2004.  The  Claimant  alleged  that  he  was  a  citizen  of  Somalia,
     allegedly born in 1986 and who said that he had arrived in the  United
     Kingdom in August 2003 from Kenya, where he had been living in a  camp
     for the previous ten years.

  2. The Secretary of State did not believe  him  and  refused  his  asylum
     claim, which was based on his alleged membership of a minority  Somali
     clan.  In the Secretary of State's decision dated 20 November 2003, he
     said:

           "It is not accepted that you  are  Somali  and  your  claim  for
           asylum and your human rights claim  have  been  refused  on  the
           basis that you are not Somali.  Directions  will  be  given  for
           your removal to Somali as this is the country of which you claim
           to be a national.  This will enable you to appeal the refusal of
           your claim.  If you do appeal and the adjudicator also concludes
           that you are not Somali we will seek to remove you to a  country
           or territory to which you can be removed pursuant  to  paragraph
           8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 or paragraph 1(1) of  Schedule  3  of  the
           1971 Act as appropriate.


           On the basis of the information you have provided  your  removal
           would not be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations  under
           the ECHR."

  3. That refusal letter was accompanied by a "Notice of Refusal  of  Leave
     to Enter" which said that the  Secretary  of  State  had  refused  the
     application for asylum for the reasons set out in the attached Notice.
      That attached Notice is the reasons  for  the  refusal  letter.   The
     Notice of Refusal of Leave to Enter continued "I therefore refuse  you
     leave to enter the United Kingdom/I therefore cancel  your  continuing
     leave...".  Underneath was the further  heading  "Removal  Directions"
     below which it said "I have given/propose to give directions for  your
     removal to Somalia by flight/ship/train:".  There were  then  set  out
     the rights of appeal which included the ground that removal  from  the
     United Kingdom as a result of the decision  would  breach  the  United
     Kingdom's obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention or the ECHR.

  4. The Claimant appealed against what he described as the decision of the
     Secretary of State to "refuse my asylum application"  explaining  that
     he could not go back to "Afghanistan" [sic].  Further details were  to
     follow.

  5. The Adjudicator described the appeal as being under section  82(1)  of
     the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 "against the  decision
     of the Immigration officer made on 24th November 2003 [the date on the
     Notice of Refusal of Leave to Enter] to issue  removal  directions  to
     Somalia as a result of the SSHD's decision to refuse  his  application
     for asylum and on the basis of his human rights".  There was no ground
     of appeal which related to the country of destination which  had  been
     set out in the Notice of Refusal of Leave to Enter in accordance  with
     Regulation 5 of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 SI No  658.
     The Adjudicator concluded that the Claimant's claim  to  be  a  Somali
     refugee was not made out.  He "was  satisfied  to  a  high  degree  of
     probability that this young man was a Kenyan  national  which  is  the
     country from where he flew directly to the United Kingdom".  He  noted
     what the Home Office letter of 20 November 2003 said at  paragraph  12
     and said that in those circumstances he would  expect  removal  to  be
     effected to Kenya, which was the last country from which he had  flown
     directly to the United Kingdom.  He  concluded  that  removal  of  the
     Claimant to Somalia would breach  neither  Convention.   There  is  no
     challenge by the Claimant  in  the  course  of  this  appeal  to  that
     conclusion.  The Adjudicator was right to dismiss the asylum and human
     rights grounds of appeal, which he did by reference to Somalia.

  6. The Adjudicator dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
     grounds but allowed the appeal "on the limited ground that the removal
     direction to Somalia in this case is against  the  law"  and  directed
     that the removal directions be quashed.

  7. He explained his reasons as follows.  The appeal should be regarded as
     brought under section 84(1)(e) on the grounds that  the  decision  "is
     otherwise not in accordance with the law" and that the law  for  these
     purposes included paragraph 8(1)(c) of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration
     Act 1971 which only permitted  removal  directions  to  by  given  for
     certain countries only, none of which would entitle the  Secretary  of
     State to remove the Claimant to Somalia because the Claimant was not a
     Somali, nor did he hold a Somali passport, nor  had  he  come  to  the
     United Kingdom directly from there, nor were there reasonable  grounds
     for supposing that he would be permitted to enter Somalia.

  8. The Adjudicator appears to have thought that section 85(1) of the 2002
     Act imposed an obligation on him to consider a ground  of  appeal  not
     raised and then concluded that section 86(3) compelled  him  to  allow
     the appeal where he thought that the decision was  not  in  accordance
     with the law.  He held that section 87(1), which permitted him to give
     a direction  for  the  purpose  of  giving  effect  to  his  decision,
     permitted him to direct the quashing of what he thought  were  removal
     directions.

  9. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds  that  the  Adjudicator
     had no jurisdiction to consider or  quash  removal  directions  or  to
     consider the power of the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  them.   The
     setting of removal directions was not an "immigration decision" within
     Section 82 of the 2002  Act.   Mr  Elks  refined  his  submissions  to
     contend that there had been no removal directions at all, and that  if
     there had been  they  were  not  part  of  the  immigration  decision.
     Indeed, there had been no decision to remove the Claimant at all.  The
     decision was  simply  a  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  under  section
     82(2)(a).

 10. Miss Choudhery for  the  Claimant  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision was a decision under (2)(a) and (g), the latter being
     a decision "that a person is to be removed from the United Kingdom  by
     way of directions under Section 10(1)(a),(b) or (c) of the Immigration
     and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal of  person  unlawfully  in  United
     Kingdom), ...".

 11. Whatever other points may have been thrown up by this appeal,  neither
     party seemed to consider that the allowing or dismissing of the appeal
     would make any practical difference to what happened to the  Claimant.
     The Secretary of State said that whether the appeal  were  allowed  or
     dismissed he would set removal directions for another country  without
     making as he understood  matters,  any  further  appealable  decision;
     Judicial Review might be available in respect of the new directions.

 12. Ms Choudhery thought that the Secretary of State would have to make  a
     new decision either way and even if she were right about  the  current
     appeal being brought in respect of  a  section  82(2)(g)  decision  as
     well.  But she recognised that either way, removal directions would be
     set for another country.  Whether  the  appeal  was  allowed  or  not,
     nobody was concerned that the Secretary of State would set  directions
     for removal to Somalia.

 13.  Although it may seem strange that the Tribunal should  have  to  hear
     such a seemingly  inconsequential  appeal,  Mr  Elks  urged  that  the
     existence or absence of removal  directions,  a  right  of  appeal  in
     respect of them and the power of the Adjudicator should be made clear.

 14. At a simple level, we accept  Mr  Elks  submissions  on  those  latter
     issues.  First, the document headed "Notice of  Refusal  of  Leave  to
     Enter" does not contain or evidence removal directions.   The  dubiety
     in the statement of whether directions have been given, unsupported by
     any more detail,  prevents  that  document  containing  or  evidencing
     removal directions.  We so held in MY  (Disputed  Somali  Nationality)
     Somalia* v SSHD [2004] UKIAT 00174, [2004] Imm AR  359,  at  paragraph
     22.  This case was decided on the 1999 Act but  contains  material  of
     continuing relevance.

 15. The purpose of  the  naming  of  a  country  of  proposed  removal  or
     destination is compliance with the requirement of Regulation 5 of  the
     Notices Regulations, which enables the contested nationality issue  to
     be resolved;  see MY above at paragraph 28.  The naming of the country
     of destination may give rise to issues which the  Tribunal  will  deal
     with in another case as to its effect on the range of countries  which
     the Adjudicator has to consider and  whether,  if  the  country  falls
     outside the scope of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, it should
     nonetheless be considered or what the effect on the substantive appeal
     should be.  However, those issues do not arise  in  this  case,  which
     involves a deceitfully contested nationality.

 16. Second, the decision of the Secretary of  State  in  the  reasons  for
     refusal letter and the Notice is giving a two stage decision,  to  the
     effect that, if the Claimant is found to be a Somali, as the  Claimant
     contends, he will be removed there but that if he is found not  to  be
     Somali, he will be removed to whatever  country  is  then  lawful,  in
     particular the country of which he is then found  to  be  a  national.
     This two stage issue approach was analysed in MY above, at  paragraphs
     25, 36 and 47.

 17. Third, the considerations in  MY  apply  to  a  case  of  a  deceitful
     nationality claim.  The appeal cannot be allowed on the basis  of  the
     conclusions that the Claimant is not a Somali because that is not  the
     Claimant's case.  The Claimant has never disavowed it, and should gain
     no advantage, however slight, from the  rejection  of  his  case.   He
     could not argue it and the Adjudicator should not take  such  a  point
     even as a consequence  of  his  nationality  conclusion.   It  is  the
     Secretary of State's decision which means that in those  circumstances
     the Claimant will not be sent to Somalia.

 18. Therefore, the decision to refuse leave to enter or  remain,  properly
     understood, was in accordance with the law.   There  were  no  removal
     directions and the decision as a whole did  not  permit  the  argument
     that the decision proposed was unlawful by virtue of Schedule 2 to the
     1971 Act.  Even if there had been an  appealable  decision  under  (g)
     with the width contended for by the Claimant on appeal to us, the same
     applies.

 19. There are two other points we need to make.  First, the power  of  the
     Adjudicator is to allow or dismiss the appeal.  The appeal  cannot  be
     allowed in part, even though  it  may  only  succeed  on  for  limited
     reasons and in that sense succeed on a limited basis.  Insofar  as  an
     appealable immigration decision  is  necessary  before  every  act  of
     removal, allowing the appeal as  the  Adjudicator  did  would  require
     another appealable immigration decision to be taken  again  here  even
     though all the issues had been resolved against the Claimant.  It  may
     or may not be the case that a fresh decision would have to be made for
     removal directions, if necessary, to be given.  Second, section  85(1)
     brings in no duty to consider grounds of appeal which  have  not  been
     raised against the decisions appealed against,  and  section  86(2)(a)
     contains no obligation to consider them.  There  is  no  duty  on  the
     Adjudicator to raise and consider grounds of appeal which the Claimant
     has not put forward and which were he to do  so  would  have  been  an
     abuse of process.  An Adjudicator should not by a  sidewind  allow  an
     appeal which gives the Claimant a result which his evidence disavows.

 20. We should mention briefly what we are not deciding.

 21. There is a significant change from the formulation in  the  1999  Act,
     considered in Kariharan v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ  1102,  [2003]  Imm  AR
     163, which meant that the setting of  removal  directions  constituted
     both a "decision" under the Immigration Acts and a "decision  relating
     to" a person's entitlement to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom.
     The language of the  subsequently  enacted  2002  Act  section  82  is
     different.  The significance of that  change  for  the  scope  of  the
     appealable decisions to remove within section 82(2) (g), (h)  and  (i)
     are at issue as is the effect of the country of proposed removal.   We
     shall say no more about that here because it is not necessary for  the
     decision on this appeal.

 22. Nor shall we deal with the question of whether there  was  a  decision
     under both (a) and (g) of section 82 as the outcome is  unaffected  by
     that.  We simply point out  that  it  is  not  inevitable  that  every
     refusal of leave to enter or remain  contains  a  decision  to  remove
     under those subsections, because they are  separate  decisions.   They
     remain separate, even though it is  possible  to  appeal  against  the
     former on  the  grounds  that  removal  in  consequence  would  breach
     Convention rights.

 23. Nor is it necessary to deal with the supposition that the Secretary of
     State can issue removal directions or fresh removal directions without
     generating a fresh and appealable immigration decision  under  section
     82 (2) (g),(h) or (i), particularly in the light of Kariharan.

 24. However, for the reasons which we give this appeal is allowed.  It  is
     of some interest for the treatment of decisions in this sort  of  case
     and is reported for that reason.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


