

|Heard at Field House       | |                                   |
|On:  6 January 2005        | |MC (Article 3:- Suicide -Preventive|
|Prepared: 12 January 2005  | |Measures) Sri Lanka [2005] UKIAT   |
|                           | |00064                              |
|                                                                 |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                      |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|Date Determination notified:                                     |
|                                                                 |
|9 March 2005                                                     |
|                                                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                 |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                 |
|Mr P Aujla                                                       |
|Mrs M Padfield JP                                                |
|Between                                                          |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                                                                 |
|                           |    |APPELLANT                       |
|                           |    |                                |
|                           |and |                                |
|                           |    |                                |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                       |
|                           | |RESPONDENT                         |

Representation:

For the appellant:          Mr S Cox of Counsel
For the respondent:      Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  appeals   against   the
      determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C Bart-Stewart, who dismissed his
      appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds against a decision made
      on 18 April 2001 giving  directions  for  his  removal  following  the
      refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.    The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 March
      1999 using a passport of which he  was  not  entitled  and  which  was
      returned to the agent after he  had  gained  entry.   He  applied  for
      asylum the same day.  His application was refused for the reasons  set
      out in the decision letter dated  20  December  2001.   There  was  an
      appeal against this decision which was dismissed by an Adjudicator.  A
      further appeal to the Tribunal was dismissed  but  this  determination
      was set aside by consent in the Court of Appeal and  subsequently  the
      Tribunal remitted the appeal for a fresh hearing.   That hearing  took
      place before the Adjudicator on 6 February 2004.

      Background

3.    The Adjudicator summarised the basis of the  claim  as  follows.   The
      appellant is of Tamil ethnicity and lived in  the  Jaffna  peninsular.
      In 1982 he was involved with the TULF. He was arrested by the army and
      held for one night.  He began to assist the LTTE in 1984 and when  the
      Indian Peacekeeping Forces intervened in Sri Lanka between  July  1987
      and December 1989 there was one occasion when he  was  arrested,  held
      for four days and seriously assaulted.   He  continued  assisting  the
      LTTE primarily by repairing their vehicles but also in leafleting  and
      providing them with food.  He was arrested at an army checkpoint on  1
      February 1999 and detained for eleven  days.   He  denied  involvement
      with the LTTE but was  told  that  he  could  help  to  identify  LTTE
      members.  His release from detention was secured by his wife paying  a
      bribe.  The appellant was told that he should  leave  the  country  or
      risk being killed.  An agent  was  arranged  to  help  him  leave.  He
      travelled to Colombo and left  by  air  transiting  in  at  least  two
      countries before arriving in the United Kingdom.

4.    The Adjudicator not only  had  background  evidence  relating  to  the
      situation in Sri Lanka but  also  medical  evidence  in  the  form  of
      psychiatric reports from Dr Patterson  dealing  with  the  appellant's
      medical and psychiatric condition.   It was the doctor's view that the
      appellant should not be cross-examined and in those  circumstances  Mr
      Cox who appeared before the Adjudicator  did  not  call  him  to  give
      evidence but relied on the documentary evidence.

5.    The  Adjudicator  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
      subjected  to  torture  whilst  in  detention  in  February  1999  and
      considered it unlikely that the authorities would have released him if
      they believed  him  to  be  actively  involved  with  the  LTTE.   She
      considered that his decision to leave at  that  time  was  an  extreme
      reaction to one relatively short detention.   She  was  not  satisfied
      that the authorities would now  have  any  adverse  interest  in  him.
      There was no evidence to suggest continuing interest or  that  he  was
      wanted.

6.    The Adjudicator went on to consider the medical evidence.   She  found
      it difficult to reconcile the problems presented to  the  doctor  with
      the account the appellant gave in his  SEF  statement  and  interview.
      The account given to the doctor had been exaggerated considerably  and
      the Adjudicator approached with caution  her  conclusions  as  to  his
      medical state noting in particular that the  consultation  was  nearly
      three years after  the  appellant's  arrival  in  this  country.   The
      appellant did not appear to be receiving any psychiatric treatment  or
      counselling despite a diagnosis  of  post  traumatic  stress  disorder
      (PTSD)  and  depression.  The  doctor's  prognosis  was  that  without
      psychological intervention and anti-depressant treatment the appellant
      was unlikely to recover.  The Adjudicator referred to the most  recent
      report before her and to the fact that there were five  scars  on  the
      appellant's wrist where he had burnt himself  with  a  cigarette.   He
      said that he would kill himself if he were told for certain  that   he
      must go back to Sri Lanka.    The Adjudicator was not  satisfied  that
      the appellant was at a high risk of suicide.   She regarded the  marks
      as superficial and questioned the appellant's motives.   She  was  not
      satisfied that the medical evidence supported a submission that  there
      would be an increased  risk  of  suicide  were  the  appellant  to  be
      removed.

      The Grounds of Appeal

7.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the  Adjudicator  erred  in
      law by failing to have regard to the fact that there was evidence that
      the appellant had been  in  receipt  of  treatment.   She  had  failed
      properly to assess the  expert  evidence  before  her.    The  hearing
      before  the  Adjudicator  had  been  adjourned  on  the   respondent's
      application to consider his response to the medical  evidence  but  he
      had made no response and had not  attended  the  final  hearing.   The
      Adjudicator had erred in her  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr  Patterson's
      report.  She had misdirected herself on the approach to be applied  in
      cases where there was a risk of suicide and  had  also  erred  in  her
      assessment of whether the appellant would be at risk of persecution.

      The Submissions

8.    At  the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  Mr  Cox  submitted  that  the
      Adjudicator had erred in law by leaving out of account the  fact  that
      the appellant had been receiving psychiatric treatment.  He  submitted
      that the proper test when assessing the risk of  suicide  was  whether
      there was a real risk  of  a  significantly  increased  likelihood  of
      suicide.  He referred the Tribunal to the judgements of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Soumahoro[2003] EWCA Civ 840, the  High  Court  in  Kurtolli
      [2003] EWHC 2744 and Tribunal determinations in N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT
      0053, SP (Risk - Suicide - PTSD - IFA - Medical Facilities) Kosovo CG
      [2003] UKIAT 0017, SJ (Issue of Risk of Suicide in UK and  in  Country
      of Origin) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00265 and KK (Risk, Return, Suicide,
      Roma) Serbia and Montenegro [2004] UKIAT 00228.  There was no evidence
      to contradict Dr Patterson's view.  The Secretary of State had had an
      opportunity of considering the medical evidence but had not  responded
      and had not attended the hearing before the Adjudicator.

9.    Ms Holmes submitted that the  issue  was  whether  there  was  such  a
      degree of risk of an increased likelihood of suicide  that  Article  3
      was engaged.  Even taking the medical evidence at  face  value,  there
      was nothing to  show  that  the  appellant  had  attempted  to  commit
      suicide.  The issue was whether there was  real  evidence  of  a  real
      risk.  An allegation of such a nature needed to be proved even to  the
      lower standard on  the  clearest  possible  evidence.   There  was  no
      evidence to show that the appellant  would  not  be  able  to  receive
      treatment in Sri Lanka or support from relatives. In KK  the  Tribunal
      had been right to express reservations  about  whether  the  scope  of
      Article 3 was such that it prevented the Secretary of State taking  an
      action properly open to him such as making and notifying a decision to
      remove the appellant.

      The Appeal on Asylum Grounds

10.   Although the grounds sought to  challenge  the  Adjudicator's  finding
      and conclusions on the asylum appeal,   Mr Cox did  not  press  these
      strongly.   This was the proper course to take.  The Tribunal  is  not
      satisfied that there is any basis for a successful argument  that  the
      Adjudicator erred in law in her assessment of  whether  the  appellant
      would be at risk on return.  He relied primarily  on  a  detention  in
      1999 and to a lesser extent on earlier events.  In the  light  of  the
      background evidence before her, the Adjudicator was fully entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant would not be of any  adverse  interest  to
      the authorities.  She considered whether the fact  that  he  had  been
      released by payment of a bribe would affect the position but concluded
      that it would not.  There is nothing in the appellant's background and
      profile to support a contention that he would now be at real risk from
      the authorities still less that the Adjudicator erred in  law  in  her
      assessment of this issue.

      The Human Rights Appeal : the Law.

11.   The position relating to the claim under Article 3 on  the  particular
      facts of this appeal is more complex.  The consequences  arising  from
      an increased risk of suicide were considered by the Court of Appeal in
      the context of an Article 3 claim  in  Soumahoro.  The  appeal  was  a
      challenge to a certificate issued by  the  Secretary  of  State  under
      Section 11(2) of the 1999 Act and  in  particular  whether  the  claim
      based on Article 3 could be certified as manifestly unfounded.   There
      was uncontroverted evidence that  if  the  claimant  was  returned  to
      France as proposed by the Secretary of State, there was  a  real  risk
      that she might commit suicide and this  risk  was  likely  to  subsist
      until she  realised  that  the  French  authorities  did  not  intend,
      assuming that to be the case, to send her back  to  the  Ivory  Coast.
      Dyson LJ agreed with the first instance judge that the issue  was  the
      degree of risk that there would be an increased likelihood of suicide.
        If it was arguable on the evidence that there was a real risk  of  a
      significantly increased risk that, if removed to France, the appellant
      would commit suicide, then her claim based on Article 3 could  not  be
      certified as manifestly unfounded.   There was an issue as to  whether
      the risk could be minimised by protective measures (such as  detention
      and warning  the  French  authorities  of  this  tendency)  to  render
      unarguable what would otherwise be an arguable claim.  As there was no
      evidence about what precautions could be taken to minimise the risk of
      suicide and in particular what measures the French  authorities  would
      take and for how long and how effective they would be, it could not be
      said that the claim would be bound to fail.

12.   In SP, the Tribunal  accepted  the  principle  that  if  the  evidence
      established that a removal decision would expose a person  to  a  real
      risk on return of committing suicide, then a decision requiring him to
      return could  give  rise  to  a  violation  of  Article  3.    On  the
      particular facts of that appeal the Tribunal held  that  it  had  been
      open to the Adjudicator to conclude that return would not  expose  the
      claimant to a real risk of suicide or to any other type of serious  or
      significant detriment to his physical and moral integrity.  In SJ  the
      principle was  accepted  that  a  risk  of  suicide  in  this  country
      following an adverse  immigration  decision  could  engage  Article  3
      although the appeal failed on its merits.

13.   This issue was considered at some length  in  Kurtolli  by  Silber  J.
      The court was considering a challenge to a  certificate  and  followed
      the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Soumahoro. It was  argued  that
      the Court of Appeal judgments  in  N  and  Djali  had  the  effect  of
      superseding the judgment in Soumahoro.   This  argument  was  rejected
      for the reasons give by Silber J in paragraphs 79-82 of his  judgment.
      He commented that Soumahoro was dealing with an issue of suicide  risk
      which was totally  different  from  the  subject  matter  in  N  which
      concerned the difference between medical treatment in this country and
      abroad.   An increased risk  of  suicide  would  constitute  extremely
      exceptional facts of the kind referred to in N.   The  claim  was  not
      based  on  events  occurring  outside  the  jurisdiction  but  on  the
      consequences of being notified of a removal decision.  There would  be
      an affront to humanitarian principles because the notification of  the
      decision to remove the claimant  with  her  particular  mental  health
      problems caused by her experiences in Kosovo and the implementation of
      that decision would lead to a deterioration in her mental condition so
      that she would probably or might well succeed in  committing  suicide.
      To  remove  or  threaten  to  remove  a  person  psychiatrically   and
      psychologically  scarred  such   as   the   claimant   would   affront
      humanitarian principles in light of the greatly  increased  risk  that
      she would commit suicide.

14.   The comments of the Tribunal in KK must be read in the light  of  this
      judgement.  On the facts of that case the Tribunal were satisfied that
      the Adjudicator's findings were properly open  to  him  and  that  the
      claimant was adequately protected from the risk of suicide  whilst  he
      remained in the United Kingdom and that on return he would be within a
      sizeable  Roma  community  with  adequate  security  and   appropriate
      safeguards to prevent his depression causing his suicide.

15.   In summary the Tribunal accept that the  proper  test  to  be  applied
      when assessing a claim under Article 3 based on an  asserted  risk  of
      suicide is as set out in the Court of  Appeal  in  Soumahoro,  whether
      there is a real risk  of  a  significantly  increased  risk  that  the
      appellant  would  commit  suicide.   The  factual  difficulty   facing
      Adjudicators and the Tribunal is that this is  an  easy  assertion  to
      make and one that is exceptionally difficult to assess in the  context
      of an appellant  resisting  a  removal  decision  where  there  is  an
      inevitable temptation to seize upon any argument.  In this context the
      Tribunal was right to make the point in N  (Kenya)  that  there  would
      need to be the clearest possible evidence of a real risk  which  would
      not otherwise be preventable by appropriate medical  supervision  both
      on the part of the removing country and having  regard  to  facilities
      which might reasonably  be  expected  to  assist  in  the  country  of
      destination.  We endorse these comments.  It  is  not  a  question  of
      imposing a higher standard of proof than a  real  risk  or  reasonable
      gegree of likelihood but of testing  and  analysing  the  evidence  on
      which the claim is based.

16.   It is also important to note that it has to be shown that there  is  a
      real risk of a significantly increased risk.  In  the  absence  of  an
      increased risk, the notification of the decision  and  the  subsequent
      removal have no causative  effect.   Similarly,  a  threat  to  commit
      suicide which is rationally made in an attempt  to  frustrate  removal
      cannot form the basis for an argument that removal  would  lead  to  a
      breach of Article 3 because it is not the threatened removal which  is
      causative.  The rationale behind the judgments of both  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Soumahoro and Silber J in Kurtolli is the need to protect  a
      person who is unable to behave rationally because of  the  psychiatric
      and psychological consequences of torture  or  ill-treatment  received
      before coming to the United  Kingdom.    It  is  only  a  particularly
      vulnerable  claimant,   whether   through   mental,   psychiatric   or
      psychological problems however caused, who would be likely to  make  a
      genuine threat of suicide where the objective  facts  do  not  support
      their fears.  The threat of suicide in such a case is not manipulative
      in the sense of being a rationally based attempt  to  prevent  removal
      but is a genuine indication of vulnerability.  However, the risk of  a
      breach of article 3 in these circumstances is normally met by  showing
      that proper arrangements have been made both for removal and for  care
      and treatment on return. These measures remove the risk  or  at  least
      minimise it to a level below a real risk.




The Facts relating to this Appeal

17.   Set against this background the Tribunal turn to consider the  medical
      evidence relating to this  appellant.     In  her  psychiatric  report
      dated  8  December  2002  Dr  Patterson  describes  the  appellant  as
      presenting a complicated picture, characteristic of many survivors  of
      trauma.  His statement that  he  would  kill  himself  in  the  United
      Kingdom  rather  than  be  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  should  be  taken
      seriously.  He has been suffering from severe depression and perceives
      that he would be arrested, tortured and murdered if returned.  It  was
      her view that there would be a significant risk of  completed  suicide
      if he  was  told  for  certain  that  he  must  return.   There  is  a
      supplementary report dated 3 April 2003 which restates this view.   In
      the further report dated 13 December 2004 the doctor observes that the
      appellant requires specialist psychological intervention.   There  she
      refers to the fact that he has attempted to harm himself  and  remains
      of the view that he would be at substantial risk of suicide.   It  was
      after her second report that the doctor discovered that the  appellant
      had started to cut himself.  More recently he has burnt  himself  with
      cigarettes. Individuals with a history of deliberate self-harm have  a
      one hundred fold increased risk of suicide  compared  to  the  general
      population.

18.   The evidence that was before the  Adjudicator  was  submitted  to  the
      Secretary of State but he failed to make any response.  Of course this
      does not mean that the Adjudicator is bound to accept the evidence but
      the Tribunal is not satisfied that there was any  adequate  basis  for
      rejecting  Dr  Patterson's  evidence.   The   Adjudicator   erred   by
      proceeding on the assumption the appellant had not been in receipt  of
      treatment when it is clear  from  the  expert  evidence  that  he  has
      received some psychiatric treatment and counselling: see the report of
      Dr Patterson dated 12 January 2004 at  page  2.     The  Adjudicator's
      comment that the appellant's symptoms were out of  all  proportion  to
      the experiences he suffered failed to take account of  the  fact  that
      what is important is the assessment of whether the symptoms exist  and
      if so what inferences can properly be drawn from them.  In this  light
      it may not be unreasonable for the appellant to describe what happened
      to him according to his own perception as "atrocities".

19.   As the Tribunal is satisfied that the Adjudicator erred in law in  her
      assessment of the evidence, we must consider whether we should  assess
      the risk for ourselves or remit the matter for  further  consideration
      to an Adjudicator.  We accept Mr Cox's submission that we  are  in  as
      good a position as the Adjudicator to assess the medical evidence.  We
      are  satisfied  that  the  evidence  does  show  a  real  risk  of   a
      significantly increased risk of suicide. We accept the conclusions set
      out in Dr Patterson's reports and note  in  particular  the  increased
      risk where there is previous evidence of self-harming. It may be  that
      this risk can be prevented by appropriate medical  supervision  before
      and during removal and by evidence that proper treatment  and  support
      would be received in  Sri  Lanka.    However,  there  is  no  adequate
      evidence in this appeal to enable us to reach  this  conclusion.    It
      may be that such evidence is available but it has  not  been  produced
      either before the Adjudicator or before the Tribunal.

20.   On this basis the Tribunal is satisfied that on the  particular  facts
      of this appeal, the medical evidence shows that  the  appellant  is  a
      vulnerable person suffering from acute psychological problems and that
      without adequate safeguards there would be a real risk  of  self  harm
      were he to be removed to Sri Lanka.

21.   The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds but  allowed  on  Article  3
      grounds.




                                                                H J E Latter
                                                              Vice President
