
H-KM-V4

|                           |        |                            |
|Heard at Field House       |        |MA (Iraq - Fayli Kurds) Iraq|
|On 11 November 2004        |        |[2005] UKIAT 00022          |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28th January 2005                                                 |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr D K Allen - Vice President                                     |
|Mr R A McKee                                                      |
|Mrs L H S Verity                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who appeals  to  the  Tribunal
    with permission against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs N
    Bircher, dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 14 June 2001 issuing directions for his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom and refusing asylum.

2.    The hearing before us took place  on  11  November  2004.   Mr  C
    Williams for the IAS appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Mr J
    McGirr appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

3.    The Appellant is an Iraqi national who, and more specifically, is
    a Fayli Kurd and a Shia  Muslim.   He  claims  that  in  1980  the
    government of Saddam Hussein expelled him and his family from Iraq
    and they went to Iran.  He claimed to have been arrested twice  by
    the Iranian police in 1994 because he was an Iraqi Fayli Kurd  and
    detained on each occasion for a week and physically assaulted.  He
    worked at a printing  business  and  claims  that  he  experienced
    particular problems in  October  2000  when  the  security  forces
    raided the business and he was told that it was done  because  the
    business was secretly printing material relating to  Christianity.
    He went into hiding and stayed with an Iraqi friend and left  Iran
    on 30 October 2000 and came to the United Kingdom.

4.     Removal  directions  were  set  for  Iraq  and   therefore   the
    Adjudicator properly  concentrated  on  risk  on  return  to  that
    country.  The Appellant said that he has had no contact  with  any
    members of  his  family  since  he  left  Iran.   The  Adjudicator
    accepted that he and his family had been forced to leave Iraq  but
    did not believe that he was subjected to the  treatment  which  he
    claimed to have been subjected to while in Iran.  At paragraph  16
    she concluded that since Saddam Hussein's regime  had  fallen  the
    Ba'ath Party no longer existed, the majority of its members having
    fled and the services, had been restored in such cities  as  Mosul
    and Kirkuk, and there was a continued presence of Allied Forces in
    Iraq which would  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection  to  the
    Appellant.  She gave brief  consideration  to  objective  evidence
    concerning the general situation particularly with regard  to  the
    Kurds in Iraq.

5.    In the grounds of appeal it is contended that the Adjudicator did
    not give proper consideration to risk on return to  Iraq  for  the
    Appellant as a Fayli Kurd.  Reference is made to  aspects  of  the
    objective evidence and it is contended that  although  the  Ba'ath
    Party no longer rules, the Appellant is at risk on return.

6.    At the hearing before the Tribunal  on  25  August  2004  it  was
    stated on behalf of the Appellant that he wished to argue that  he
    was not an Iraqi and could therefore not be returned to Iraq.  The
    Presenting Officer had had no notice of  this  point  and  it  was
    therefore  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be  adjourned,  with
    directions being made firstly that the Appellant's representatives
    within ten days should serve amended grounds of appeal setting out
    any arguments they wished to raise with regard to the  Appellant's
    nationality or the removal  directions  attaching  any  supporting
    documents and thereafter a skeleton argument was to be  served  by
    the Respondent.

7.    The latter directions were not complied with, but we do have  the
    benefit of the amended grounds of appeal in which it is  contended
    firstly that the Adjudicator  over-simplified  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's problems being resolved by the downfall of the  Ba'ath
    Party, and making the point that  Fayli  Kurds  were  stripped  of
    Iraqi citizenship when they were forced to flee Iraq and  the  law
    that stripped them of their citizenship was still in force.  It is
    also contended that the Coalition  Provisional  Authority  in  the
    Interim National  Government  has  no  power  to  reinstate  Iraqi
    citizenship as the source of  their  powers  does  not  extend  to
    grants of citizenship.  It is also contended  that  the  purported
    attempt  made  by  the  Coalition  Provisional  Authority  law  to
    reinstate Iraqi citizenship is not yet effective because this  has
    to be done by the National Assembly which will not be  constituted
    until 2005.

8.    Mr Williams relied on the amended grounds of  appeal.   Coalition
    regulations stated that the National Assembly would be in power to
    grant citizenship but that was currently an aspiration and whether
    or not it  would  occur  was  imponderable.   He  referred  us  to
    paragraph 6.102 of the  October  2004  Country  Report  which  was
    concerned with the situation of the Fayli Kurds.  Mr Williams  had
    undertaken extensive internet searches in regard to Fayli Kurds in
    Iraq but there was no current information.  It  was  unclear  what
    procedures  were  to  be  followed  in  order  to   obtain   Iraqi
    nationality. He did not  think  that  conquest  would  change  the
    matter but that it needed to be in the regulations.

9.    As regards the Dutch report referred to in paragraph 6.102 of the
    Country Report, it was unclear how the Fayli Kurds referred to had
    returned from Iran but they had probably drifted over  the  border
    after the war and it was unlikely that they had returned by air to
    Baghdad Airport as would be the case for the Appellant were he  to
    be returned.  They were unlikely to have passports, there  was  no
    government and therefore no presumably no consulates  for  example
    in Iran.  He referred us to page 3 of the bundle.   They  had  had
    their property confiscated and they had  been  stripped  of  Iraqi
    citizenship and were now a minority in Iraq as so  many  had  been
    deported and also the fact that they were Shia rather  than  Sunni
    raised a problem if they lived in the KAA, as  most  people  there
    were Sunni.

10.   Mr Williams also referred us to paragraph  6.79  of  the  Country
    Report and the UNHCR comment that most people who  had  opted  for
    repatriation  have  returned  to  areas  where  their  ethnic   or
    religious groups constitute a majority.  It could be inferred that
    the best chance of survival was on that basis rather  than  as  in
    the case of a Fayli Kurd as part of a minority.  The Appellant was
    from Baghdad so for internal relocation purposes that was his home
    area.  It was unlikely that his group was there in such numbers as
    to be able to protect him and themselves.  It was unclear how many
    had returned.  There were therefore very serious protection issues
    in this case.  The situation was akin to civil war in Iraq and  it
    was therefore, in accordance with the guidance in Adan,  necessary
    to look for a differential  impact.   The  Fayli  Kurds  had  been
    targeted  as  an  unprotected  minority  and  spoke  a   different
    language.    If he relocated away from Baghdad it would not be  to
    an area where his group were in the minority so he was at risk  of
    persecution on the basis of his ethnicity.

11.   The issue of citizenship was unresolved and  that  fortified  the
    above submissions.  The present  authority  could  not  grant  him
    citizenship.  Mr Williams referred us to his bundle at page  5  in
    Regulation number one, and also section 2, which included  section
    660 of the 1980 law referred to in the  amended  grounds.   As  to
    whether there was a conflict with basic rules of international law
    there was the point at the start of section 1 that laws  in  force
    as of April 16 2003 in Iraq continued to apply insofar as they did
    not prevent the Coalition Provisional  Authority  from  exercising
    its  rights  and  fulfilling  its  obligations.   As  regards  the
    question of whether the Regulations' status was uncertain since in
    June Mr Alawi had become Prime  Minister,  Mr  Williams  suggested
    that the Regulations  before  the  Tribunal  prevailed  until  the
    National Assembly was in place.  The  matter  was  dealt  with  at
    paragraph 3 of the preamble at page 7 stating  that  the  law  was
    established to govern the affairs of Iraq during the  transitional
    period until a duly elected government operating under a permanent
    and legitimate constitution achieving  full  democracy  came  into
    being.  Elections were scheduled for the end of 2004 or the end of
    January 2005.

12.   We raised with Mr Williams the wording in particular  of  Article
    11 of the  Coalition  Provisional  Authority  Regulations  and  in
    particular sub- paragraph (E) which states  that  decision  number
    666 (1980) of  the  dissolved  Revolutionary  Command  Council  is
    annulled and anyone whose citizenship was withdrawn on  the  basis
    of this decree shall be deemed an Iraqi.  Mr Williams referred  us
    to sub-paragraph (D) which  states  that  any  Iraqi  whose  Iraqi
    citizenship was withdrawn  for  political,  religious,  racial  or
    sectarian reasons had the right to reclaim his  Iraqi  citizenship
    and at (F) the National Assembly must  issue  laws  pertaining  to
    citizenship and naturalisation consistent with the  provisions  of
    this law.  He argued that the case required more  information  and
    the Home Office should approach the Coalition Authority to see how
    it would deal with such a returnee at present.  At the moment  the
    Regulations were aspirational.  There  was  a  need  for  National
    Assembly laws for  recognition  to  take  place.   There  were  no
    examples of returns as yet.  It was unclear that people  like  the
    Appellant would be granted citizenship on return  to  Iraq  today.
    The real risk test should be borne in mind.

13.   At present the situation in Iraq was very uncertain and there was
    a real risk of disruption by militants and it was unclear  whether
    the election would actually happen and also who would  be  elected
    and there could be a coalition for example.   This  law  could  be
    repealed.  Political issues surrounded the return of Fayli  Kurds.
    There might be large issues of compensation given the  deprivation
    of properties and businesses that had taken place.  It was similar
    to the situation of Palestinians outside the Occupied  Territories
    or Israel  for  example.   There  were  no  examples  of  European
    countries returning Fayli Kurds apart  from  the  mention  in  the
    report at page 3 of the bundle.

14.   In his  submissions  Mr  McGirr  suggested  that  the  dearth  of
    information indicated that there was no problem or  no  identified
    problem for  a  Fayli  Kurd  on  return.   The  onus  was  on  the
    Appellant.  The appeal must fail.  The crucial point  was  Article
    11 of the Coalition Provisional Authority Regulations and  it  was
    perfectly clear.  The Country Report at paragraph 5.6 onwards  was
    relevant as to questions of citizenship and nationality  and  also
    at paragraph  5.10.   There  was  clearly  a  structure  in  place
    assisting the return of Fayli Kurds who would be recognised by the
    governing body.  The citizenship laws were to be restored.

15.   The other submissions concerning the political variables in  Iraq
    were speculative.  There was paragraph 5.11 of the Country  Report
    but Article 11(E) should be seen in relation to that.   It  was  a
    question of real risk on return but the Tribunal was referred also
    to paragraph 6.44 of  the  Country  Report  indicating  that  Shia
    Muslims constituted 60% to 65% majority.  Religiously and  perhaps
    also culturally the Appellant would be returning  to  a  majority.
    There was a lack of  objective  evidence  concerning  Fayli  Kurds
    being at risk in Baghdad at present and if  he  was  not  at  risk
    there, there was no need to consider relocation.  The human rights
    claim went with the asylum claim.

16.   By way of reply Mr Williams argued that with regard to the  point
    concerning lack of information, this would be  relevant  if  there
    was a lot of human rights information available but that  was  not
    the case.  The UNHCR had withdrawn from Iraq in October  2003  and
    the lack of information on  the  dangerousness  of  Iraq  did  not
    indicate that there was no risk.  There  was  a  lot  of  evidence
    about the level of danger in Iraq  now  and  past  persecution  of
    Fayli Kurds and it was inconceivable that they were in any kind of
    majority in Iraq.  Even if he was wrong on the citizenship  point,
    they were still members  of  a  minority  and  given  the  current
    problems would still be at risk.  It was not merely speculative to
    suggest that  there  could  be  disputes  about  such  matters  as
    property.  It could not be assumed that all would go according  to
    the coalition government plans.  There  was  speculation  on  both
    sides as to what might occur and it was proper to make  reasonable
    inferences as to the likelihood of disputes.  As regards the point
    concerning the Fayli Kurds being in a religious majority it  could
    not be said from that that there was a majority of  any  substance
    in Iraq constituted by them at present.  The Appellant was a  Kurd
    and spoke  a  different  language  from  the  majority  which  was
    indicative of risk factors again.

17.   We consider first the point that was raised before  the  Tribunal
    previously and amplified in the amended grounds  of  appeal,  that
    being the question of whether or not the Appellant is a citizen of
    Iraq.  This is in no sense determinative of the issues before  us,
    since if we conclude that he is a citizen we would have to go  and
    consider risk on return and equally if we find that he is not  and
    is turned away at the border on any hypothetical return  we  would
    still have to consider what risk he might face, on  the  authority
    of Saad  Diriye and Osorio.

18.   We are grateful  to  the  representatives  for  the  very  recent
    evidence with regard  to  the  citizenship  issue  that  has  been
    produced to us.  Thus we note the statement at  paragraph  5.6  of
    the Country Report  from  the  IWPR  Iraqi  Press  Monitor  on  25
    February 2004 that Iraqis whose citizenship was cancelled  by  the
    former  regime  will  have  it  restored  when  the  new  law   of
    administering the country is  issued,  according  to  a  governing
    council member and that this new law will terminate the  notorious
    Resolution 666 under which hundreds of thousands  of  Iraqis  were
    deported by Saddam Hussein.  It is also  said  at  paragraph  5.10
    that a Non-Governmental Organisation operating a legal aid  centre
    would help Iraqi returnees  who  lack  Iraqi  identity  papers  to
    translate and notarise any identity documents that  they  have  in
    order that they can access legal and other services open to  Iraqi
    nationals.

19.   Further, at paragraph 5.11 it was said by the Iraqi press monitor
    on 27 September 2004 that a Ministry of Interior official had said
    that  all  deportees  and  other  Iraqis  whose  citizenship   was
    cancelled by the former regime for political  reasons  would  soon
    regain their rights after the issuance of Regulations.

20.   We have before us the Coalition Provision  Authority  Regulations
    and the law of administration  for  the  state  of  Iraq  for  the
    transitional period.  Of particular interest and relevance in this
    regard, as we have noted above,  is  Article  11  of  the  Law  of
    Administration.  Article 11(D) states as follows:

       "Any Iraqi whose Iraqi citizenship was withdrawn for  political,
       religious, racial, or sectarian reasons has the right to reclaim
       his Iraqi citizenship.


       (E) Decision number 666 (1980) of  the  dissolved  Revolutionary
       Command Council is annulled, and anyone  whose  citizenship  was
       withdrawn on the basis of this decree shall be deemed an Iraqi.


       (F)   The  National  Assembly  must  issue  laws  pertaining  to
       citizenship and naturalisation consistent with the provisions of
       this law".


21.   Although sub-paragraph (D) may be regarded in some sense as being
    aspirational, it is clear to our mind that sub-paragraph  (E)  has
    the immediate effect of annulling decision number 666 and  deeming
    anyone whose citizenship  was  withdrawn  on  the  basis  of  that
    decision to be an Iraqi.  That  has  clear  implications  for  the
    position of the Appellant and other Fayli Kurds.   The  intentions
    set out in the Country Report to which we have referred  above  at
    paragraph 5.6 and paragraph 5.11 have clearly been given effect by
    the relevant sub-paragraph of this  Article,  and  paragraph  5.10
    indicating the legal aid centre that needs to be set up to  assist
    returnees to  access  legal  and  other  services  open  to  Iraqi
    nationals is of clear relevance  to  any  problems  the  Appellant
    might have in substantiating his claim to be a Fayli Kurd.   These
    are evidentiary matters which  were  not  resolved  by  the  Iraqi
    authorities, but we are clear that  the  provision  of  Iraqi  law
    which removed the Appellant's citizenship has itself been  removed
    and he is by that provision deemed as of now to be an  Iraqi.   As
    we say, there may be evidentiary issues  which  he  will  need  to
    resolve, but we have no indication as to how difficult or easy  he
    would find that, and such matters as giving his previous  address,
    his parent's names and other matters that he can adduce and  bring
    to the attention of the authorities would in our view give  him  a
    good prospect  insofar  as  we  can  tell  from  the  evidence  of
    establishing that he is a Fayli Kurd as he claims and  indeed  has
    been found to be by  the  Adjudicator  and  as  a  consequence  we
    consider  that  it  can  properly  be  said  that  he  has   Iraqi
    citizenship.

22.   That is of course by no means an end of the matter.  As a citizen
    he is retunable but there is a question then of what he would face
    on return.  At page 3 of Mr Williams' helpful bundle  there  is  a
    document from the United Nations Office for  the  Coordination  of
    Humanitarian  Affairs  Integrated  Regional  Information  Network,
    dated 21 May 2003,  concerned with the difficulties that  will  be
    faced by Fayli Kurds on return.  There is reference  to  the  very
    large numbers of Fayli Kurds who were expelled in the  late  1970s
    as being at least 50,000 and the fact that by 1987 another  50,000
    at least crossed the border to Iran and probably  another  100,000
    by August 1998.  The property of Fayli Kurds  was  confiscated  as
    part of the state's  campaign  against  them.   The  main  problem
    referred to in this document is the problem that will be faced  by
    the Fayli Kurds in re-establishing ownership of  their  properties
    that were taken from them.  A small number of cases is noted where
    new owners of houses welcomed the idea of returning  them  but  in
    many other cases residents were not helpful.  The fact that  there
    may be difficulties in this regard is not in our  view  indicative
    of a real risk of persecution or breach of the  Appellant's  human
    rights on return.

23.   Otherwise Mr Williams referred us particularly  to  the  problems
    that the Appellant would face as a Shia and as  not  speaking  the
    same language as many other Iraqis.  He  would  be  returned  very
    much as a member of a minority.  Paragraph 6.102  of  the  Country
    Report provides some  helpful  information  on  the  Fayli  Kurds.
    There is reference there to the fact that Fayli Kurds are said  to
    have returned from Iraq on  the  fall  of  the  regime  but  exact
    numbers are not known and as Mr Williams pointed  out  nor  is  it
    known how they got back, and he suggested, and it is in  our  view
    likely that he is right, that they would  have  drifted  over  the
    border rather than being returned in particular to Baghdad or  any
    other major airport.  It is said at  paragraph  6.102  that  Fayli
    Kurds from north of the Great Zab river  speak Kumaniji Kurdish as
    do the most of the Turkish Kurds, although those south of it speak
    Sorani and have greater affinity with Iranian Kurds.  The majority
    are Shafi'l Sunni, but about 150,000 in Baghdad in the south  east
    are Shi'l (known locally as Fayli) mostly of Luri origin.  In this
    context we bear in mind also the point made by Mr McGirr that Shia
    Muslims constitute a 60% to 65% majority of  Iraqis  and  that  in
    that sense at least the  Appellant  would  be  in  a  majority  on
    return.  Otherwise it must be accepted that  he  would  return  as
    part of a minority of no very great number,  and  the  figures  on
    this are far from clear, in that it would appear on the  one  hand
    that most Fayli Kurds were expelled  in  the  1980's  but  that  a
    number have returned subsequently.

24.   Even bearing in mind  though  we  do  the  various  risk  factors
    identified by Mr Williams which we have set out above, we  do  not
    consider that on  return  the  Appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or breach of his human rights.  The Appellant would be
    returned to Baghdad which is in any event is his  home  city.   We
    agree with Mr McGirr that there is no need to consider  relocation
    since we are satisfied that  what  he  would  face  on  return  to
    Baghdad is not such as to cross the threshold  of  persecution  in
    breach of his human rights.  Clearly there are  risks  in  Baghdad
    but we do not consider that the  evidence  shows  that  there  are
    risks to a person such as the Appellant with  the  differences  in
    language and cultural background that he has such as to place  him
    at real risk.

25.   This appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                                                   D K ALLEN
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


