

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On: 3 November 2004        |        |MN (FINDINGS ON SEXUALITY)  |
|                           |        |Kenya [2005] UKIAT 00021    |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|28 January 2005                                                   |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr J Perkins, Vice President                                      |
|Mr J Widdup                                                       |
|Mr A E Armitage                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |Appellant                   |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation
For the appellant:     Mr P Jorro, of Counsel, instructed by  Fisher  Jones
                     Greenwood
For the respondent :   Mr  P  Deller,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                     Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Kenya.  He was born on 7 December 1974 and so
is now twenty-nine years old.  He appeals the decision of  an  Adjudicator,
Mr R.B.L. Prior, who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  29  March  2004
dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State that he
was not entitled to refugee status and that removing him  from  the  United
Kingdom was not contrary to his rights under  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights.

At the start of the hearing Mr Jorro briefly renewed  a  request  that  had
been made earlier today in writing that we adjourn the hearing.   It  seems
that the key point in this case will be decided by the Court of Appeal in a
case due to be heard in November 2004 called Z v SSHD.  Without in any  way
wanting to be disrespectful of the Court of Appeal, we decided it  was  not
appropriate to adjourn this hearing.  In the end we decided that  the  case
had to be remitted.  It may be that the parties will  not  want  it  listed
until the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  that  case  has  been  given.
However that is something that the Adjudicator will have to decide.

According to paragraph 10 of the determination it was the appellant's  case
that he faces a real risk on return to Kenya of persecution by the  Mungiki
in particular and by the  people  of  Kenya  generally  by  reason  of  his
homosexuality.   The  authorities  in  Kenya  cannot  give  him  sufficient
protection against either enemy because they have persistently shown strong
and systemic prejudice against homosexuals.

It was the appellant's case that he  was  a  'very  senior  person  in  the
Mungiki movement'.  Additionally, he said that he is homosexual and  had  a
close  relationship  with  one  [                   ].   He   described   [
       ] as his only lover.  They had kept the nature of their relationship
secret but [                  ] had left a note to the  appellant's  family
telling  them  of  the   relationship   between   the   appellant   and   [
  ].  The appellant said that  after  his  partner's  death  the  note  was
discovered and the news spread.  The appellant's  family  and  friends  and
fellow members of Mungiki felt  betrayed  by  his  homosexuality.   He  was
denounced and had to leave.  His father cursed him and said that  he  would
prefer it if the appellant was dead.  The appellant fled to Nairobi and his
business premises were destroyed.  He  stayed  with  a  friend  in  Nairobi
before escaping to the United Kingdom.

The appellant emphasised that he feared not only the Mungiki but  also  the
general public by reason of his  homosexuality.   The  appellant  told  the
Adjudicator that he had kept  a  secret  his  homosexuality  since  he  had
arrived in the United Kingdom.  It was known only to  his  general  medical
practitioner and a small group of people he trusted.  He said that  he  did
not want his homosexuality known amongst the Kenyan community in the United
Kingdom.  The Adjudicator found that this indicated it was  not  oppressive
to the appellant to suppress his homosexuality.

The Adjudicator has not made clear findings of fact.  We do  not  know  how
much, or what parts, of the appellant's case the  adjudicator  accepted  or
what risks the appellant would  run in the event of returning to Kenya  and
making known his homosexuality, or, perhaps most importantly or  all,  what
it would mean to the appellant  to  suppress  his  homosexuality.   In  the
absence of clear  findings  on  these  points  we  find  the  determination
inadequately reasoned and it is mainly  for  this  reason  that,  with  the
agreement of both representatives, we decided to 'remit' the appeal.

However we wish to explain this decision further.

According to the grounds of appeal, the appellant, in a  skeleton  argument
put before the Adjudicator, complained that he risked persecution in  Kenya
'either in the form of serious physical harm (without recourse to  adequate
state protection) in the exercise of his basic human right to  express  his
sexuality or in the form of fear of such physical harm causing him to  have
to repress his basic human right to express his sexuality.'  This point had
not been considered and the appellant was given permission to appeal for it
to be considered.

Mr Jorro submitted, and we agree, that it is trite immigration law  to  say
that a person's claim to refugee protection cannot be defeated  by  telling
him not to do the thing that attracts persecution.  Mr Jorro submitted that
it was  therefore  unacceptable  to  say  that  a  homosexual  could  avoid
persecution by suppressing his  homosexuality.   If  he  is  homosexual  he
should not be expected to deny that.  He relied particularly on a  decision
of  the  High  Court  of  Australia,  Appellant  S395/2002  v  Minister  of
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2004] INLR 233.  That was a decision
made by seven judges of the High Court of  Australia  including  the  Chief
Justice.  Four of them found for the asylum seeker.  We set  out  below  an
extract from the judgment of Gummuwh J  and  Hayne  J.   At  paragraph   78
onwards they said:

  [78]           'The central question in any particular  case  is  whether
  there is a well-founded fear of persecution.  That  requires  examination
  of how this applicant may be treated if he  returns  to  the  country  of
  nationality.  Processes of classification  may  obscure  the  essentially
  individual and fact-specific inquiry which must be made.

  [79]            The  dangers  of   arguing   from   classifications   are
  particularly acute in matters in which the applicant's sexuality is  said
  to be relevant.  Those dangers lie within the notions of "discretion" and
  "being discreet": terms often applied in connection with some aspects  of
  sexual expression.  To explain why use of these terms  may  obscure  more
  than they illuminate, it is useful to  begin  by  considering  Convention
  reasons other than membership of a  social  group  defined  in  terms  of
  sexual identity.

  [80]           If an applicant holds political or religious beliefs  that
  are not favoured in the country of nationality,  the  chance  of  adverse
  consequences befalling that applicant on return  to  that  country  would
  ordinarily increase if, on return, the applicant were to  draw  attention
  to the holding of the relevant belief.  But it is no answer  to  a  claim
  for protection as a refugee to say to an  applicant  that  those  adverse
  consequences should be avoided if the applicant were  to  hide  the  fact
  that he or she holds the beliefs in question.  And to say to an applicant
  that he or she should be "discreet" about such matters is simply  to  use
  gentler terms to convey the same meaning.  The question to be  considered
  in assessing whether the applicant's fear of persecution  is well-founded
   is  what  may  happen  if  the  applicant  returns  to  the  country  of
  nationality;  it is not, could the applicant live in that country without
  attracting adverse consequences.

  [81]           It is important to recognise the breadth of the  assertion
  that is made when, as in  the  present  case,  those  seeking  protection
  allege fear of persecution for reasons of membership of  a  social  group
  identified  in  terms  of  sexual  identity  (here,  homosexual  men   in
  Bangladesh).  Sexual identity is not to be understood in this context  as
  confined to engaging  in  particular  sexual  acts  or,  indeed,  to  any
  particular form of physical contact.  It may, and often will,  extend  to
  many aspects of human relationships and activity.  That  two  individuals
  engage in sexual acts in private (and in that sense 'discreetly') may say
  nothing about how those individuals would choose to live other aspects of
  their lives that are related to, or informed by, their sexuality.'

It is instructive to look at the reasoning of the minority judges  in  that
case.  Gleeson CJ, Callinan and Heydon  JJ  were  all  concerned  that  the
appellant had not put his case on  the  basis  that  led  to  the  majority
decision.  He had not complained that he would be persecuted by  having  to
suppress his sexuality.  The point is that the minority judges in that case
did not disagree with the reasoning of the majority.  They simply  did  not
accept that it applied to the facts before them.

Of course this is not a decision that binds us but we would be foolish  not
to give a lot of respect to the  learning  of  the  Australian  court  when
delivering  a  considered  judgement  concerning  the   operation   of   an
international convention that binds the United Kingdom.

We were also reminded of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Iftikhar
Ahmed v SSHD [2000] INLR where Simon Brown LJ said at page 8 paragraph  (d)
'...  I cannot see how this consideration avoids the need  to  address  the
critical question: if returned, would the asylum seeker in fact act in  the
way he says he would and thereby suffer persecution?'

The point made by the Court of Appeal is  that  refugee  status  is  to  be
awarded to people who risk persecution in the country of which they  are  a
national.  It is not the business of a person deciding an  application  for
refugee status to enquire into the reasonableness of their  conduct.   What
matters is their need of protection.

The Court of Appeal also referred to Sahm Jain v  SSHD  [2000]  Imm  AR  76
where Schiemann LJ recognised that 'criminalisation of homosexual  activity
between consenting adults in private is not regarded by  the  international
community  at  large  as  acceptable.'   That  case  also  emphasised  that
persecution is not normally established by an occasional interference  with
the exercise of a human right.

Mr Jorro emphasised that homosexuality  is  a  matter  of  sexual  identity
rather than sexual activity.  We accept that.  Whether or  not  a  person's
homosexuality  is  an  innate  characteristic  or   chosen   behaviour   is
immaterial.  In either case it is not  something  that  he  should  not  be
required to give up even if he could.

Putting these things together, we find it wrong to approach cases  of  this
kind on the basis that a homosexual is not entitled to refugee status  just
because he could avoid persecution  by  conducting  his  sexual  activities
discreetly, for example "behind the veil of  decency".   Such  an  approach
diminishes a person's sexuality to a series of private sexual acts.  It  is
possible (although in our view unlikely) that this approach is  appropriate
in some cases.  We do not accept that such an  approach  is  a  proper  one
unless it flows from the asylum seekers description  of  his  homosexuality
and how he seeks to express it.

However we must also emphasis that a person  is  not  entitled  to  refugee
status just because the expression of his sexuality will  attract  societal
disapproval (or worse), or that a person who  avoids  such  disapproval  by
being  discreet  is  necessarily  subjected  thereby   to   internationally
unacceptable restraint.

We have considered the argument at least implicit in Mr Jorro's submissions
that a person should not be expected to avoid persecution by restraining or
modifying his sexual behaviour in any way.

We do not accept take a person is entitled always to behave  as  he  wishes
and then complain of persecution  if  his  conduct  attracts  any  kind  of
approbation.  For example it is well understood that a person's "right"  to
religious freedom, including the freedom to proselytise  his  religion,  is
not unqualified.  It must be balanced against another person's right not to
be bothered by the claims of a  different  religion  in  which  he  has  no
interest.  Similarly it is not necessarily persecution for a person  to  be
made reluctant  to  gratify  his  sexual  desires  because  of  legislation
against, or societal intolerance of, his  chosen  means  of  gratification.
Schiemann LJ in Jain recognised that the state can interfere properly  with
some person's sexual lives, for example  "those  who  most  easily  express
their sexual desires in sexual activity with small children, or  those  who
wish to engage in sexual activities in the unwilling presence of others".

We do not accept that any kind of restriction on any kind of homosexual (or
other) behaviour  is  necessarily  persecution  but,  as  explained  above,
decisions about whether the kind of disapproval a homosexual faces  amounts
to  persecution  should  start  on  the  footing  that,  by   international
standards, homosexual behaviour should not be regarded as criminal.

Most societies restrain expressions of sexuality.  A person  who  wants  to
take part in a sexual act that  international  standards  would  regard  as
criminal is not being persecuted if he is restrained. Such  non-persecutory
restraint, we find, would include not only forms of sexual expression  that
would be regarded internationally as  criminal,  but  would  also  included
expressions that  are  disturbing  in  any  particular  society.   In  some
societies kissing in public between people of opposite sexes is acceptable.
 In others it is not.  In some societies it is acceptable for grown men  to
hold hands.  In others it is a  least  questionable  behaviour.   Societies
have different ideas about what  constitutes  acceptable  dress  in  public
place.  It is not necessarily persecution because a person is  expected  to
conform to social mores.

That said we emphasis that, in our experience, homosexuals generally do not
complain that they risk persecution because they want to take part publicly
in sexual acts.  To suggest otherwise  is  a  narrow,  wrong  and  probably
offensive description of homosexuality.

We  are  persuaded  that  a  person  who  can  avoid  persecution  for  his
homosexuality only by living a lie, that is by  persistently,  and  against
his will, so organising his affairs  that  he  lives  furtively  and  at  a
constant worry of discovery is being oppressed.  Further, depending on  the
nature of the oppression and his response to it, such oppression could well
be so severe that it is persecutory.

We also considered a decision of RPG Haines  QC,  sitting  in  the  Refugee
Status Appeals Authority of New Zealand, Refugee Appeal No 74665 03.  Again
we recognise, of course, that it is not a binding authority  but  it  is  a
very closely reasoned and instructive decision.  The appellant  there  gave
evidence of how his homosexuality resulted in his being derided at  school,
and detained by the Monkerat and warned that his conduct could be  punished
with 100 lashes.  He enrolled at a different secondary school where he  was
caught taking part in a sexual act.   He  was  harangued  by  his  friend's
family and then severely beaten by his friend's brother.   Soon  afterwards
he was expelled.  For a long time he was too frightened to leave his  home.
He then learned  to  mix  with  other  homosexuals  and  enjoyed  different
partners  but  always  acting  furtively,  subject   to   the   "overriding
imperative" to conceal his behaviour.  His family did not support  him  and
he became so unhappy that he attempted suicide on two or  three  occasions.
He was deeply troubled at the prospect of condign punishment at  the  hands
of the state.  For him "life would be meaningless without  the  ability  to
express feeling and desire".  For him the expression of his  sexuality  was
not a matter of discretion but a matter of keeping his  sexual  orientation
"carefully hidden".  Given these findings it is not surprising that he  was
found to risk persecution.

We find it important that we do not fall into the mistake  of  stereotyping
homosexuals as if all aspects of a person's sexuality can be encompassed in
that one word.  Some homosexuals will  want  to  be  discreet  about  their
homosexuality.  They will regard it as a private matter and  not  something
they want to share with the world at large.  For other people it will  only
be part of their sexual experience and not something they want to assert or
make known generally.  For others expressing their homosexuality will be at
the centre of how they live as people.

These things emphasise that it is essential in cases of this kind  to  make
very clear findings about what a person will want  to  do  to  express  his
sexuality if returned to the country of which he is a national.

Mr Jorro submitted in argument that it would be unusual for a person not to
want to disclose his homosexuality to some extent.  That may well be right.
 It is still something that would have to be proved.  We do not  regard  it
as self- evidently and necessarily right in every case.  Further we do  not
accept that any restraint in behaviour in response  to  societal  or  legal
pressure is persecutory.

The first step in cases such as this is to decide  unequivocally  from  the
background material if there is a real risk of homosexuals being persecuted
in the country of which the appellant is a national.  This is an  important
question.  Persecution  requires  serious  and,  usually,  persistent  ill-
treatment.  In almost every society in the world there are  occasions  when
some homosexual is badly treated because  of  his  sexuality.   We  do  not
accept that in this case the Adjudicator has  made  properly  reasoned  and
clear findings.  We do not know if homosexuals generally  risk  persecution
in Kenya.   The  existence,  or  absence,  of  criminal  sanctions  is  not
definitive.  It may be that the law is not enforced or that it is  enforced
in a limited way.  An adjudicator must decide if there is a  real  risk  of
persecution in the country being considered.

We do not accept that the mere fact that a homosexual will face a degree of
social oppression means that he will be  persecuted.   Not  all  oppression
amounts to persecution.  We are reminded of the comment of Staughton LJ  in
Sandralingam & Ravichandran v SSHD [1996] Imm AR  97  at  114  "Persecution
must at least be persistent and serious ill treatment without just cause".

If  homosexuals  do  risk  persecution  in  Kenya  by   reason   of   their
homosexuality, then the Adjudicator must decide if there is a risk to  this
particular appellant.

In order to do this the adjudicator must decide firstly if the appellant is
going to do something because of his sexuality that will expose him to real
risk  of  persecution.   If  he  is  then  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
protection.

If he is not then the Adjudicator must ask if the appellant will want to do
something that would put him at risk.  Some people will be  happy  to  live
discreetly.  However if the appellant wants to do something that  he  feels
inhibited about  doing  then  he  must  explain  what,  and  why,  and  the
adjudicator must decide if the legal or societal  pressures  that  restrain
the asylum seeker are  so  severe  that  they  are  described  properly  as
persecutory.

We realise that this approach will require the appellant to  give  evidence
about matters that may well be very private to him and  anyone  questioning
him or assessing his evidence must be careful to show  proper  respect  for
his situation.  Nevertheless a person seeking international protection must
be prepared to prove his case. It may be that a person's ability to set out
his fears will reveal much about the extent and nature of his alleged  fear
of persecution.

It will also be necessary for the appellant to show  that  any  persecution
that he risks cannot reasonably be avoided by removing to a different  part
of Kenya.

In the circumstances and for the reasons given we allow the appeal  to  the
extent that we direct that it be heard again by an Adjudicator  other  than
Mr Prior.

We hope the Adjudicator hearing the case the next time will be  careful  to
make very clear findings on the matters listed above.

We thank Mr Jorro and Mr Deller for their very helpful submissions in  this
interesting case.








                              Jonathan Perkins
                               Vice President
