
ar          SG (Article 3-Military Service-Detention) Algeria [2005]  UKIAT
00031

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                          Date of Hearing  : 17 January 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                             ...1st February 2005


                                   Before:

                                Mr G F Denson
                                Mr C Thursby




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation

For the appellant/SSHD : Ms A Rehman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent/claimant: Mr B J Davis,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Messrs
                 Darbys Mallam Lewis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  an  Adjudicator,
      Mr J.P. Griffin, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on  17  May  2002
      refusing the claimant's  asylum  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State dated 23 August 2001 refusing leave  to  enter  the
      United  Kingdom  after  refusal  of  asylum,  however   allowing   the
      claimant's appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

2.    The Secretary of State appeals with leave granted by the  Tribunal  on
      4 July 2002 in relation  to  the  claimant's  Article  3  claim.   The
      respondent has not in this instance submitted a respondent's notice.

3.    The Tribunal granted leave on  the  basis  that  the  Adjudicator  had
      erred in his findings with regard to the objective evidence on Algeria
      in relation to  the treatment and punishment of deserters  from  armed
      forces as to whether any sentence  that  the  claimant  would  receive
      would be disproportionate.

4.    The Secretary of State's appeal  was  determined  by  the  Tribunal  2
      October 2003 subsequent to a hearing on  30  May  2003,  however,  the
      claimant appealed against such determination and  by  consent  of  the
      Court of Appeal the matter was to  be  remitted  to  the  Tribunal  by
      virtue of an Order dated 21 October 2004.

5.     Since  the  date  of  the  claimant's  original  appeal  before   the
      Adjudicator, he has produced an extract of  a  judgment  showing  that
      under paragraph 256 of the Military Code of Algeria he has been  tried
      in absentia for desertion in a state of emergency receiving a  penalty
      of ten years of actual imprisonment.

6.    Article 256 of the Algerian Penal Code reads as follows:

             'All military personnel guilty of desertion within the country
             in peacetime shall be punished with a term of  six  months  to
             five years imprisonment.


             If desertion occurs in wartime or in a territory  in  which  a
             state of siege or state of emergency has  been  declared,  the
             term shall be between two years and ten years.


             In all cases, a discharge may  be  pronounced  if  the  guilty
             party is an officer.'

 7.   The claimant gave evidence before the Adjudicator as to  how he was  a
      member of the Algerian air force, having joined as  a  career  officer
      and after completing training in the United Kingdom  between  1996  he
      returned to Algerian and was based in the air force at Boufarik.

8.    The appellant gave an account of how, in late April  whilst  flying  a
      plane equipped as an ambulance, he overheard instructions to  military
      personnel  flying  helicopters  from  what  appeared  to  be  superior
      officers to open fire on  Algerian  troops  who  were  engaged  in  an
      operation against terrorists in the area.  On return to  his  base  he
      was grounded  for  a  week,  was  not  placed  in  detention  but  was
      segregated from his unit.  The claimant heard that forty soldiers  had
      been killed by terrorist in the attack  and  was  concerted  that  his
      military comrades were killed by the  Algerian  forces.  The  military
      authorities accused the claimant of spreading word of what he had  had
      heard inadvertently and  that  he  would  be  court  martialled.   The
      appellant learned of the disappearance of one of the officers involved
      in the indent, he became concerned for his own safety  and  ultimately
      made plans to leave the country which  he  did  so,  arriving  in  the
      United Kingdom on 13 May 2000, claiming asylum on 25 May 2000.

9.    The claimant left the United Kingdom on 31  March  2001  and  went  to
      Holland with the intention of flying on to Canada to claim asylum,  he
      was detained by the Dutch authorities and  sent  back  to  the  United
      Kingdom on 8 May 2001 whereupon he renewed his claim for asylum.

10.   The claimant has since leaving Algeria been tried in his  absence  and
      produced a copy of the extract of judgment as  referred  to  above  in
      relation to his desertion.

11.   Miss Rehman submitted that the grounds of appeal clearly set  out  the
      errors made by the Adjudicator in finding that the claimant would have
      his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR breached upon his return as the
      Adjudicator's  findings  on  credibility  were  not  consistent   with
      allowing such a claim. Furthermore,  the  Adjudicator's  determination
      failed to consider the objective evidence in the  CIPU  Report  before
      him when making a finding that it would be disproportionate in all the
      circumstances to return the claimant to Algeria.

12.   Miss Rehman submitted that the extract of  the  judgment  was  not  in
      dispute, and therefore the ground of appeal in relation to whether  or
      not Algeria was in a current state of emergency which equated to a war
      time situation was not at issue before the  Tribunal  at  the  hearing
      today.

13.   Miss Rehman submitted that the  Adjudicator  made  clear  and  precise
      adverse credibility findings and quite extensive ones as contained  in
      paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 of the determination, and in effect  did  not
      believe the appellant's account concerning the events that led  up  to
      his leaving Algeria.  However, he did find that the  claimant  was  an
      airforce officer  and  accepted  that  he  had  left  Algeria  without
      permissions and was consequently therefore a deserter.  She  submitted
      that there was no evidence to demonstrate that the claimant had  shown
      that he had a profile that the authorities would be interested in  him
      other than as a deserter. He had not engaged in any activities against
      the state and would not be subject to  any  adverse  punishment  as  a
      result of his desertion other than as someone  who  had  deserted  the
      armed forces, albeit during a period of a  state  of  emergency  which
      equated to wartime.

14.   Miss Rehman submitted that the burden was  on  the  claimant  to  show
      that any punishment would be excessive.  The CIPU Report of April 2004
      in paragraph 5.96 shows  that  desertion  within  the  country  during
      wartime is liable to two to ten years imprisonment. Based on this  the
      Adjudicator failed to establish that this would be disproportionate as
      he had stated the case to be in paragraph 29 of his determination.  It
      was not for the Adjudicator to consider  the  appropriateness  of  the
      sentence. However, he must find that the sentence would be  excessive,
      disproportionate or a  breach  of  Article  3.   The  Adjudicator  had
      accepted that prison conditions met international  standards  and  had
      improved over  the  year  and  the  current  CIPU  report  states  the
      following in relation to deserters:

            '5.150   UNHCR have stated that  they  are  not  aware  of  the
                   authorities using excessive or inhumane or discriminatory
                   treatment in the case of deserters and draft evaders.


            5.160  After serving their  prison  sentence,  deserters  still
                   have to fulfil the rest  of  their  interrupted  time  in
                   military service.


            5.170  A country visit report of  1999  stated  that  deserters
                   were dealt with more severely than draft evaders  and  it
                   is not known how the authorities were presently  deciding
                   deserters' cases. Another recent country report  of  2003
                   stated that as conscripts are used in conflicts with  the
                   armed  opposition,  the  desertion  rate  was  high,  and
                   deserters  were  punished  in  accordance  with  military
                   legislation.


            5.180 However, at a country information seminar in  June  2001,
                   organised by UNHCR/ACCORD one of the speakers  considered
                   that deserters were at risk of torture on return as  they
                   would be considered to have broken the  law  of  silences
                   regarding past atrocities by security forces.'

15.   Miss Rehman submitted that there was no evidence that the  authorities
      would have any information that the claimant had  broken  any  law  of
      silence.  In any event, the  Adjudicator  had  found  him  not  to  be
      credible on  this  point.   In  the  claimant's  bundle  of  objective
      material a report from Dr Joffe  (pages 46 to 52) stated  at  page  49
      therefof, the details of the actual sentence that the  claimant  would
      receive and in it Dr Joffe stated:

             'In any case,  Mr  Gaid's  situation  is  not  merely  one  of
             desertion or absence without leave. He had been warned that he
             would face court martial although the charges  have  not  been
             specified ... In other words the claimant's oppressions  arise
             not merely because of his desertion but because  of  what  may
             happen to him as a result of what he accidentally  discovered.
             His situation is such  that  exceptional  circumstances  would
             certainly apply to him, quite apart from the sentence of up to
             ten years in prison that he formally faces.'

16.   As the Adjudicator did not find the claimant's  story  credible,  then
      the details outlined in Mr Joffe's report did not  apply.  Before  the
      Adjudicator there were no exceptional  circumstances  other  than  the
      claimant was a deserter.

17.   Miss Rehman went on to submit the CIPU Report before the  Adjudicator,
      which he accepted, showed that prisons met international standards and
      this had not changed. There was no evidence that the claimant would be
      treated with harshness, whilst Dr Joffe said this would  be  the  case
      this was due to the claimant's story which the Adjudicator  found  not
      to be credible.

18.   Dr Joffe in his report made reference to the claimant knowing  Captain
      Haroune. However, the Adjudicator discounted any evidence in  relation
      to therefore as contained in paragraph 20  of  the  determination  and
      there was no evidence  of  the  claimant's  association  with  Captain
      Haroune that would be before the authorities in Algeria.

19.   Miss Rehman submitted that there was no evidence that  on  return  and
      subject to the penalties for desertion, the claimant  would  have  his
      Article 3 rights breached. The Adjudicator had not established  prison
      conditions would breach Article 3 or that the claimant would come  the
      authorities' attention over and above being that of a deserter.

20.    Mr  Davis  submitted  that  the   Adjudicator's   determination   was
      sustainable and sound, it was critically  well  argued  and  thorough.
      The objective  evidence  quite  clearly  showed  that  the  claimant's
      Article 3 rights would be breached.

21.   It is now common ground that the claimant would  receive  a  ten  year
      sentence and has in fact been tried in absentia and would receive such
      sentence., Mr Davis referred the Tribunal to paragraphs 5.105 to 5.108
      of the current CIPU Report as outlined above and submitted  that  this
      showed  that  the  appellant  would  be  treated  harshly  on  return.
      Furthermore, the report from the War Resistors International dated  30
      June 1998 (pp. 58 to 67 of the claimant's bundle) showed  at  page  61
      that the sentence in wartime under Article 256 would  be  two  to  ten
      years imprisonment and that on page 61 of the same report:

             'It has been reported that deserters and conscripts attempting
             to desert have been executed, and the army generals have  even
             proceeded to execute family members  of  deserters,  including
             parents,  women,  children  and  cousins  in  order  to   stop
             desertions.'

22.   Mr Davis submitted that as the  claimant's  brother  has  disappeared,
      this was in line with the objective material before the Tribunal.

23.    Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  general   prisons   conditions   met
      international standards, Dr Joffe was a valuable expert and his report
      shows that the conditions in the military prison at Blida are said  to
      be worse that in any Algerian prison except  Serkedji  prison  in  the
      centre of Algiers, with reports of disappearances having taken place.

24.   Mr Davis submitted that the  Secretary  of  State's  submissions  that
      there would be a differential approach in relation to  the  claimant's
      case by the authorities as against being a simple deserter or one  who
      would be of interest to the military authorities  was  erroneous.   He
      would receive equal treatment in the  event. He further submitted that
      the Adjudicator's findings in Article 3  were  correct,  the  claimant
      would be at real risk and any deserter given a ten years  sentence  is
      at real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 and the Tribunal  were
      asked to dismiss the appeal.

25.   In addition to the section of the CIPU Report that have been  referred
      to us by both  representatives,  we  note  the  following  provisions.
      Firstly as to prison conditions which report as follows:-

             '5.48 In 2004 prison conditions were  reportedly  spartan  but
                   generally met international standards. A  country  report
                   by the Netherlands authorities dated January 2003  stated
                   that Algeria had  about  35,000  prisoners  held  in  123
                   penitentiary  establishments  under   the   Ministry   of
                   Justice. The prison in Algiers were Serkadjk, prison D.El
                   Harrach  and  Berouagghia.  The  prisons  at  Batna   was
                   Tazoult.  Problems  reportedly  arose  from  overcrowding
                   rather than neglect.  In 2002 there were riots in several
                   prisons in protest against the prison conditions.   These
                   riots concluded several episodes of  arson  by  prisoners
                   and led to about fifty deaths and forty causalities.


             5.49 The government has reportedly continued to improve prison
                   conditions and undertaken to reform  the  prison  system.
                   Administering charge of prison reform  was  appointed  in
                   June  2002.   In  December  2003  Algeria  accepted   the
                   recommendations of a UNDP programme at  a  conference  in
                   Algiers on measures to improve prisons conditions and  to
                   help prisoners integrate into society upon release.

26.   The Tribunal also note the details in relation  to  the  treatment  of
      military service personnel which read as follows:

             '5.100 However, more recent reports state that  absentees  are
                   not treated so  harshly by  the  authorities  as  in  the
                   past.  The Algerian  authorities  informed  the  Canadian
                   Embassy in Algiers in March 1999 that people suspected of
                   being absent without leave are arrested by the police and
                   immediately brought before a military tribunal  which  is
                   free  to  decide  the  punishment  for  the   individual,
                   according to the law.  They stated that  absence  without
                   leave was  not  considered  to  be  major  issue  by  the
                   Algerian authorities:  those convicted  of  this  offence
                   were usually sent to their units  to  do  their  national
                   service.


             5.101  The  same  source  quoted  two  Algerian  human  rights
                   organisations - the Observatoire Nationale des Droits  de
                   l'Homme (ONDH), which was linked to the  state,  and  the
                   Liegue Algerienne des Droits  de  l'Homme  (LADH).   They
                   stated that they had  received  no  complaints  regarding
                   torture  of  deserters  and  draft  evaders   but   these
                   organisations also indicated that the situation today  is
                   considerably different from what it was  in  the   1970s,
                   when soldiers who were absent without  leave  might  have
                   been treated more harshly.

27.   We find that the Adjudicator has made an  error  in  relation  to  the
      assessment of the objective evidence  before  him  in  coming  to  the
      decision that the claimant would have his Article  3  rights  breached
      upon return to  Algeria.   The  objective  material  showed  that  the
      claimant would receive a prison sentence for his desertion  and  there
      was nothing  before  the  Adjudicator  to  show  that  this  would  be
      disproportionate in all the circumstances and  therefore  his  finding
      that if the appellant were to be returned to Algeria there would be  a
      real risk he would suffer a  breach  of  his  protected  rights  under
      Article 3 is an error in law.  The objective material showed  that  he
      would receive a prison sentence. The length of sentence as outlined in
      the objective material before the Adjudicator was not disproportionate
      in  all  the  circumstances.  As  far  as  the  current  situation  is
      concerned, we note the objective evidence that is before  us  and  the
      submissions that had been made by both representatives.  We accept the
      argument put forward by  Miss  Rehman  that  there  is  in  essence  a
      difference between the claimant being merely treated as a deserter per
      se and a deserter who would be considered to have broken  the  law  of
      silence regarding past atrocities by the security  forces.   The  CIPU
      report in  paragraph  5.08  notes  that  one  of  the  speakers  at  a
      conference differentiated the second  category  of  deserters  to  the
      extent that they  would  be  at  risk  of  torture  on  return.    The
      Adjudicator made clear findings of fact which are entirely sustainable
      concerning the claimant's account that led to him  leaving  the  army,
      but disbelieved such account and therefore as far as  the  authorities
      are concerned, the claimant is merely someone  who  has  deserted  his
      post during the period of  an  emergency  and  has  subsequently  been
      sentenced to ten years in absentia for such offence.

28.   The claimant has not received a  disproportionate  sentence,  all  the
      objective material both before the Adjudicator  and  the  court  today
      shows clearly it is within the bounds of the Algerian Penal Code, this
      being the case, no element of disproportion can be showed  as  against
      this particular claimant.

29.   The tenor of the objective material shows that prison conditions  have
      improved over the years. Whilst it is appreciated  that  the  claimant
      will serve his sentence in a military prison, the  objective  evidence
      before the Tribunal does not show that the  conditions in such  prison
      cross the high threshold to amount  to  a  breach  of  the  claimant's
      Article 3 rights.

30.    As  regards  the  treatment  of  deserters  by  the   authorities  is
      concerned, we note Mr Davis' submissions in  relation  to  the  report
      from War Resistors International,  and  in  particular  the  paragraph
      contained in page 61.   However, this report was dated 30  June  1998,
      some 6� years ago  and  the  current  objective  material  show  that,
      absentees are not treated so harshly by the authorities as in the past
      (CIPU 5.100). The human rights organisations in  Algeria  have  stated
      that they have received no complaints regarding torture  of  deserters
      and draft evaders. Both organisations indicate the situation today  is
      considerably different from what is was in the  1970s,  when  soldiers
      who were absent without leave might have  been  treated  more  harshly
      (5.101).  Further, the CIPU Report shows that the UNHCR are not  aware
      of the authorities  using  excessive  or  inhumane  or  discriminatory
      treatment in the case of deserters or draft  evaders.  Deserters  were
      punished in accordance with military legislation (5.105 and 5.105).

31.   The objective material does not show per se that prison conditions  in
      military prisons are harsh to the extreme that  they  cross  the  high
      threshold to amount to a breach of the claimant's  Article  3  rights.
      There is nothing to show that the claimant will  be  singled  out  and
      treated any differently from a rank and file deserter and there is  no
      evidence that upon his return he will be considered   to  have  broken
      the law of silence regarding  the  past  atrocities  by  the  security
      forces. The Adjudicator made a clear findings  of fact concerning  the
      appellant's account in relation to these matters and disbelieved  him,
      giving good and cogent reasons why he did so, which the Tribunal  will
      not set aside or endeavour to go behind.

32.   The claimant's appeal relates solely to his  treatment  in  prison  on
      return.  The Tribunal find that he has  been  tried  in  absentia  and
      sentenced to  ten  years  of  actual  imprisonment  for  desertion  in
      accordance with Article 256 of the Military  Code.  There  is  nothing
      exceptional or extraordinary concerning the appellant's  circumstances
      and the sentence imposed is not disproportionate.  The  Tribunal  find
      that the appellant's removal to Algeria would  not  cause  the  United
      Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations under Article 3 of the 1950
      Convention and in the circumstances can only allow  the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal.

Decision
33.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.



                                 G.F. DENSON





-----------------------
      1


