
KK (Recognition elsewhere as refugee) Democratic Republic of Congo [2005]
UKIAT 00054

                                                                         | |


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  15 February 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                          25th February 2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr J Freeman (Vice President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)

Between:


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Buley, instructed by Tennakoons



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Mr T Cockrill, promulgated on 28 January 2004.   He
     allowed the Claimant's appeal  in  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
     against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  15  November  2002  to
     refuse asylum and leave to enter.  The case had an unusual history.

  2. The Claimant is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  who
     left there in May 2001 for Zimbabwe where he was granted asylum  under
     the 1969 OAU "Convention Governing the  Specific  Aspects  of  Refugee
     Problems in Africa".  In August 2002,  he  left  Zimbabwe  because  he
     feared persecution there and claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom
     immediately on arrival.

  3. The  Secretary  of  State  rejected  his  claim  because  he  rejected
     completely the story of persecution  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of
     Congo, of flight to Zimbabwe and of the grant there of refugee status.
      He was to be returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo.  An appeal
     was made on the grounds that to send  him  either  to  the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo or Zimbabwe would breach both Conventions.   It  was
     heard by an Adjudicator, Mrs S Clarke, and dealt with  in  a  decision
     sent out on 20 November 2003, entitled "Determination and Reasons on a
     Preliminary Issue".  There  had  been  no  directions  given  for  the
     determination of a preliminary issue but the Adjudicator said that she
     had been told that there was a preliminary issue which if decided  one
     way would decide the claim and remove the need for a full hearing.

  4. The Claimant submitted that he did not  need  to  prove  his  fear  of
     persecution because he had already been granted  asylum  by  Zimbabwe.
     The Secretary of State is recorded as saying that if the Claimant  was
     credible then removal directions would be set for Zimbabwe because  it
     was now accepted that he had been granted asylum status in relation to
     the Democratic Republic of Congo by Zimbabwe.

  5. The  Adjudicator  then  announced  her  decision  before  writing  her
     determination but, as so often happens when  that  exceedingly  unwise
     course is followed, she had to reconsider the decision in the light of
     her further consideration of the issue.   While  she  adhered  to  her
     decision, she did so on the basis of a case which she was not referred
     to and which she did not invite submissions on.  She then said:

           "15.  However, I have taken on  board  the  submissions  by  the
                 Respondent's representative that the  claim  regarding  the
                 DRC is no longer relevant because the Appellant was granted
                 refugee status.


           16.   I allowed the appeal on the preliminary issue because  the
                 removal directions  were  set  for  the  DRC.   However,  a
                 consequence of this is that the Appellant  still  does  not
                 have leave to enter this country.   Therefore,  it  remains
                 for the Appellant to  prove  that  he  cannot  go  back  to
                 Zimbabwe.


           17.   Accordingly, I make the following directions:


                 i)    The  Respondent  do  consider  amending  the  removal
                       directions to Zimbabwe
                 ii)   This case is listed  at  the  first  available  date,
                       standard directions and a time estimate of 2 hours."

  6. The file shows that this was not sent out  as  a  final  determination
     with the notes on how to appeal, and there was no appeal or  challenge
     by way of Judicial Review.  The matter came on for  hearing  again  as
     the directions envisaged.  Mr Cockerill commented that the Adjudicator
     appeared to have been wrong to refer to the case which she  relied  on
     without allowing the  parties  to  deal  with  it.   The  Home  Office
     Presenting  Officer  said  that  the  removal  directions   had   been
     considered pursuant to the Adjudicator's direction, but the  Secretary
     of State had decided not to amend them,  and  that  was  a  considered
     position.  It was acknowledged that  the  Claimant  had  been  granted
     refugee status in Zimbabwe but maintained that he had no  well-founded
     fear of persecution under the  Geneva  Convention  in  the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo.

  7. The Adjudicator considered that that grant precluded the Secretary  of
     State from setting removal directions for the Democratic  Republic  of
     Congo, because  it  would  necessarily  be  a  breach  of  the  Geneva
     Convention to remove him there.  It  followed  that  Article  3  would
     equally be breached.  He found some assistance in the House  of  Lords
     decision in what he called Muisis.  He allowed the appeal without  any
     substantive consideration of whether there was a well-founded fear  of
     persecution.

  8. Ms Sigley for the Secretary of State accepted before the Tribunal that
     the Claimant had been recognised as a refugee  in  Zimbabwe  and  that
     return to Zimbabwe had not been raised before  the  Adjudicator.   She
     argued that the removal directions had ceased to have effect once  the
     appeal had been made.  In particular, she submitted that it was  wrong
     as a matter of law for the Adjudicator to have treated  the  grant  by
     Zimbabwe as binding on this country:  the terms of the OAU  Convention
     were broader than those of the Geneva Convention and  it  was  unknown
     what the basis of the decision had been;  even  if  the  decision  had
     been taken on one of the grounds  which  appear  also  in  the  Geneva
     Convention that did not bind the United Kingdom Courts.

  9. Mr Buley argued that the grounds of appeal did  not  raise  the  issue
     which Ms Sigley sought to raise.  If they  did,  the  issue  had  been
     determined by the decision of the first Adjudicator which had not been
     appealed.  He accepted however that the analysis in the  Adjudicator's
     decision of the significance of the grant of asylum  by  Zimbabwe  was
     wrong and had misunderstood the authority relied on.  He also accepted
     that there were relevant issues as to the substantive  merits  of  the
     claim for consideration by an Adjudicator, raised by the Secretary  of
     State throughout and which had never been dealt with.

 10. We regard the grounds of appeal as raising  among  other  matters  the
     issue which Ms Sigley puts before us.  We had certainly so  read  them
     before we heard Mr Buley's contrary argument.  Ground 2, and it can be
     seen as related to ground  1,  specifically  raises  the  question  of
     whether the earlier grant of asylum should be  seen  as  binding.   It
     refers to the absence of any transfer of status and to  the  need  for
     the Clamant to show a well founded fear of persecution.   There  would
     be no need for its binding nature to be considered if only  return  to
     Zimbabwe was being considered.  Ground 3, which was abandoned, related
     to that point.  The purpose of ground 1 was  to  say  that  the  issue
     should not be decided simply by reference to removal directions but by
     reference to the substantive fear.  If we are  wrong,  we  would  have
     granted leave to amend so that the real issue was raised as  Mr  Buley
     had realised that it was a potential issue;  he just thought that  the
     grounds did not raise it.

 11. We grant a similar indulgence to Mr Buley in respect of the point that
     the second Adjudicator had no power to reach a decision on  the  issue
     as to the Democratic Republic of Congo, in  the  light  of  the  first
     Adjudicator decision, and should have held that there  was  no  appeal
     before him once the Secretary of State  kept  his  removal  directions
     unchanged.  There was no Respondent's Notice which raised that  point.
     But we do not accept it as a good one.

 12. The first decision was not treated by the Adjudicator as determinative
     of the appeal;  the relevant form for an appeal to  the  Tribunal  did
     not accompany it.  Whatever her intentions, the first Adjudicator  did
     not require the Secretary of State to  do  more  than  reconsider  his
     directions, which plainly  conveys  that  he  can  say  that  he  will
     maintain them and still deal with  the  substance  of  the  appeal  on
     different basis.  Neither  party  considered  that  the  decision  was
     appealable or challengeable.

 13. The Claimant did not submit to the second Adjudicator that he  had  no
     jurisdiction either to hear an appeal at all in the absence of a fresh
     immigration decision or to hear further argument about the  effect  of
     the earlier grant of refugee status on the appeal or to  consider  for
     the first time the risk of persecution which the Claimant  might  face
     on return to the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Both  parties  assumed
     that he had jurisdiction in all three respects.  He specifically  drew
     attention to the deficiency in the way the matter had been handled  by
     the first Adjudicator.  Both parties argued their corner.  Before  the
     second Adjudicator, the Secretary of State did want to argue that  the
     grant  of  refugee  status  was  not  binding  and  that  there   were
     substantive reasons for not  believing  that  the  Claimant  had  been
     persecuted in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  No-one suggested that
     he could not do so if the grant were not binding.  If the  Adjudicator
     had reached a different, and as we say correct, conclusion  about  the
     non-binding nature of that grant, he would  have  heard  argument  and
     evidence, without jurisdictional objection, about whether the Claimant
     had been or would be persecuted in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

 14. Until the last minute here, there was no suggestion that these  issues
     could not have been raised before him, or that  there  was  no  appeal
     available on all grounds from the second Adjudicator.

 15. The first decision was not seen  as  disposing  of  the  appeal.   The
     Adjudicator refers to allowing the appeal, but then  makes  directions
     for its continuance;  the appeal was not allowed in  fact.   It  could
     not be appealed as  that  decision  was  not  a  "determination".   It
     remained live before the second Adjudicator.  He had the whole  of  it
     to deal with, and in so far as the second Adjudicator could have  been
     confined by the preliminary ruling, there was no  objection  taken  to
     him  dealing  with  all  the  issues  on  the  material  before   him,
     particularly in the light of the procedural unfairness  which  tainted
     the first decision.  It is too late for objection now to be  taken  to
     that course and to his determination being  the  final  determination,
     appealable on all the points  to  which  it  gives  rise.   The  first
     decision should be seen as part of the whole process of  determination
     of  this  appeal  and  that  this  is  the  first  point,  the   final
     determination,  at   which   the   opportunity   to   appeal   arises.
     Additionally, the possible procedural objections were clearly waived.

 16. On the substance of the points, both Adjudicators were wrong  to  have
     treated the grant of asylum by Zimbabwe as  determinative  of  refugee
     status vis a vis the Democratic Republic of  Congo  in  this  country.
     First, the terms of the OAU  Convention  are  wider  than  the  Geneva
     Convention in the definition of a refugee  in  a  significant  respect
     which would have been very relevant to  someone  from  the  Democratic
     Republic of Congo.  There was no evidence at all as to  the  basis  of
     the grant.  It says in Article 1(2):

           "The term 'refugee' shall also apply to ever person  who,  owing
           to external aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events
           seriously disturbing public order in either part or the whole of
           his country of origin or nationality, is compelled to leave  his
           place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge  in  another
           place outside his country of origin or nationality."

 17. Second, even if the grant had been on grounds which were found in  the
     Geneva Convention,  the  grant  would  not  be  determinative  of  the
     position so far as the United Kingdom is concerned.  It would still be
     necessary to consider the substantive merits of the case.  This  issue
     was considered in the case of Babela [2002] UKIAT 06214; it  has  been
     considered more recently in the case of LW  (Ethiopia-Cancellation  of
     refugee status) [2o05] UKIAT 00042.  (We note that  the  reference  to
     cancellation is a term which UNHCR employs where the cessation  clause
     is applied following the judicial determination  of  refugee  status.)
     Where the claimant can show, to a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,
     that there was a grant of asylum and that the grant of asylum was made
     on the same grounds as those which engage the Geneva  Convention,  the
     position is as follows.

 18. The earlier grant of asylum is not binding, but it is the  appropriate
     starting point for the consideration of the claim;   the  grant  is  a
     very significant matter.  There should be some certainty and stability
     in the position of refugees.  The Adjudicator  must  consider  whether
     there are the most clear and  substantial  grounds  for  coming  to  a
     different conclusion.  The Adjudicator  must  be  satisfied  that  the
     decision was wrong.  The language of Babela is that of the  burden  of
     proof:  their status is prima facie made out but it can  be  rebutted;
     the burden of proof in so doing is on the Secretary of State.   We  do
     not think that that is entirely satisfactory as a way of expressing it
     and it leaves  uncertain  to  what  standard  the  burden  has  to  be
     discharged and what he has to disprove.  The same effect without  some
     of the legal difficulties is established by the language which we have
     used.

 19. But the important point is that it does not prevent the United Kingdom
     from challenging the basis of the grant in the first place.   It  does
     not require only that there be a significant change  in  circumstances
     since the grant was made.  Clear and substantial grounds may show that
     the grant should never have been made by the authorities;  it  may  be
     relevant to show that the  authorities  in  the  country  in  question
     lacked relevant information or did not apply the Geneva Convention  in
     the  same  way.   Exclusionary  provisions  may  be   relevant.    The
     procedures adopted for examination of the claim may also be  relevant.
     Considerations of international comity  may  be  rather  different  as
     between EU member states and those with less honest administrations or
     effective legal systems.

 20. Where however the Adjudicator is not satisfied that the foreign  grant
     was wrongly made, if the Claimant is to  fail  in  his  claim  in  the
     United  Kingdom  because  of  a  change  of  circumstances,  this   is
     equivalent to the application of a cessation provision and  should  be
     considered in a like manner.

 21. It is accepted that there is material which  the  Secretary  of  State
     wished to deploy and that it should  be  heard.   It  has  never  been
     examined  at  all  as  a  matter  of  substance  and  it  should   be.
     Accordingly this appeal is allowed and  remitted  for  hearing  before
     another Adjudicator.

 22. The case to which the Adjudicator referred is in  fact  R  v  SSHD  ex
     parte Musisi [1987] Imm AR 250  HL,  part  of  the  quartet  including
     Bugdaycay.  Musisi concerned the question of whether someone could  be
     returned to a country where he would not be persecuted but which would
     return him to a country where he would be.  That  has  nothing  to  do
     with recognition of refugee status or return on the facts of this case
     to the Democratic Republic of Congo which was not said to be  remotely
     likely to send him to Zimbabwe.  The Adjudicator's  citation  from  it
     refers to the Secretary of State's implicit acceptance that Musisi was
     a refugee and so would face persecution in his country of nationality,
     if removed there from a third country.  It was not  an  acceptance  of
     the binding value of foreign  decisions  by  the  Secretary  of  State
     because the case is silent about that and certainly not by  the  House
     of Lords.

 23. We add that the determination of cases on the basis of  a  preliminary
     point of this sort, as opposed to eg the question of whether an appeal
     is out of time, is very unwise and can lead to real  confusion  as  to
     the status of the decision, what points are thereafter arguable and as
     to whether it is appealable or challengeable by Judicial  Review.   It
     is a common experience that a preliminary point often leads to greater
     delay as the short cut turns out to be the longest route  between  two
     points, when it does not in fact dispose of the case.  It must be made
     clear if a preliminary  issue  is  decided  what  the  effect  of  the
     decision is.  If it leads to the allowing of the appeal, that is that.
      The decision has been dealt with.  The appeal is not against  removal
     directions but an  immigration  decision.   It  may  be  that  another
     immigration decision can be taken on a different  basis;   it  may  be
     appealable.

 24. There is no power to direct a reconsideration of removal directions in
     the way done here.  Schedule 4, paragraph 21, to the 1999 Act did  not
     (nor now does section 87 of the 2002 Act) permit a direction  of  that
     sort.  Those statutory  provisions  are  not  concerned  with  general
     directions to the Secretary of State as to what he should do to  reach
     a final conclusion in a claim;   they  are  to  enable  the  appellate
     authority to direct him  to  give  effect  to  the  outcome  of  final
     determinations such as by the grant of entry clearance, where  he  has
     to take some action for the determination to  be  effective.   Such  a
     direction leaves uncertain what the position is if the reconsideration
     leads to no change in position.  Reconsideration would follow from the
     allowing of the appeal, if the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that
     another country could be specified and if he reached another decision,
     appealable or not.

 25. This decision is reported for what we say about the grant  of  refugee
     status in another country, and the treatment  of  preliminary  points.
     The appeal is allowed and remitted for hearing before  an  Adjudicator
     other than Mrs Clarke or Mr Cockrill.



                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
