
H-AB-V2

|Heard at Field House       |        |                            |
|On 29 November 2004        |        |FI and others (Bangladesh   |
|Prepared 29 November 2004  |        |-presumptions-marriage      |
|                           |        |-legitimacy.) Bangladesh    |
|                           |        |[2005] UKIAT 00016          |
|                                                                  |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                       |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Date Determination notified:                                      |
|                                                                  |
|24 January 2005                                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |Before: |                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr H J E Latter (Vice President)                                  |
|Ms C St.Clair                                                     |
|Mrs L.R Schmitt                                                   |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|[  ]                                                              |
|[  ]                                                              |
|[  ]                                                              |
|                           |        |APPELLANT                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |and     |                            |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA                                    |
|                           |        |RESPONDENT                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Blum of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms P Ellis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the first  and  second  Appellants  against  the
    determination of an Adjudicator, Mr  J  A  Blair-Gould,  who  dismissed
    their appeal against the decision made on 26 August 2002 refusing  them
    a Certificate of Entitlement to  the  Right  of  Abode  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the son of the late Abdul Hoque (also referred to in many of
    the documents as Abdul Haque).  At the hearing before  the  Adjudicator
    the appeal by the third Appellant was withdrawn.


Background

2.    There is an extensive background to this appeal.  The first Appellant
    was born on 5 December 1966 and the second on  8  January  1970.   They
    assert that they are the children of Mr Hoque and Shafikun Nessa.  They
    apply for a Certificate of Entitlement on the basis that they were born
    after their claimed father registered as a British citizen.  There have
    been  previous  applications  for  an  entry  certificate.   The  first
    Appellant applied with his mother in January 1977.  The application was
    refused.  A notice of appeal was given out of time and it was held that
    there were no special circumstances making it right to extend time.   A
    further application was made in  1978  which  was  refused  and  yet  a
    further application by both Appellants and their mother  in  1980.   An
    appeal was eventually heard by an Adjudicator in 1984 and dismissed  as
    the Adjudicator was not satisfied on a balance  of  probabilities  that
    the Appellants and their  mother  were  related  as  claimed  to  their
    father.

3.    This application was made in  December  2001.   The  Appellants  were
    interviewed in August 2002.  The reasons for refusing  the  application
    are set out in the explanatory statement dated 1  December  2002.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer found that the Appellants and their sister gave
    conflicting stories which damaged their  credibility.   Documents  were
    produced which the Entry Clearance Officer found to  be  unsatisfactory
    such as recently issued birth certificates  when  other  documents  had
    been produced during previous applications  and  appeals.   The  oldest
    passport he had for Mr Hoque was issued in April 1970  and  he  assumed
    that registration of citizenship had only been  made  a  month  or  two
    before that date and he could not be satisfied that the Appellants were
    born after their claimed father.

The Hearing before the Adjudicator

4.    The appeal was heard by the Adjudicator on 1 December 2003.   Further
    documentary evidence was submitted which had not been before the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  This included a letter  from  the  Home  Office  to
    solicitors in England dated 7 October  2003  which  confirmed  that  Mr
    Hoque's nationality certificate was issued on 29  December  1964  under
    Section 6(1) of the British Nationality  Act  1948.   The  position  of
    children born outside the United Kingdom and Colonies to a  father  who
    was at the time of birth a citizen of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies
    otherwise than by descent is that the children  have  such  citizenship
    provided they are legitimate.  They are treated as  such  if  they  are
    either legitimate at  birth  or  if  their  parents  have  subsequently
    married.  Therefore, it is necessary for the Appellants to  prove  that
    they are the children of Mr Hoque and that  he  was  married  to  their
    mother, Shafikun Nessa.  If so, they will be entitled to a  Certificate
    of Entitlement.

5.    For the purposes of this  application  the  Appellants  had  obtained
    birth certificates by registering their births on 13 August 2002.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer made  the  point  that  birth  certificates  in
    Bangladesh could be issued without any corroborating evidence and  that
    births could be registered at any time.  There must have been  previous
    certificates submitted in respect of earlier applications and the Entry
    Clearance Officer questioned why certified copies of these had not been
    obtained as against re-registering the births.  The Adjudicator  agreed
    with these comments and noted that although the certificate stated  the
    names of the Appellants' father and mother, it did not appear  to  show
    that the two parents were married.  He commented that it was not  known
    to  him  whether  this  was  to  be  implied  by  the  entries  on  the
    certificates or not.  Certificates  were  also  submitted  showing  the
    dates on which the first and second Appellants had left  their  primary
    school describing them in each case as the sons of the late  Mr  Hoque.
    There was  nothing  to  indicate  whether  the  paternity  of  the  two
    Appellants was recorded in the school's  contemporaneous  documents  or
    whether  those  certificates  were  repeating  a  description  of   the
    Appellants provided to their writer.   There were witness  certificates
    from local residents worded in identical terms.  Each stated that  they
    had known Mr Hoque since the beginning of his  life.   This  would  not
    have been possible for one witness who was aged about 40 as,  according
    to the evidence, Mr Hoque was born on 11 August 1930.

6.    Mrs Saida Uddin was called to give oral evidence.  She said that  she
    had known the two male Appellants as family friends.   Her  father  and
    their father had been friends ever since she was born.  Mr  Hoque  used
    to come and visit  her  family.   When  she  went  to  Bangladesh,  the
    Appellants with their mother Shafikun Nessa used  to  come  and  visit.
    She had been to Bangladesh when she was very young in  1973  and  again
    from 1977 until 1984.  She paid further visits for six week periods  in
    1993, 1996 and 2001.  Mr Hoque used to describe the Appellants  as  his
    children.  She said that she saw them when she was in  Bangladesh.   Mr
    Hoque used to give her family presents to take back to his children.

7.    She did not know whether Mr Hoque had ever divorced  his  wife.   She
    had died about a year before him and in the  intervening  time  he  had
    remarried.  There was a daughter  from  the  second  wife.   In  cross-
    examination she said that she had got to know Shafikun Nessa very well.
     She and Mr Hoque were not divorced because  they  lived  together  and
    that would not have happened if people were  divorced.   In  answer  to
    questions from the Adjudicator she confirmed that her  own  father  had
    come to the United Kingdom in 1962.  Her father and Mr Hoque had worked
    together.  Mr Hoque's first marriage was in Bangladesh.   When  he  was
    living in Birmingham and then  in  London  his  wife  always  lived  in
    Bangladesh but he went back from time to time.  She did not know  about
    the previous applications.  Mr Hoque's wife was quite well off  in  the
    village and he used to send her money.  The first  Appellant  lived  in
    the village and was married with two young children.  He had a shop and
    would like to come to the United Kingdom.  The second Appellant was not
    married and was also a partner in the shop.  They both lived  in  their
    father's old house.

8.    The Adjudicator confirmed that the issue in this appeal  was  whether
    the Appellants could demonstrate on a  balance  of  probabilities  that
    they were entitled to the Certificates of  Entitlement.   He  commented
    that there was a considerable amount of evidence not available  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and rightly made the point that in the light of
    the history of the matter, the previous findings of the Adjudicator  in
    1984 and the evidence revealed in his determination, it  was  necessary
    for him to consider the evidence with a very careful eye.  He  believed
    that Mrs Uddin was a truthful and honest witness and  despite  all  the
    previous doubts and inconsistencies the Appellants had established that
    it was more likely than not that they were the children  of  Mr  Hoque.
    He went on to say that he was concerned that no evidence  of  any  kind
    had been placed before him to establish that they were  the  legitimate
    children of Mr Hoque or that he was  ever  lawfully  married  to  their
    mother.  He appreciated that this was not  the  matter  principally  in
    issue before the Entry Clearance Officer but that was entirely  because
    of the evidence produced to him in connection with the  claim  and  its
    past history.  He noted that in the 1980  explanatory  statement  there
    was reference to  an  alleged  Bengali  marriage  certificate  produced
    showing a marriage on 18 February 1946 but that was  false  because  Mr
    Hoque had signed his name in English twelve years before he went to the
    United Kingdom and first learnt any English.  The Adjudicator said that
    he could make no assumption that  there  was  ever  a  lawful  marriage
    between Mr Hoque and the Appellants' mother.   In  these  circumstances
    the appeals were dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.    In his grounds of appeal and submissions, Mr Blum submitted that  the
    Adjudicator had failed to take into account the cultural background and
    the lack of likelihood that the Appellants were illegitimate.   He  had
    failed to apply the presumption  of  marriage  or  the  presumption  of
    legitimacy.  Considering the background of Mr Hoque and  his  wife,  it
    was extremely unlikely that they would not have married.  They lived in
    a small village where illegitimacy would  not  be  tolerated.   He  had
    failed to take relevant considerations into account and failed to  give
    proper weight to the evidence of Mrs Uddin whose evidence supported the
    fact that the parties were regarded as married.  Mr Blum  referred  the
    Tribunal to Halsbury Laws of England volume 29(3) at paragraph 142,  to
    Muslim Family Law (3rd edition) written by Pearl and Menski, a document
    dealing with presumptions when assessing widow's benefit and finally to
    the Tribunal determination in Ali (18900).

10.   Miss Ellis submitted that throughout the various appeals the issue of
    the relationship of the Appellants to their mother and to Mr Hoque  had
    been in issue  and  never  accepted.   The  Adjudicator  was  perfectly
    entitled to consider even though he found that the Appellants  were  Mr
    Hoque's children whether they  were  legitimate.   There  were  serious
    discrepancies throughout the evidence and it was acknowledged  that  Mr
    Hoque had previously resorted to deception.   If  the  Appellants  were
    illegitimate there would be good reason to keep that issue under wraps.
     The Adjudicator had taken  all  relevant  evidence  into  account  and
    reached a decision properly open to him.

Consideration of the Issues

11.   There  is  no  challenge  to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  that  the
    Appellants are in fact the children of Mr Hoque and Shafikun Nessa.  In
    the  light  of  the  oral  evidence  from  Mrs  Uddin  taken  with  the
    documentary evidence, that finding was clearly open to the  Adjudicator
    for the reasons he gave.  They were born in 1966 and 1970  respectively
    after the date now accepted in 1964  when  Mr  Hoque  registered  as  a
    citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies.   The  remaining  issue  is
    whether the Adjudicator erred in law in his finding that the Appellants
    failed to show that they were his legitimate children.

12.   Mr Blum makes  a  preliminary  point  that  there  was  an  issue  of
    procedural unfairness in that the Adjudicator did not make it clear  at
    the hearing that there was an issue as to  legitimacy  and  whether  Mr
    Hoque and his wife had married.  In the light of the view  we  take  on
    the substantive issues we need not deal with this ground save  to  note
    that it does seem to us that it was implicit in the issues  before  the
    Adjudicator that it was necessary to show that the Appellants, if  sons
    of Mr Hoque,  were legitimate.

13.   Mr Blum's main point  is  that  the  Adjudicator  was  wrong  in  his
    approach to assessing whether  the  Appellants  were  legitimate.   The
    adjudicator commented that no evidence of  any  kind  had  been  placed
    before him to show that they were legitimate or that their  father  had
    ever lawfully married their mother.  Mr Blum argues that  this  ignores
    two presumptions.  The  first  is  the  presumption  of  marriage.   He
    referred to Halsbury's Laws of England and to paragraph 142  in  volume
    29(3) which reads:-

         "Where a man and woman have cohabited for such a length  of  time,
         and in such circumstances, as to have acquired the  reputation  of
         being man and  wife,  a  lawful  marriage  between  them  will  be
         presumed, even if there is no positive evidence  of  any  marriage
         ceremony having taken place, particularly where the relevant facts
         have occurred outside the jurisdiction; and this  presumption  can
         be rebutted only by strong and weighty evidence to the  contrary."




    This presumption is adopted when considering whether widow's benefit is
    payable.   The  guidance  notes  produced  in  evidence  refer  to  the
    presumption of a valid marriage, which arises from the acceptance for a
    substantial period  that  a  man  and  woman  are  married  only  being
    rebuttable by cogent evidence.


14.   The Tribunal were also referred to Muslim Family Law.   This sets out
    the strong presumption in favour  of  marriage  in  Muslim  law.   When
    dealing with parents and children, the point is made that  illegitimate
    birth is severely stigmatised in Muslim law. It  threatens  a  dominant
    principle,  purity  of  the  bloodline  through  males.   Concern  over
    legitimacy seeks to avoid confusion over paternity but also reflects  a
    desire to uphold proper sexual mores in society and  to  avoid  illicit
    sexual relations.  There is a presumption that  a  child  born  into  a
    valid marriage is a legitimate child and, perhaps in order to avoid the
    drastic consequences of individuals being stigmatised as  illegitimate,
    all the Sunni schools recognise gestation periods beyond the  medically
    recognised maximum.

15.   The Tribunal were referred to Ali where the Tribunal dealt  with  the
    issue of whether a child born within a valid marriage was to be treated
    as legitimate making the point that there was  a  presumption  in  both
    Muslim law and  English  law  that  the  child  should  be  treated  as
    legitimate.  Mr Blum argues  that  as  it  is  now  accepted  that  the
    Appellants are the children of Mr Hoque it  can  properly  be  presumed
    that there was a valid marriage. He bases this submission on  the  fact
    that Mr Hoque and his wife  were  according  to  Mrs  Uddin's  evidence
    regarded as married by those who knew them such as her father and  also
    in the village where the Appellants and their mother lived.

16.   In her further witness statement Mrs  Uddin  says  that  there  is  a
    stigma attached to illegitimate children in  Bangladesh:  this  is  not
    culturally or religiously accepted.  She says that society  as  it  was
    when Mr Hoque and his wife were living together would not have accepted
    this, especially as they were living in a close-knit village. It  would
    not be comprehensible to believe that the Appellants were illegitimate.
     The family  lived  together.  The  Appellants  were  not  treated  any
    differently by other people and were regarded as  part  of  Mr  Hoque's
    family.

17.   The Adjudicator accepted Mrs Uddin as a truthful and honest  witness.
    Her evidence on these issues  set  out  in  her  further  statement  is
    entirely consistent with the cultural  background  set  out  in  Muslim
    Family Law.  Mr Hoque lived  and  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    remitted money to Shafikun Nessa.  He returned on occasions and further
    children  were  born  to  them.   The  Tribunal  also  note  that  both
    Appellants live in property which had been owned by their  father.   We
    are satisfied that on the facts proved and in  particular  the  finding
    that the Appellants are the children of Mr Hoque taken with the  length
    of the period of cohabitation  with  their  mother,  a  presumption  of
    marriage does arise.  This can only be rebutted by strong  and  weighty
    evidence.

18.   The evidence pointed to by Ms Ellis on behalf of  the  respondent  is
    the fact that it was accepted when the appeal was heard in 1984 that Mr
    Hoque behaved dishonestly in his dealings with the  Inland  Revenue  by
    claiming allowances for two bogus children.   It  is  clear  from  that
    determination that there was considerable  confusion  in  the  evidence
    generally as to the chronology of events and the  documentary  evidence
    was unsatisfactory.   On  the  basis  of  the  information  before  the
    Adjudicator in 1984, it is clear why he dismissed the appeal.  However,
    there was further evidence before the Adjudicator in 2003  and  he  was
    entitled, as  he  did,  to  accept  that  evidence  as  credible.   The
    Appellants succeeded in establishing that they were the children of  Mr
    Hoque and Shafikun Nessa.  Their parents had  been  in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage for many years.

19.   Taking into account the cultural  and  religious  background  of  the
    Appellants and their parents and in particular the stigma  attached  to
    illegitimacy in Muslim society, the Tribunal is not satisfied that  the
    presumption of marriage has been rebutted.  Therefore, on the basis  of
    the facts found by the Adjudicator, we are satisfied that he  erred  in
    law by leaving the presumptions  of  marriage  and  legitimacy  out  of
    account when assessing  whether  Mr  Hoque   and  Shafikun  Nessa  were
    married.

Decision

20.   For the reasons the Tribunal have given we  are  not  satisfied  that
    these presumptions have been rebutted and in  these  circumstances  the
    appeals by the first and second Appellants are allowed.




                                                                H J E LATTER
                                                              VICE PRESIDENT


Approved for electronic distribution
