
ar
               NS (Relevance of children to removal - Art 8) Sri  Lanka
[2005] UKIAT 00081


                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                             Date of Hearing: 5 January 2005
                                        Date of notification: 4th April 2005


                                   Before:

                       Mr P D King TD (Vice President)
                         Sir Jeffrey James KBE, CMG
                               Mrs L R Schmitt




                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.     The  appellant  appeals  with  leave  to  the  Tribunal   against   a
      determination of an Adjudicator, Professor R.M.M. Wallace, promulgated
      on 19th December 2003, dismissing her appeals in respect of asylum and
      human rights.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in 1952. She arrived  in
      the United Kingdom  in May 2002 and claimed  asylum.  The  appellant's
      fear of persecution was based on an alleged imputed political opinion,
      namely that of her husband's involvement in the LTTE. She  lived  with
      her husband in Kopay. He became actively involved  in  the  LTTE.  She
      last saw her husband in October 1995 and she  has  reason  to  believe
      that he is still alive, living in an LTTE controlled  area.   In  1996
      there were a number of visits to her home by the army enquiring as  to
      her husband's whereabouts. She was threatened and physically abused by
      the soldiers. Her daughter, (   ), was a member of the  LTTE  and  the
      appellant began  to  be  questioned  in  relation  to  her  daughter's
      activities in addition to those of her husband.  The  house  would  be
      raided and she would be physically ill-treated. She  went  to  Colombo
      with her younger daughter on 25 October 2001 and  eventually  came  to
      the United Kingdom. She maintained that if  returned  to  Colombo  the
      authorities would suspect that  her  daughter  and  husband  had  been
      involved with the LTTE and that she would be at risk of  torture.  She
      maintained also that she had a close and loving family in  the  United
      Kingdom.  Her daughter, (      ), had been recognised as a refugee  by
      the United Kingdom government and her other daughter, (     )had  been
      granted exceptional leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  April
      2006.  The appellant has a brother  and  two  sisters  in  the  United
      Kingdom. Her parents and other brother and sister live in Jaffna.

3.    At the hearing before the Adjudicator the appellant's older  daughter,
      (       ), gave evidence. Initially when she had come  to  the  United
      Kingdom she had lived with her aunt in Wembley who had taken  care  of
      her. She said that after she had been arrested and then released,  her
      mental state was badly affected and she needed her mother desperately.
      She felt better now that her mother was in the United Kingdom. She had
      been sixteen years old when she arrived in the United Kingdom and  was
      now eighteen, taking 'A' levels with a view to  studying  medicine  at
      university. There was also a statement  from  the  younger  daughter,(
      ). She is thirteen years old and started school  at  nine.  She  feels
      much happier now that her mother is with her and that they  are  safe.
      A report was presented before the Adjudicator by an expert, Dr Anthony
      Good,  setting  out  his  understanding  as  to  the   situation   and
      circumstances in Colombo and Sri Lanka generally. The report expressed
      the opinion that it would be completely unfeasible for  a  lone  Tamil
      woman to live in Colombo.

4.    The Adjudicator did not find that the appellant would be  at  risk  if
      returned to Sri Lanka, either under the 1951 Convention or in  respect
      of Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.  At paragraph 32 the  Adjudicator
      considered   the Appellant's position under Article 8.   She  did  not
      find that to return the appellant to Sri Lanka would cause the  United
      Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Convention  of
      Human Rights.   The Adjudicator expressed the view that there were  no
      insurmountable obstacles to the  younger  daughter  returning  to  Sri
      Lanka and that contact between mother and  daughters  would  still  be
      maintained, notwithstanding removal.

5.    It was in respect of  the  mother/daughter  relationship  and  removal
      that permission  was granted.

6.    The appellant was  represented  before  us  by  Miss  L.  Dubinsky  of
      Counsel, instructed by Wandsworth & Merton Law Centre.  The respondent
      was represented by Mr S. Ouseley, the Home Office Presenting Officer.

7.    Miss Dubinsky submitted that the Adjudicator had  failed  to  consider
      adequately or at all  the  relationship  as  it  existed  between  the
      appellant and her two  daughters.  She  had  failed  to  consider  the
      closeness of mother and daughters and in terms of Article 8 had failed
      to follow the steps of reasoning which have been referred to  on  many
      occasions by the Tribunal.    It is necessary for the  Adjudicator  to
      ask herself four questions, namely :

      -     Is there family life as between mother and daughters?


      -     If so, would a removal of the mother amount to  an  interference
         with that family life?


      -     Was such removal lawful?
      -     Was it  proportional  to  the  proper  exercise  of  immigration
         control?

8.    It was submitted that family life was to be  presumed  between  mother
      and daughters.  Our attention was drawn  to  the  decision  of  Sen  v
      Netherlands [2003] 36 EHRR 7.  This was a  decision  of  the  European
      Court of Human Rights in December 2001.

9.    In that case the applicants, who were Turkish,  were  settled  in  the
      Netherlands. They applied for a residence permit to enable their first
      child who was born in Turkey to join them and their  second  child  in
      the Netherlands. The application had been  rejected.   The  applicants
      claimed that such a refusal to grant  a  residence  permit  interfered
      with their right to respect for their family life.  It was  held  that
      there had been a violation of Article 8 of  the  Convention.   It  was
      held that from the moment of birth there existed between the child and
      the parents a bond amounting to family life  which  subsequent  events
      could not break,  save  in  exceptional  circumstances.  It  was  held
      further that by giving the first two applicants the choice  of  giving
      up the  position  which  they  had  acquired  in  the  Netherlands  or
      renouncing the company of their eldest  child,  the  respondent  state
      failed to strike a fair balance between the  appellant's  interest  on
      the one hand and  their interest in  controlling  immigration  on  the
      other.  It was not necessary for the court to examine  whether  family
      members in Turkey were able and willing to look after the child.

10.   Miss Dubinsky submits that there is a distinction to be  made  between
      the relationship between siblings and  that  as  between  parents  and
      child.

11.   Thus it was submitted that  the  starting  point  of  the  Adjudicator
      ought to have been a recognition that family life existed  as  between
      the appellant and her daughters.

12.   Miss Dubinsky invited us to consider the situation  of  each  daughter
      separately  although she submitted that the general principle in Sen v
      The Netherlands applied equally to both.  The elder daughter  was  now
      nineteen  and  involved  in  her  studies,  hopefully  to  lead  to  a
      university place.  She had been recognised as a  refugee.  Indeed  her
      statement and her oral evidence had been before the Adjudicator.   She
      had been active within the LTTE as a result of which the army had been
      actively looking for her.  Indeed, she was detained in 2001  for  some
      twenty days on account of her own activities and those of her  father,
      being released only by bribery. Notwithstanding her release it was the
      evidence of the appellant that the authorities continued to  look  for
      her daughter, indeed had beaten her up in the process.  Her father had
      been involved with the intelligence unit of the LTTE and was therefore
      wanted by the authorities. The authorities had shown a  keen  interest
      in her as well.

13.   The Adjudicator had given no consideration  in  her  determination  to
      the possibility of return of the elder daughter.    It  was  submitted
      that she was a refugee and that it could not safely be assumed without
      more that she could safely return.  Indeed, it was submitted before us
      by  Miss  Dubinsky  that  the  daughter  fell  within  the  ambit   of
      Jeyachandran [2002] UKIAT 01869  and  that  she  would  have  been  of
      interest to the authorities.

14.   In that connection our attention  was  drawn  to  a  decision  of  the
      Tribunal chaired by the President, in SS (ILR - Article  8  -  return)
      Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00126.   The  appellant  in  that  case  was  a
      citizen of Sri Lanka. The Adjudicator considered the Article  8  claim
      on the basis of his acceptance that there was family life  enjoyed  in
      the United Kingdom with her husband who had been  a  recognised  as  a
      refugee.  The Adjudicator considered the issue of  proportionality  by
      reference to the ratio of the decision in Mahmood  [2001]  ImmAR  229,
      making the assumption that Mr S was unable to travel to Sri  Lanka  by
      virtue of his acknowledged status as a refugee. He  concluded  however
      that the appellant and the baby could return to Sri Lanka and make  an
      application for leave  to  enter  under  the  Immigration  Rules  from
      abroad.  The Tribunal in paragraph 10 of the decision considered  that
      the Adjudicator was wrong in his assumption  of the  existence  of  an
      inability for Mr S to return to Sri Lanka  simply  by  reason  of  his
      having been recognised as a refugee. The Tribunal  went  on  in  these
      terms:

             'That means no more than that the Secretary  of  State  cannot
             give directions for his removal whilst his indefinite leave to
             remain exists, but it does  not mean that  there  is,  in  the
             sense in which it is explored in  Mahmood,  an  insurmountable
             obstacle to his return.  The fact  of  former  recognition  of
             refugee status does  not  of  itself  show  that  there  is  a
             continuing insurmountable obstacle to returning to the country
             of origin. Such cases will depend upon a consideration of  the
             specific facts upon which the claim had been  recognised.   It
             is  not  necessary   for  the  Refugee  Convention   cessation
             provisions to be applied to someone with  refugee  status  and
             ILR in order for the potential of his return to the country of
             origin, so as to remain with his family, to be contemplated in
             an Article 8  case.   There  is  no  automatic  insurmountable
             hurdle in the mere fact of the past grant of ILR.  Of  course,
             that person is not expected to prove his  asylum  claim  again
             and there would need to be a proper  basis  for  contemplating
             that circumstances had changed significantly since  the  grant
             of ILR.  If they have, and it is contended that a person still
             faces an insurmountable obstacle to return  with  his  family,
             evidence will be needed as to why.'

15.   The Tribunal went on to  consider  that  there  had  been  substantial
      change in the situation following the ceasefire and that there was  no
      evidence before the Adjudicator to show that there existed any current
      insurmountable obstacles to Mr S returning to Sri Lanka, and therefore
      no evidential basis for saying that the removal decision made  by  the
      Secretary of State was unlawful.

16.   Miss Dubinsky submits that the Adjudicator did not apply her  mind  in
      the present case to the situation of whether the elder daughter  could
      or could not return to Sri Lanka.  She had not addressed her  mind  to
      whether  the  circumstances  of  the  elder   daughter   had   changed
      significantly in Sri Lanka  as  to  enable  her  to  return.   It  was
      submitted that they had not and that insurmountable obstacles remained
      in the return of the elder daughter.

17.   Considerable reliance was placed by Miss  Dubinsky upon  the  case  of
      Sen.  She submitted that the elder daughter was placed in an invidious
      position and that she would have to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      separated from the appellant if removed. Alternatively, she would have
      to give up the status which she had obtained  and  expose  herself  to
      risk upon return to Sri Lanka.   It was this real difficulty which was
      recognised by the Court of Human Rights in the case of Sen.

18.   The Adjudicator had given no regard to  the  situation  of  the  elder
      daughter and of the effect which that would have  upon  her  were  the
      appellant to be returned.  The daughter had  established  a  life  for
      herself and it was disproportionate in all the  circumstances for  the
      Secretary of State to force an agonising decision  upon  the  parties,
      namely to cause mental anguish to the  appellant   by  separating  her
      from the daughter, or by in effect forcing the daughter to give up her
      rights and freedoms to accompany the appellant.

19.   Our attention was drawn to the statement of (     )dated  21  November
      2003 which was before the Adjudicator at the date of hearing of the  3
      December 2005.    In that statement she  speaks  of  having  found  it
      difficult to be in a  foreign  country,  namely  the  United  Kingdom,
      without her mother.   There had been no contact between  her  and  her
      mother since June 2001.  Her younger sister, (     ), arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom in December 2001 when she was only  twelve  years  old.
      They lived together with their aunt.  The appellant arrived on 31  May
      2002  and  that  was  the  first  occasion  that  contact   had   been
      established. (     )needs the appellant's support, particularly as she
      is studying hard at school.

20.   Insofar as the younger daughter is concerned, our attention was  drawn
      to a statement  from her also dated 21 November 2003,  as  was  placed
      before the Adjudicator.   She had been twelve when  she  came  to  the
      United Kingdom and relied very much upon her elder sister and aunt for
      support. She missed her mother very much and  was  relieved  when  her
      mother arrived in the United Kingdom.  She has started at  school  and
      feels safe now that her mother is here to look after her.

21.   Miss Dubinsky submits that once again the Adjudicator failed  to  bear
      in mind the very close bond which  clearly  exists  in  emotional  and
      family terms as between the appellant and her daughter.

22.   She further submitted that it cannot be ignored in the  analysis  that
      both daughters and the appellant  had  a  particularly  difficult  and
      stressful time in Sri Lanka.  There was clearly  a  considerable  bond
      established between the family unit in adversity in  Sri  Lanka.  That
      was particularly so given the disappearance of their father  in  1995.
      The particular experience of the appellant and her younger daughter in
      seeking to flee  Sri  Lanka  firmly  established  such  a  bond.   Our
      attention was invited to paragraph 37 of Sen in which the  Court  says
      as follows:

             'In its analysis, the court  takes into consideration the  age
             of the children concerned, their situation in their country of
             origin and their degree of dependence on  their  parents.   It
             cannot in effect consider the matter from the  sole  point  of
             the view of immigration, by comparing this situation with that
             of persons who have  only  established  bonds  after  becoming
             settled in their host country...'

23.   It was submitted therefore that the nature of the relationship  should
      be considered.  The Adjudicator had  failed  to  consider  that  whole
      context in her analysis of the situation.

24.   It was submitted that  the  Adjudicator  had  indeed  focussed  albeit
      erroneously on a very narrow issue as expressed by her in paragraph 32
      of the determination, namely:

             'The appellant's younger daughter is not required to remain in
             the United Kingdom. There are no insurmountable  obstacles  to
             her returning to Sri Lanka. The  contact  between  mother  and
             daughter could still be maintained.'

25.   It was submitted that the Adjudicator erred in law  in  that  approach
      because an insurmountable obstacle was essentially to be seen  in  the
      context of a marriage case. In any event, the issue of  insurmountable
      obstacle was but one of a number of factors to be borne in  mind.  Our
      attention  was  drawn  to  the  judgment  of  Mahmood  itself  and  in
      particular to paragraph 55 of that judgment. The conclusions were  set
      out therein, in particular 55(3) :

             'Removal or exclusion of one family member from a state  where
             other members of the family are  lawfully  resident  will  not
             necessarily infringe Article 8  provided  that  there  are  no
             insurmountable obstacles to the family living together in  the
             country of origin of the family member  excluded,  even  where
             this involves a degree of hardship for some or all members  of
             the family.'

26.   Paragraph 55(4):

             "Article 8 is likely to be violated  by  an  expulsion  for  a
             member of a family that has been long established in the state
             if the circumstances are such that it  is  not  reasonable  to
             expect the other members of the family to follow  that  member
             expelled."

27.   Miss Dubinsky submits that it was more the ingredient  of  55(4)  that
      ought to have been considered. The family had been long established as
      a family unit even before coming to the state. It was  not  reasonable
      to expect the younger daughter to give up all that she had obtained in
      order to go back to the uncertainties and  potential  dangers  of  Sri
      Lanka.     She  submitted   that  the  Adjudicator  was  in  error  in
      requiring the element of insurmountable obstacle to be a pre-requisite
      .  What had been made clear in Sen was that  the  appellant  had  been
      culturally integrated. This is the case with  the  appellant  and  her
      children.

28.   The Adjudicator had failed to consider the precarious situation  which
      the appellant  would face upon her return to Colombo, particularly  in
      the light of Dr Good's report.   Matters had further worsened,  it was
      submitted, because of the recent natural disaster which  had  affected
      the area and the disruption which had been caused  to  the  fabric  of
      many countries, particularly  that of Sri Lanka.    It  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect either daughter to return to  a  situation  where
      there was a lack of support and stability.

29.   In that connection our attention was drawn  to  the  decision  of  the
      Tribunal in Bakir [2002] UKIAT 01176, notified in  April  2002.    Our
      attention was drawn to the judgment of the then President to the  IAT,
      Mr Honourable Justice Collins, who set out in paragraphs 9 and  10  of
      that decision as follows:

             'The Adjudicator's reference to the need for there to  be  "no
             insurmountable obstacle to the family  living together in  the
             country of origin and for family members excluded" comes  from
             the judgment of  the  Master  of  the  Rolls  in  Mahmood.  At
             paragraph 55 he sets out his conclusions as to the approach of
             the Commission on the European Court of Human  Rights  to  the
             potential conflict between the respect for family life and the
             enforcement  of  immigration  control.   The  Adjudicator  has
             quoted number 3. It is to be noted that, helpful  though  they
             are, these conclusions are not  specifically  adopted  by  the
             other two members of the court (Laws and May, LJJ).  The  test
             to be applied is  whether  in  all  the  circumstances  it  is
             reasonable to require the family members to leave the country,
             that is to say, whether the interference is proportional.

             It is always necessary to consider the facts of  a  particular
             case.  Lord Phillips' conclusions are not  requirements  which
             have always to be met. Naturally, it would usually be the case
             that,  if  there  were   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
             continuation of family life out of the United Kingdom, removal
             would not be reasonable.  Even if the respondent has a  family
             life here, it is one which has  been  established  for  little
             over a year with siblings he had not seen for some years.   He
             had parents are in Turkey with whom he had been  living  until
             they decided to leave and come to the  United  Kingdom.   That
             was, on the findings of  the  Adjudicator,  a  voluntary  act.
             There is no reason why he should not return and  continue  his
             family life with his parents in  Turkey,  being  able  to  see
             sisters who are still there.  His  eldest  brother  is  now  a
             British citizen and has visited his parents in Turkey. He  can
             continue to do so. Equally, the respondent can (at least if he
             persuades an Entry Clearance Officer of his bona fides)  visit
             his siblings here. The particular family life enjoyed  in  the
             United Kingdom with his siblings  is  not  one  which  in  the
             circumstances must continue to exist and  which  it  would  be
             unreasonable to break.'


             [ It may well be that such comments should now be
             read within the context of Razgar and of Huang]


30.   Miss Dubinsky submits that that is not the situation as faces the  two
      daughters in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  a  much  closer  bond
      established in emotional terms because of the past experiences of  the
      family unit. There is no guarantee of family support,  either  to  the
      appellant or to the children were they to return.   Given  the  recent
      events of the flooding and the tsunami, it cannot  be  said  that  any
      family members continue to reside in the Jaffna area which was an area
      affected by the flooding. There is no indication that contact with the
      father could be made.  It is submitted that the Adjudicator failed  to
      have regard to any of these factors in making the  comments  which  he
      did relating to the younger daughter.

31.   Finally, Miss Dubinsky invites us to  revisit  the  situation  of  the
      appellant's return, notwithstanding that such an  aspect  was  not  an
      aspect of the leave to appeal. She   has  placed before us a number of
      BBC news items relating to the tsunami.  She invites our attention  to
      the extent of the destruction and to the  considerable  strain  placed
      upon the resources within Sri Lanka.   Such  would  only  add  to  the
      difficulties it is submitted of the appellant returning to Colombo. It
      cannot safely be said that the LTTE and the government are cooperating
      over that disaster such as to have removed the danger to the appellant
      in her return.  The involvement of the husband was at a high level  in
      the LTTE and the risk to her on return  is  a  significant  one.   The
      Adjudicator failed to bear in mind the matters set out by Dr  Good  in
      the report, and the difficulties which she would face upon  return  to
      Colombo would be exacerbated in any event by the  humanitarian  crises
      with which the country is now faced.

32.   Miss Dubinsky invites us to remit the matter  to  be  heard  again  in
      order for there to be a proper evaluation as to the dependence  within
      the family unit and a proper assessment of the risk of return in light
      of the tsunami disaster.

33.   Mr Ouseley on behalf of the respondent invites us to find  that  there
      has been no error  of  law  on  the   part  of  the  Adjudicator.  The
      Adjudicator heard all the evidence relating to the  family.   She  had
      before her the evidence of both children in  terms  of  statements  or
      oral evidence and has recorded in some detail the evidence as given by
      the appellant.  The children are settled in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      have the support of close relatives within the United Kingdom.  Indeed
      both daughters lived with their aunt and her family for a considerable
      period of time prior to the appellant arriving in the United  Kingdom.
      The appellant herself has family members living in Jaffna and there is
      no suggestion that they have been adversely affected by  the  tsunami.
      In addition, her husband is also alive in a  part  of  Sri  Lanka.  No
      doubt efforts could be made to find him. There is nothing to  indicate
      that the Adjudicator failed to have regard to the report of  Dr  Good.
      There is nothing to indicate that there has been a fundamental  change
      in circumstances brought about by the  tsunami.   Indeed,  there  have
      been reports which, taken as a whole, speak of aid  being  brought  to
      the country and  of  the  cooperation  between  government  and  Tamil
      Tigers. The comments made by the Adjudicator as to the return  of  the
      younger daughter were ones which were open to her.  The appellant  had
      been in the United Kingdom  for three years and there is no reason  to
      believe that she could not  adapt to life in Sri  Lanka,  particularly
      as there is no suggestion that she has  ever  been  detained  or  ill-
      treated or indeed of any interest to the authorities.

34.   Our attention was drawn to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, dated 21 January 2003.   Essentially,  it
      was a case involving a relationship  between siblings but comments are
      made within the judgment as to the  wider  issue  of  family  life  as
      between adult child and a parent or other  siblings.   In  particular,
      paragraph 25 states as follows:

             'Because there is  no  presumption  of  family   life,  in  my
             judgment of family life, it  is  not  established  between  an
             adult child and surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal  emotional  ties:  see  S  v
             United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196  and  Abdulazis,  Cabales  and
             Balkandali v United Kingdom [1985]  7  EHRR  471.   Such  ties
             might exist if the appellant were dependent on his  family  or
             vice versa.  It is not, however, essential that members of the
             family should be in the same country. The Secretary  of  State
             accepts that that possibility may exist, though in my judgment
             it will probably be  exceptional.   Accordingly  there  is  no
             absolute rule that there must be family  life  in  the  United
             Kingdom, as the  Immigration Appeal Tribunal held.'

35.   It is submitted that the approach  of  the  Adjudicator  was  entirely
      correct and that there is no reason at all why the appellant  may  not
      return to Sri Lanka.  It is a matter of  choice for  the  children  to
      remain in the United Kingdom or return with her.   The fact that there
      was no contact as between them and their mother prior to her coming to
      the United Kingdom does not mean that communication could now  not  be
      established.   There are telephones and faxes in Sri  Lanka  and  also
      the ability to write and keep in general contact.

36.   Miss Dubinsky, in reply, submitted that contact between the  appellant
      and her children in the United Kingdom had  been difficult in the past
      and there was no reason to believe that there had been any improvement
      now. Given the tsunami it could be argued that the infrastructure  was
      more strained than previously.


  37. In coming to our conclusions the first question to ask is  of  course
      whether there exists family life as between  the  appellant  and  her
      daughters in the United Kingdom.  The existence  of  family  life  as
      between  parent  and  child  must   necessarily   depend   upon   the
      circumstances of the particular case.  As the Court  of  Appeal  made
      clear in the case of Kugathas at paragraph 25 of the judgment of Lady
      Justice Arden, there is no presumption of family life. Further, it is
      not established between an adult child and his  surviving  parent  or
      other siblings unless something more  exists  than  normal  emotional
      ties. The judgement went on in these terms:

           " Such ties might exist if the appellant were dependent
           on his family or vice versa. It is not however essential
           that the members of the family should be in the same
           country. The Secretary of  State accepts that the possibility
           may exist, although in my judgement it will probably be
           exceptional. Accordingly, there is no absolute rule that
           there must be family life in the United Kingdom, as the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal held."


38.   As was noted later in  the  same  judgment,  the  appellant   in  that
      particular case, if sent back to Sri Lanka, could still make telephone
      calls to his family and it would still be possible for him  to  visit.
      The court emphasised at paragraph 19 that neither blood ties  nor  the
      concern and affection which ordinarily go with them are by  themselves
      enough to constitute family life.

39.   In the case before us it is clear that the appellant  lives  with  her
      two daughters, one of whom is over the age of eighteen and  the  other
      still a minor. There is nothing to indicate, however, that there is  a
      dependency which is  far greater than the normal bonds of affection as
      between mother and daughter.

40.   Miss Dubinsky submitted to us that the  full  pattern  of  the  family
      life as between the appellant and her two daughters was not before the
      Adjudicator.  We would reject that submission. It is clear to us  that
      the appellant and her two daughters had  the  fullest  opportunity  to
      present their particular perspectives to the Adjudicator. Such matters
      are noted by her in the determination.  The elder daughter,  now  aged
      nineteen, arrived in the United Kingdom  in June 2001 and was able  to
      establish her life in the United Kingdom with the  assistance  of  her
      aunt and her aunt's family in the United Kingdom.  She  coped  without
      her mother the appellant until  the  mother's  arrival  in  May  2002.
      The younger daughter arrived in the United Kingdom  in  December  2001
      and established herself with her sister and aunt  as  a  family   unit
      until the arrival of the appellant. She, too, has established  herself
      in terms of being at school. As a matter of commonsense there would be
      a close bond between daughters and mother as would be expected in  any
      family relationship. There is no suggestion, however,  that  there  is
      any emotional or physical dependence other than that. It is of  course
      to  be  recognised,  in  fairness  to  all,  that  families  who  have
      experienced  hardship  and  privation  will  be  possibly  more  drawn
      together with  such  experiences  than  not.    It  is  understandable
      therefore that the daughters would very much welcome the  presence  of
      their mother and the reassurance which that gives.  Equally, the  same
      would apply to the mother to be reunited  with  her  daughters.   Such
      matters were  canvassed  before  the  Adjudicator  and  there  was  no
      indication from the determination that they were matters not borne  in
      mind.



41.   In tackling the question of proportionality it is of course  important
      to consider the family unit as a whole as part of the assessment.  The
      matter was dealt with recently  by  the  Administrative  Court  in  AC
      [2003] EWHC 389 Admin, a decision of Mr Justice Jack  reported  on  11
      March 2003.   The context of that case was one of deportation but  the
      focus of the attention was, however, upon S, the  child  of  appellant
      who was placed with foster parents initially, following the  detention
      of her mother and later stayed with her  father.  She  maintained  her
      relationship with her mother whilst the appellant had been  in  prison
      by means of visits and telephone calls. It was said that there  was  a
      warm and loving relationship which existed between  them  and  it  was
      accepted that  family  life  existed.  The  fact  of  the  appellant's
      deportation on her relationship with S was an important factor in  the
      Adjudicator's decision in  allowing  the  appeal.   The  Tribunal  had
      considered the case of Kehinde v Secretary of State  (01/TH/2668)  the
      essence of which decision  was  that  in  an  appeal  under  s.65  the
      Adjudicator or Tribunal is concerned only with the human rights of the
      appellant. Mr Justice Jack interpreted the comments by the Tribunal as
      exhibiting their intention to consider the relationship between S  and
      her mother from the viewpoint of the mother's right alone.  It did not
      intend to consider the impact of the deportation on S.   The court was
      referred to a number of decisions by the European Court, in particular
      that of Boultif v Switzerland [2001] 33 EHRR 1179, that of Amrollahi v
      Denmark [2002] and Ciliz v Netherlands  [2000].

42.   Mr Justice Jack in the course of  the  judgment  said  as  follows  at
      paragraph 33 thereof:

             'In my judgment, where in a deportation case  an  interference
             with family is under  consideration  in  the  context  of  the
             deportee's  right  to  freedom  from  interference  with   the
             exercise of family life  under  Article  8,  it  is  right  to
             consider and take into account the effect of the  interference
             on all those sharing the family  life  in  question,  and  not
             simply the effect  upon  the  individual  who  is  subject  to
             possible deportation.  I accept that  this  question  was  not
             specifically addressed by the European Court in either Boultif
             or Amrollahi.  Nevertheless, it is consistent with the  manner
             in which the  European Court expressed itself in  those  cases
             and  with  its  approach.  It  seems  to  me  artificial   and
             unsatisfactory  that,  where  a  right  to  family   life   is
             established as existing, the effect  of  the  interference  on
             only one individual should be taken into account.   That  must
             particularly be so where the effect  of  the  decision  to  be
             made, if made one way, is likely to be to destroy  the  family
             life in question.  The purpose for the Article is, in relation
             to family life, to conserve that life.  As I pointed out,  the
             impact of one family member in turn impacts on another.  So  I
             consider that it is the effect of  the  proposed  interference
             with the family life as a whole which  should  be  taken  into
             account.'

43.   In paragraph 37 of the judgment  the  court  considered  a  number  of
      other decisions including that of Beqiri [2002] UKIAT 00725.

44.   It seems to us, however, that paragraph 33 of the judgment  should  be
      read in the context of paragraph 38 in which it was stated as follows:

             'I conclude that the Tribunal was right in  deciding  that  it
             was not primarily concerned with the human rights of  S.   The
             grounds of appeal under s.65 are restricted to breach  of  the
             human rights of the appellant.  The human  rights  of  another
             person will  only be relevant if a breach of them impinges  on
             the human rights of the appellant.  I also conclude  that  the
             Tribunal was wrong if, as I think it did, it concluded that in
             considering the rights of the appellant, AC under  Article  8,
             it should take no  account  of  the  impact  of  the  proposed
             deportation on S.  On an appeal under s.65 the Adjudicator and
             the Tribunal should take into account of  the  impact  of  the
             proposed deportation on the family life  of  any  person  with
             whom the appellant has established a family life.'

45.   The scope of that decision was further considered by  the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal in the starred decision SS (ECO - Article 8)  Malaysia
      [2004] UKIAT 00091(starred), notified on 29 April 2004.  The appellant
      in that case was a citizen of Malaysia applying for  indefinite  leave
      to remain, his mother  being  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
      appellant was twenty two years  at  the  date  of  the  decision.  The
      appellant's mother and stepfather had decided to return to the  United
      Kingdom and she was granted indefinite leave to remain in  1999.   The
      eldest child was married and lived in the United  States  of  America.
      Her second child graduated from a  UK  university  and  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom on a work permit expiring in 2006.  The  appellant  had
      also studied in the United Kingdom but had returned to Malaysia.

46.   The issue in the appeal was whether the  exclusion  of  the  appellant
      was proportionate.  In considering whether there was a duty  upon  the
      ECO not in a way which was incompatible with the ECHR rights. the case
      of Box v ECO Dhaka [2003] UKIAT  02212 was cited. The case of  Kehinde
      was cited as indeed the judgment of Jack J in AC. The Tribunal chaired
      by the President essentially reaffirmed the position  as  set  out  in
      Kehinde.  Paragraph 26 in these terms :

             'We also agree with the point made by him in paragraph 32 when
             he points out that the impact of removal, or refusal of entry,
             may have an impact on a person other than  the  Appellant  and
             that impact in turn may affect the  Appellant;   for  example,
             the anxiety that the non-appellant may feel about the  absence
             of the Appellant may in turn make  the  appellant  distressed.
             However, it is only in that indirect way that the position  of
             someone other than the Appellant can be  taken  into  account.
             The Tribunal is still examining the Appellant's position  when
             it allows for the indirect impact of the position  of  others.
             It is right to  say  that  there  are  passages  in  Jack  J's
             judgment which suggested that a  broader  approach  was  being
             taken; which appeared to contradict what  he  said  elsewhere.
             However, if a broader approach had  been  intended,  which  we
             doubt, we would not have followed it. We are bound by  Kehinde
             which is correct as  a matter of statutory interpretation.'

47.   The Tribunal went on in paragraph 29 a follows:

            'Even were the Tribunal to have the power to look  more  widely
            than it does at the position of the family, it would  still  be
            necessary for those who were  not  the  Appellant  to  identify
            themselves as "victims".  Only those who so identify themselves
            have the right to challenge decisions on human  rights  grounds
            by s.7 of the  1998  Act. It would  be  entirely  inappropriate
            for someone, the Appellant, to seek to  advance   his  case  by
            reliance on the rights which he asserts for others  which  they
            do not seek to vindicate themselves.'

48.   The Tribunal in paragraph 43 had  regard  to  a  number  of  decisions
      including that of Sen.

49.   The Tribunal set out certain matters in paragraph 48 of  its  judgment
      as follows:

             'The appellant is now nearing 26. He was  nearing  23  at  the
             date of the decision.  At that  age, is it possible to have  a
             family  life  with  parents  but  one  would  normally  expect
             something stronger than the normal ties of love and  affection
             and concern for a child or parent's wellbeing.   There  should
             be evidence of specific emotional dependency or a serious lack
             of maturity.  There is no evidence of any especial  mental  or
             emotional dependency of the Appellant on his  parents;  he  is
             financially dependent on them. Although he  has  illnesses  in
             Malaysia, he is in  good  health  and  is  not  physically  or
             mentally disabled.  We would accept that he  does  at  present
             enjoy  some  form  of  family  life  with  them  but  that  is
             inevitably one which will diminish as the years go by and  the
             normal expectation would be that  in  the  United  Kingdom  he
             would set up home away them in due course, as have his brother
             and sister, and that it would be stretching  a  point  to  say
             that he then enjoyed family life with them. We accept  that  a
             family life can be constituted by the relationship with  adult
             siblings but it is not usually strong in the  absence  of  any
             particular dependencies; they would normally  be  regarded  as
             separate families who have grown up and  gone  their  separate
             ways, however much the bond of affection and contact remained.
             This evolution reflects the way in which  the  rules  make  it
             fairly easy for children up to 12  years  old  to  join  their
             parents somewhat more difficult for those under 18, and impose
             very much more stringent tests for those over 18.'

50.   That matter was further dealt with in the decision of AC  (deportation
      - Article 8) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00122.  The Tribunal gave guidance as
      to the manner in which s.65 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  is
      to be applied in cases where the immigration decision affects not only
      the appellant but also others including members  of  his  family.  The
      Tribunal stated (paragraph 17) et seq as follows:

            '17.  We regard it as clear that  the  effect  of  s.65  is  to
                 require the Adjudicator and the Tribunal to decide  whether
                 or not the decision breaches the appellant's  human  rights
                 and not whether it breaches the rights of  others  who  are
                 not appellants.   The  appellant's  human  rights  are  not
                 breached by a decision relating to his entitlement to enter
                 or remain simply because the right of someone else  who  is
                 not an appellant may be breached by  that  decision.   That
                 another person has the  ability,  if  a  victim,  to  bring
                 proceedings in the Administrative Court under  s.7  of  the
                 1998 Act. It may be cumbersome, but it avoids an  appellant
                 making claims related to someone else who may be unaware of
                 what is being said or who may disagree with it. A child  of
                 divorced or separated parents  may  be  in  a  particularly
                 difficult position in this respect.


            18.  This is not to say that the position of others  is  always
                 irrelevant. As the Tribunal pointed out in  its  ruling  on
                 this matter, the impact on the  human  rights  of  a  third
                 party may be relevant in this way. If their return  to  the
                 country to which it is proposed to remove the appellant  is
                 precluded because that would put their  Article  3   rights
                 there at risk, that may be very material to the  degree  to
                 which they might be able to unable to return and  hence  to
                 the degree of  interference  with  the  appellant's  rights
                 which the latter's removal might entail.  We  also  accept,
                 as Jack J pointed out in AC, that  although  the  right  to
                 family life  and  the  effect  of  interference  on  it  is
                 examined, under s.65, from the viewpoint of the  appellant,
                 the impact of separation on another may cause  distress  or
                 anxiety to the appellant and that indirect  impact  on  the
                 appellant should be taken into  account.  It  is  right  to
                 recognise  that  although  some  family  relationships  may
                 involve complete  reciprocity,  others,  and  parent  child
                 relationships  are  the  obvious  example,  may   be   very
                 different depending upon the person  from  whose  viewpoint
                 that matter is examined.

            19.  Although there was room for some argument before us as  to
                 the meaning of the judgment, we consider that,  read  as  a
                 whole, it is accepting the point that an appeal under  s.65
                 must be determined by whether or not the decision  breaches
                 the right of the appellant in  all  the  circumstances.  We
                 agree with Jack J's observations if we are correct  in  our
                 understanding of them; they are in line  with  Kehinde  and
                 with the paragraphs  of  the  ruling  referred  to  in  the
                 Order.'

51.   The wording of s.65 of the 1999 Act is  not  materially  different  to
      that of s.84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act.  The approach must be the same  in
      considering issues arising under the 2002  Act consistently with  what
      is stated in AC  above. The Tribunal are therefore concerned only with
      whether or not the decision breaches the human rights of the appellant
      and  not whether it breaches the rights of  her  daughters.    We  are
      entitled to take into account the impact on her of removal insofar  as
      her separation from her children may cause her distress and anxiety or
      otherwise may affect her. This is particularly so given the nature  of
      her depression as highlighted in the medical report as was be fore the
      Adjudicator.

52.   We find therefore that the degree of focus  which  Miss  Dubinsky  has
      sought to place on the wellbeing of the daughters is one which is  not
      supported by the authorities.   Clearly, in looking at  the  issue  of
      removal and whether or not it is proportional, it  is  right  to  have
      regard to the whole of the family   unit  but  focussing  particularly
      upon the impact of the removal upon the appellant.   It is clear  that
      in certain cases it would be impractical to separate the interests  of
      children from that of the mother.   In  the  recent  Court  of  Appeal
      decision in CA that was precisely the concern of the court, namely the
      removal of the mother and the risk which that presented to  her  young
      child.  Clearly the court had found  the interest of the child in that
      case as being bound inextricably  with the interests  and  removal  of
      the mother.

53.   Turning therefore to the elder daughter in the appeal  before  us,  it
      should be noted that she is nineteen and is developing  her  own  life
      and study.  She is an adult and as time  goes  on  she  will  move  to
      university and will live apart from her mother for appreciable periods
      of time in all probability. It is the way with children that they will
      develop their own life and move away to some extent from the closeness
      of childhood dependence upon parents.  There is  nothing  to  indicate
      that the elder daughter is otherwise vulnerable  or  unduly  dependant
      upon her mother.  She managed to build up a life for  herself  in  the
      United Kingdom in the period between her coming to the United  Kingdom
      and  her mother arriving. She was not alone in the United Kingdom  and
      has close family members to whom she may turn and indeed to  whom  she
      did in fact turn initially.   The Adjudicator set out  her  particular
      circumstances in paragraph 6 of the determination.

54.   The Adjudicator at paragraph 32 comments as follows:

             'Taking initially the elder daughter,  once  a  person  is  no
             longer a child, family life relationships may be considered to
             continue only if there continues to be a  factual  content  to
             those relationships. The appellant's daughter has been in  the
             United Kingdom since  2001, the appellant's daughter, has aunt
             and uncle and cousin in the United Kingdom.   The  appellant's
             daughter, although it may have been difficult has within  that
             two year period  settled into the United Kingdom   educational
             system and is studying for her 'A' levels.'

55.   We find that the Adjudicator has properly addressed the  situation  of
      the elder daughter.    Relationships  do  change  and  the  degree  of
      closeness between parents and children will vary according to age  and
      circumstances. We understand the  Adjudicator  to  mean  that  in  her
      speaking of "factual content".  There is nothing to indicate that  the
      elder daughter would not be able to  continue  to  make  communication
      with her mother once her mother has returned to  Sri  Lanka.   It  was
      said by Miss Dubinsky that the tsunami has caused major disruption  to
      Sri Lanka. There is no evidence  that  that  is  so  in  the  area  of
      Colombo. It may well be so in terms of the coastal region but there is
      nothing to indicate that the facilities  of  telephoning  and  contact
      would not be available in  Colombo or indeed elsewhere.

56.   The fact that the daughter is recognised as  a  refugee  does  not  of
      itself mean that she is unable to return to Sri  Lanka  either  on   a
      permanent or basis or on a temporary one.  Reference has already  been
      made to SS (INLR Article 8 - return) Sri Lanka  [2004] UKIAT 00126 and
      to the comments made in paragraph 10 thereof.   The circumstances have
      considerably changed since the daughter came to the United Kingdom.

57.    So  far  as  the  younger  daughter  is  concerned,  once  again  the
      Adjudicator has set out her situation and circumstances in paragraph 6
      of the determination. In particular the  Adjudicator  has  highlighted
      the matter which was stressed in the  statement   of(       ),  namely
      that she is relieved because her  mother  could  resume  the  role  of
      supporting her emotionally and be  a  parent  again.  The  Adjudicator
      recognised that someone studying for 'A' levels is very much  in  need
      of  care  and  support.   There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that   the
      Adjudicator failed to appreciate such matters.  It is  said  that  the
      comment made by the Adjudicator to the effect  that  'the  appellant's
      younger daughter is not required to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
      there are no insurmountable obstacles to her returning  to  Sri  Lanka
      and contact between mother and daughter could still be maintained'  is
      in the event an error of law.  We  do  not  find  it  to  be  so.   We
      recognise that there is some merit in the submissions on behalf of the
      appellant that the phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' should not  be  a
      mantra to be recited.   Clearly  in  determining  proportionality  the
      whole nature of the relationship falls to be considered. As  the  case
      of SS 00126 makes clear, the fact of leave to remain simply means that
      the Secretary of State cannot give directions  for  removal  but  that
      does not prohibit the return.  Essentially the younger daughter  would
      have a choice upon the return of her mother. One would be to  stay  in
      the United Kingdom for the currency of her existing leave to  complete
      her studies. She would have the support of her elder sister which  she
      had before her mother came and the support of her wider family in  the
      United Kingdom including her aunt.  There is nothing to  suggest  that
      her  mother  could  not  maintain  contact  with  her  when  returned.
      Alternatively, she could return with her mother to study in Sri Lanka.
       It is suggested that the tsunami has divested the  infrastructure  of
      Sri Lanka such that a return would be inappropriate or  unduly  harsh.
      We do not find that argument to be made out. It is  clear  that  there
      has been widespread devastation of the coastal region  but  there  was
      nothing to indicate that the infrastructure in  Colombo  is  otherwise
      than functioning.    In any event, there are relatives  in  Jaffna  to
      whom the  appellant  and  her  daughter  could  return.  There  is  no
      indication before us that those relatives have suffered adversely as a
      result of the tsunami in any event.

58.   We detect an effort  by  Miss  Dubinsky,  as  it  were,  to  introduce
      considerations of asylum by  the  side  door.  She  submits  that  the
      experiences of the appellant in Sri Lanka would  be  such  that  there
      would be a continuing interest in her by the authorities and that  her
      failure to register in  Colombo  would  be  a  matter  acting  to  her
      detriment. The Adjudicator has determined the matter as to the  safety
      of return and such was not the subject of permission to appeal in  any
      event.

59.   We find that the Adjudicator has borne in  mind  the  balance  of  the
      family unit in her consideration of proportionality.  She was right to
       focus upon the appellant in particular. We  bear in mind the  way  in
      which proportionality should be approached, particularly in the  light
      of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2005] EWCA Civ  105.   We  do  not
      find that this case is an exceptional one in all the circumstances. We
      do not find that there is any evidence to suggest that being separated
      from one or both of her children will result in the nature of the harm
      or  hurt as envisaged in CA  or in any way to make removal exceptional
      or disproportionate.

60.   We do not find that the Adjudicator  has made any  material  error  of
      law in her assessment of the case.


61.   In the circumstances therefore the appeal is dismissed.


                                P.D. KING TD
                               VICE PRESIDENT
                               23rd March 2005
Approved for electronic distribution as a reported decision
-----------------------
      18


