
WD (Article 3 - not undue harshness ) Iraq [2005] UKIAT 00034
                                                                         | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  12 January 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                    ..4 February 2005.......

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Ms C Jarvis (Vice President)
                                Mr P S Aujla

Between:




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     And


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Ramachandran, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Norris, instructed by Hackman Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination
     of an Adjudicator, Miss Moira Dawson, promulgated on 1 March 2004.

  2. The Claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 September  2003,  and
     claimed asylum the day after.  His claim was that he was a  Kurd  from
     Northern Iraq, born on 1 July 1986, which meant that he was  seventeen
     when he arrived.

  3. The basis of his claim  was  that  he  had  left  after  he  had  been
     threatened by the father of his girlfriend.  In  early  2003,  he  had
     asked the father's permission on two occasions to marry his  daughter,
     but had been refused.  Subsequently, the daughter lost  her  virginity
     to him.  The father found out and killed her.  He  then  came  to  the
     Claimant's family house with security forces and the police to  arrest
     him.  The Claimant was not there and was told of  the  father's  anger
     and that the father was looking to kill the Claimant.  The father  was
     said to be a man from a large and powerful tribe in Iraq, and a member
     of the Islamic Movement  Party.   The  Claimant  was  advised  by  his
     brother-in-law to leave and was  assisted  by  other  members  of  his
     family to do so.  He travelled and arrived unaccompanied.

  4. The Secretary of State rejected the asylum claim, taking the view that
     the Claimant would be able to receive  protection  in  the  KAZ  area,
     because the law there had changed  to  make  honour  killing  illegal.
     Both the KDP and the PUK were seeking to  address  this  problem,  and
     punishments for honour killings were much more severe.  The PUK or KDP
     authorities  would  be  able  to  protect  the   Claimant   from   the
     girlfriend's father as they do in relation to militant Islamic  groups
     generally.  In any event, it was considered that  it  was  not  unduly
     harsh for failed asylum seekers to return to KAZ  or  its  surrounding
     areas even if they had no connection with KAZ.  The option of internal
     flight was available as there were areas of KAZ as well as other parts
     of Iraq outside of the KAZ where he did not have a  well-founded  fear
     of persecution.  The Secretary of State also took the  view  that  the
     Claimant was rather older than he claimed.

  5. There was no Home Office Presenting Officer  present  at  the  hearing
     before the Adjudicator.  She found that the Appellant's  evidence  was
     credible and consistent having considered  background  information  in
     relation to honour killings  in  the  KAZ  and  more  generally.   She
     rejected the Secretary of State's contention as to age and found  that
     the Claimant had been born in July 1986 as he said.   The  Adjudicator
     then pointed out  that  the  refusal  of  asylum  had  been  based  on
     background information relating to the changes in 2002 to the  law  on
     honour killings, and continued:

           "38.  Although I accept that  the  background  information  does
                 refer to the changes in the law and changes in punishment I
                 do not agree that this necessarily  reflects  a  change  of
                 attitude at grass roots where the influence of  tribal  and
                 religious  law  persists.   I  am  also  aware   from   the
                 background evidence that since the war there  has  been  an
                 increase in such killings and an ever  increasing  presence
                 of the Islamic Movement."

  6. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant had not established  a  well-
     founded fear of persecution  for  a  conventional  reason.   She  then
     turned to the question of whether there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
     protection  for  the  Claimant  on  return.   She  appeared  to   have
     considered this for the purposes of the Article  3  ECHR  claim.   She
     said:

           "40.  I now address the  issue  of  whether  there  would  be  a
                 sufficiency of protection for the Appellant on  return.   I
                 am  aware  from  the  Appellant's  evidence  which  I  have
                 accepted as credible  and  which  the  Respondent  has  not
                 questioned that although it was known that Dilman's  father
                 had killed his daughter the security forces and the  police
                 accompanied him to the Appellant's home to arrest  him.   I
                 find that this is at odds with Respondent's  assessment  of
                 the background information and  I  do  not  find  that  the
                 Appellant could rely on the authorities for protection."

  7. In paragraph 41, the Adjudicator said that in the light  of  that  and
     the background information, she concluded that if  the  Claimant  were
     returned to KAZ there was a real risk that that would breach Article 3
     ECHR.

  8. In the next paragraph, and this was a contentious  paragraph  on  this
     appeal, she said:

           "42.  I have found  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  age
                 credible.  He is a minor and accordingly  I  find  that  it
                 would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant  to  re-locate  to
                 another part of Iraq where he has no support."

  9. Finally, in paragraph 44 she  concluded  that  if  the  Claimant  were
     "returned to Iraq (KAZ)", it would breach his rights under  Article  3
     ECHR.

 10. The Secretary of State advanced two grounds for his appeal.  The first
     related to paragraph  42  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination.   The
     question of whether relocation would be unduly harsh was not  a  point
     which arose, at least as such, in considering whether Article  3  ECHR
     would be breached by the return of the Claimant to Iraq.  That was  an
     issue peculiarly related to the Refugee Convention.  It followed  that
     the Adjudicator had failed to apply the necessary  high  threshold  of
     Article 3 to her consideration of the return of the Claimant  to  Iraq
     outside of the KAZ.  Miss Ramachandran  supported  her  submission  by
     reference to passages from the Tribunal decision in  AL  (Afghanistan)
     [2003] UKIAT 00076.  She  pointed  out  that  returns  took  place  to
     Baghdad and not to the KAZ, and that the removal  directions  in  this
     case had referred to Iraq and not to the KAZ.

 11. Her second submission was that the Adjudicator had failed to  consider
     whether the risk to the Claimant was localised to the KAA, and so  did
     not exist throughout Iraq, or  indeed  whether  it  was  localised  to
     certain areas within the KAZ where the Islamic  Movement  Party  might
     have influence.  It was said that  the  Adjudicator  had  ignored  the
     material related to the  localised  nature  of  the  Islamic  Movement
     Party.

 12. Finally, she submitted that if she was correct in submitting that  the
     Adjudicator had made a material error of law it was relevant  for  the
     Tribunal, in considering how to  dispose  of  the  case,  to  consider
     material from the October 2004 CIPU Report on Iraq  which  dealt  with
     honour killings and the position of the party which she submitted  was
     being referred to, namely the  Islamic  Movement  of  Iraqi  Kurdistan
     (IMIK).

 13. The material on honour killings in that Report appears to be the  same
     as that summarised by the Adjudicator in paragraphs 28 and 29  of  her
     determination drawn from the Home Office Bulletin 8/2003  of  December
     2003.  This referred to the fact that, notwithstanding the  change  in
     law in the KAZ saying that males could be prosecuted  for  the  honour
     killings of female  family  members,  such  killings  still  occurred.
     Indeed, the number of honour killings had increased rapidly since  the
     war, particularly in rural Shiite dominated areas.   Dozens  of  young
     women had been killed by male relatives  and  women  might  be  killed
     because they had lost their virginity before marriage.  Such  killings
     were treated leniently within the Iraqi judicial system.  There was  a
     reference to a couple who fled to the KAZ after  eloping  three  years
     before, and were in fear of their lives  because  of  the  freedom  of
     travel between the KAZ or  Kurdish  Regional  Government  administered
     area, and the rest of Iraq.  They  had  moved  back  to  the  relative
     anonymity of Baghdad, where despite the protection of a women's group,
     they had to change address regularly.

 14. The CIPU Report pointed out that Northern Iraq had  particularly  high
     levels of honour killings, compared with the Middle East as  a  whole.
     The change in law  had  caused  a  dramatic  drop,  but  the  law  was
     difficult to enforce and, although perhaps  fewer  than  claimed,  the
     killings continued to occur.  It was perfectly clear that by  far  the
     largest number of victims of such killings were women.

 15. The evidence from the CIPU about political parties in Iraq showed that
     IMIK had at times had alliances with the KDP and had been involved  in
     clashes with the PUK.  It was described as having very  local  support
     in the north of Iraq, in five areas.  It no longer rules  in  Halabja.
     It now was thought to have normal relations with the PUK, and to  want
     to merge with the Iraqi Islamic Party but it  was  not  known  whether
     anything had happened to that  end.   IMIK  was  the  party  which  Ms
     Ramachandran submitted the murderous father had belonged to.   It  did
     not have connections throughout Iraq.  It was based in the  KAZ  where
     it had limited reach.  There was no evidence of an Iraq  wide  Islamic
     party which had roots in KAZ.   Two  splinter  groups  had  left  IMIK
     ultimately to form Ansar  al-Aslam,  a  radical  terrorist  group.   A
     further splinter group had formed the Islamic group of Kurdistan which
     had become closer to Ansar al-Aslam.

 16. The material before the Adjudicator was not so explicit  as  the  CIPU
     Report about the parties.  But it did not identify any party which had
     connections with the Kurdish areas and which also had a wider reach in
     Iraq.  Those Islamic parties referred to were the small  splinter  and
     extreme groups based in the KAZ.

 17. Mr Norris submitted for the Claimant that the Adjudicator had made  an
     error in the way in which she dealt with undue harshness on return but
     that it was not the one alleged by the Secretary of  State.   She  did
     not need to deal with that issue because  on  her  findings  of  fact,
     including her acceptance of the Claimant's  credibility,  he  faced  a
     risk of treatment which breached Article 3 wherever he  was  in  Iraq.
     She must be taken to have accepted  his  claim  that  the  father  had
     contacted all the different departments of the party in  Iraq  on  the
     very day when he killed his daughter, leaving the Claimant  no  hiding
     place in Iraq.  The evidence before the  Adjudicator  dealt  with  the
     increasing influence throughout Iraq which tribal  leaders  had  after
     the fall of Saddam and the growing enforcement of strict Islamic ways.
      The CIPU material also showed honour killings throughout Iraq.

 18. We accept that  the  determination  should  be  read  in  the  way  Ms
     Ramachandran said that it should be.  It seems to us  clear  that  the
     Adjudicator would have had  no  other  need  to  deal  separately,  in
     paragraph 41, with the breach of Article 3 which  return  to  the  KAZ
     would entail, and in paragraph 42 with undue  harshness  elsewhere  in
     Iraq if she was of the view that Article 3, or at least that same risk
     which applied in  KAZ,  applied  throughout  Iraq.   She  has  clearly
     applied that Refugee Convention concept to the rest of Iraq.  This  is
     also consistent with the reference to Article 3 in paragraph 44  where
     she refers to return to Iraq (KAZ).

 19. She has adopted that structure to her  determination  because  she  is
     dealing with and  in  sequence  rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State's
     arguments from his decision letter.  He dealt first with return to the
     part of the  KAZ  whence  the  Claimant  came,  and  then  with  undue
     harshness elsewhere, including the rest of Iraq.

 20. True it is that the background evidence in part relates to  the  whole
     of Iraq, but the bulk of  it  concerns  the  north.   Her  conclusion,
     however, was that the growth of tribal and religious  power  generally
     countered the Secretary of State's claim that the change in the law in
     KAZ provided effective state protection for the  Claimant  there.   Mr
     Norris puts too much  weight  on  the  acceptance  of  the  Claimant's
     credibility.  Clearly  that  covers  the  essential  features  of  the
     evidence which he gave about his age, his relationship, the murder and
     the threat to him by the father.  We think that it goes  somewhat  too
     far to say that it means that everything which he  said  is  therefore
     accepted as both accurate and reliable.  After all, the  point  relied
     on is a response point in a statement which  also  deals  with  honour
     killings more generally in KAZ  and  appears  to  draw  a  distinction
     between KAZ and the rest of Iraq, suggesting that he would  be  better
     of in KAZ than the Adjudicator accepted.  Likewise what he says  about
     what his would-be killer told his party officials  elsewhere  in  Iraq
     can only be hearsay, and not from the father on his evidence,  and  is
     unsourced.  Its effect also depends upon the knowledge of the reach of
     the party in question about which the Adjudicator makes  no  findings.
     It would appear to us that if that is a matter which  the  Adjudicator
     thought had been proven, she would not have differentiated as she  did
     between the various parts of Iraq for the purposes of Article 3.

 21. Indeed, if Mr Norris' argument were to be accepted, it would create  a
     further problem for him in that the Adjudicator's reasoning would then
     be flawed for other reasons.  There  would  have  been  no  evidential
     basis and no findings about the extensive reach throughout Iraq  which
     the father or his party would have had to have.  The tribal power as a
     counter to the effect of the law would not have been relevant  in  the
     absence of  the  threat  from  the  father  being  capable  of  effect
     generally in Iraq.

 22. Mr Norris did not contend that on that reading  of  the  determination
     there was no error of law.  Clearly there has been one.  The Court  of
     Appeal in AE and FE v SSHD [2003] EWC Civ 1032, paragraph 64, makes it
     clear that the concept of the undue harshness of  internal  relocation
     is an asylum related concept which should not  be  used  to  bring  in
     general humanitarian considerations.  The Tribunal in AL  (Article  3-
     Kabul) Afghanistan XG [2003] UKIAT 00076, at paragraph 14, says:


           "To put it another way, when one  is  considering  the  specific
           action of the UK Government being challenged by an applicant  as
           being in breach  of  Article  3  (usually  in  our  jurisdiction
           removal to his own  country)  we  may  only  take  into  account
           matters which relate to that decision, and which individually or
           in aggregate are of sufficient severity  to  engage  Article  3,
           (and also Article 2 which is also an  absolute  obligation  that
           may for practical purposes be  subsumed  within  this).  Matters
           that  do  not  constitute  "torture  or  inhuman  or   degrading
           treatment  or   punishment"   as   defined   in   human   rights
           jurisprudence are not material. The Robinson  derived  tests  of
           reasonableness and undue harshness are part of the assessment of
           refugee  status.   They   are   inappropriate   to   Article   3
           consideration, which should be assessed on the basis of  whether
           there is a real risk that the  decision  or  action  of  the  UK
           government complained about, would result in  a  breach  of  the
           terms of that Article."



 23. We agree with that.  What is unduly harsh may or  may  not  show  that
     there would be a breach of Article 3.  For the purposes of Article  3,
     the language of Article 3 should be deployed.  The question is whether
     the circumstances as a whole show that there  is  a  real  risk  of  a
     breach of Article 3.  Whether the  country  to  which  the  individual
     would be returned has areas where Article 3 would not be  breached  is
     material, if they can be accessed without a breach of Article  3.   It
     would be a difficult case to make out that although one's rights under
     Article 3 would not be breached in a particular place, return  to  the
     country in question would nevertheless constitute a breach of  Article
     3, because circumstances in that place are such  that  the  individual
     would be impelled to go to that part of the country  where  Article  3
     would be breached.

 24. The second submission is  that  the  Adjudicator  has  not  considered
     whether the threat is localised to the KAZ or to parts of the KAZ.  We
     think that the Adjudicator in dealing with the two parts of Iraq,  KAZ
     and non KAZ, differently must be taken to have  concluded  that  there
     would be no breach of Article 3 in those other parts at least  arising
     out of the father's threat.  On the other hand  it  appears  that  she
     accepted that it applied generally in KAZ.  It may  be  debatable  how
     much material she really had to support such a conclusion but the Home
     Office provided no submissions and we do not conclude that we can  say
     that she was not entitled on the albeit somewhat  sparse  material  to
     conclude on that as she did.

 25. However, there has been a material error of  law.   The  determination
     cannot stand.  We can examine the new material in order to see what we
     should now do about the appeal.  The additional  material  shows  that
     IMIK would not have the wide reach even in the  KAZ  which  must  have
     been assumed and no other party to which the Claimant could have  been
     referring is near that reach.   It  also  suggests  that  this  threat
     should be seen as a threat of a simple revenge  killing,  rather  than
     one in which tribal powers would feel that the woman had to be  sought
     out and killed to avenge family honour; she has already  been  killed.
     Nonetheless, even if the threat was only effective in those  parts  of
     Iraq, KAZ or not, where  the  Claimant  and  his  parents  lived,  the
     implications for someone of  his  age,  living  away  from  his  home,
     unsupported, in Iraq would need to be considered.  We do not see it as
     likely that Article 3 would be breached but this  is  an  issue  which
     would need to be considered.  This is, of course,  a  different  basis
     for the engagement of Article 3 from the  threat  posed.   We  do  not
     consider that it can be taken as resolved  or  bound  to  be  resolved
     against the Claimant merely because of the reference to the  different
     question of undue harshness.  There may be other factors which  engage
     Article 3 and in view  of  the  uncertainty  over  that  part  of  the
     determination we remit the case to  another  Adjudicator  rather  than
     decide ourselves whether they do.  We have indicated the  reasons  for
     the remittal but we are not  exercising  any  power  to  restrict  its
     scope.

 26. The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  case  is  remitted  for
     determination to a fresh Adjudicator.  It  is  reported  to  note  our
     endorsement of what the Tribunal said in AL.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
