

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00948/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 13 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     B H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms D. Revill, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co.
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent refused the appellant's original protection claim in  a
    decision dated 31 January 2013. His appeal was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baldwin in a decision promulgated on 25 April 2013.  The
    First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and remade by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall in a decision  dated  17
    January 2014. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall dismissed the protection
    claim but found that  the  appellant  was  a  minor.  Pursuant  to  the
    respondent's policy on  unaccompanied  minors  contained  in  paragraph
    352ZC of the immigration rules the appellant was subsequently granted a
    period of Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR) until 29 July 2014.

2.    On 20 May 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain.  The
    respondent refused the application in  a  decision  dated  22  December
    2014. It appears that there were delays in  the  appeal  following  the
    appellant's conviction for  a  criminal  offence  and  then  subsequent
    acquittal on appeal. Further delays occurred in order to obtain medical
    evidence.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell dismissed the appeal in a  decision
    promulgated on 23 May 2017. He set out the background to the  case  and
    the content of the evidence in some detail in the decision [1-46].  The
    relevant parts of the judge's conclusions are as follows:

       "58. I have set out above  details  of  the  evidence  given  by  the
                 Appellant's cousin, [F  H].  Significant  cross-examination
                 was posed to him. I note that he has found himself able  to
                 return to Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan. He stated that
                 it was to visit an  aunt,  but  the  reality  is  that  the
                 witness clearly judged that he would be able to  return  to
                 Kabul on those three occasions.
       59.  The witness gave evidence concerning  the  obtaining  of  stated
                 documents, to which I am urged to give  weight,  consequent
                 upon which I am then urged to accept that a different  view
                 of the account of the Appellant  should  be  accepted.  The
                 witness  was  specifically  asked   questions   about   the
                 production of the documents, which appear in copy form  and
                 with translations in the Appellant's supplementary  bundle.
                 I am guided by the decision in Tanveer Ahmed in relation to
                 a consideration of the documents, as also presented  to  me
                 at the hearing. Ms Parr asked a number of questions of  the
                 witness,  particularly  relating  to  the  timing  of   the
                 production of the documents and to the involvement  of  the
                 witness in seemingly obtaining the same. Having  considered
                 the documents and the evidence of [F H] I am not  persuaded
                 that weight should be given to  the  documents.  I  do  not
                 believe that he gave a credible account  and  I  note  also
                 that he had given evidence before Judge Hall in  the  Upper
                 Tribunal.
       60.  Considering the evidence in the round in relation to the  asylum
                 grounds, together with the relevant documentation,  I  find
                 that the views concluded by Judge Hall must stand. I do not
                 find that the  Appellant  has  established  that  he  comes
                 within the terms of the Geneva Convention. If for  whatever
                 reason he wishes to relocate on return, I would not find it
                 to be unduly harsh, taking all circumstances into  account,
                 if the Appellant sought to reside in  Kabul  which  is  the
                 capital city where  the  aunt  of  the  Appellant's  cousin
                 resides.
       61.  With respect to the claim that the Appellant would face  a  risk
                 to his Article 3 ECHR rights  on  return  due  to  suicidal
                 tendencies, I am of courses guided by the Court  of  Appeal
                 judgment in J (above). Ms Parr was of  the  view  that  the
                 relevant consideration was whether the Appellant would face
                 a heightened risk of suicide on return. I have  taken  into
                 account all medical correspondence which has been provided,
                 including that which relates to  the  consequences  of  the
                 accident on 20 November 2016 in  which  the  Appellant  was
                 clearly the victim. In relation to medical issues generally
                 the threshold is high in relation to establishing Article 3
                 ECHR   entitlement   to   leave   (N   [2005]   UKHL   31).
                 Notwithstanding the detail within the documentation  before
                 me I am not persuaded that the risk to the Appellant  would
                 be heightened on return to Afghanistan. Further, I  am  not
                 persuaded that, in any event,  the  degree  of  risk  would
                 reach the threshold for the engagement of Article 3 ECHR in
                 relation to suicidal tendencies.
       .....
       62.  With respect to paragraph 276ADE(1) it is  maintained  that  the
                 Appellant would face very significant obstacles on  return.
                 Reference is made to the judgement of the Court  of  Appeal
                 in Kamara (above). The Appellant is a vulnerable individual
                 and that is relevant to  the  assessment.  In  that  regard
                 whilst  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  is  a   vulnerable
                 individual  I  do  not  find  that  there  would  be   very
                 significant obstacles as to his integration on return.  The
                 Appellant had lived all his life in Afghanistan  before  he
                 left the country and  ultimately  made  his  way  into  the
                 United Kingdom. Although he would face challenges on return
                 I do not find that such challenges  would  constitute  very
                 significant  obstacles.  In   relation   to   his   medical
                 condition, particularly his mental health,  a  Home  Office
                 response has been received, dated 6 April 2017, which  sets
                 out certain  information  confirming  the  availability  of
                 facilities in Kabul. As I have indicated above I find  that
                 if the Appellant  on  return  does  not  wish  to  live  in
                 Nangarhar Province then he would be  able  to  relocate  to
                 Kabul. The relevant medical facilities  are  stated  to  be
                 within the capital city.
       .....
       66.  It is important in undertaking  the  proportionality  assessment
                 that all aspects of the evidence are taken into account. In
                 that regard I  refer  to  the  various  reports  and  views
                 expressed in relation to the Appellant. Quite  clearly  the
                 accident which occurred on 20 November  2016  is  a  matter
                 which  is  dealt   with   in   some   detail   within   the
                 correspondence before me. That of course had an  effect  of
                 the Appellant and his cousin's evidence was that there were
                 significant consequences for  the  Appellant.  I  note,  as
                 evidenced by the Letter from Lambeth College (at  page  321
                 of the Appellant's main  bundle  of  documents),  that  the
                 Appellant was congratulated  on  his  good  attendance  and
                 quality of work. The letter is  dated  as  recently  as  10
                 April 2017 and indicates that the appellant remains able to
                 undertake studies.  Indeed,  notwithstanding  the  accident
                 which the Appellant suffered, he has  had  the  benefit  of
                 education in this country.  I  find  that  that  will  have
                 assisted the Appellant in terms of his ability to return to
                 Afghanistan, where he  may  be  in  a  position  to  pursue
                 further  studies  within  his  home  country.  Despite  the
                 challenges which the Appellant has faced, he has been  able
                 to pursue his education.
       67.  I appreciated that Freedom from Torture have expressed  concerns
                 as to the ability of the Appellant to cope in  Afghanistan.
                 In this country has had support and  assistance,  including
                 from his local authority,  Croydon  LBC.  Nevertheless  the
                 fact that the Appellant may receive greater  assistance  in
                 this  country  than  might  be  the  case  on   return   to
                 Afghanistan is not a factor  which  significantly  advances
                 the Appellant's position with respect  to  proportionality.
                 Taking all factors into account I  find  that  the  balance
                 favours the respondent's contention  with  respect  to  the
                 strong weight  which  should  be  accorded  to  immigration
                 control  and  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   such
                 procedures."


4.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

       i)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
          assessment of the six-stage test outlined in the case of J v SSHD
          [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and failed to give  reasons  to  explain  his
          finding that removal would not amount to a breach of Article 3.
      ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to make findings on evidence  that
          was  material  to  a  proper  assessment   of   the   appellant's
          vulnerability on  return  for  the  purpose  of  a  human  rights
          assessment under Article 8.

5.    The respondent argues that the judge directed  himself  appropriately.
    The claimed catalyst for the appellant's  mental  health  problems  was
    rejected and there could be no causal  link  between  removal  and  the
    inhumane treatment the appellant alleged would happen  on  return.  The
    appellant has family members in Kabul who would be able to assist  him.
    The judge gave sufficient reasons to justify the decision.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal, the  written  response,
    the oral submissions and the documentary evidence I am  satisfied  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of  an  error  of
    law.

7.    It is trite law that a Tribunal  must  give  reasons  to  explain  the
    findings that are made.  A  bare  statement  that  a  witness  was  not
    believed or that a document  is  afforded  no  weight  is  unlikely  to
    satisfy the requirement to give reasons: see MK (Duty to give  reasons)
    [2013] UKUT 641.

8.    It seems  clear  that  the  judge  took  some  time  to  set  out  the
    background to the case and the evidence that was before  the  Tribunal,
    including the oral evidence and the submissions made  at  the  hearing.
    Whilst the evidence was set out in the  decision,  the  fact  that  the
    judge considered it is not  in  itself  sufficient  reason  to  justify
    conclusions if they are not supported by reasons. In this case a series
    of medical evidence over a period of time showed that the appellant was
    diagnosed with PTSD,  had  reported  suicidal  ideation  and  had  made
    attempts, albeit reported to be fairly superficial,  to  harm  himself.
    Nothing in the judge's summary  of  the  evidence  [15-16]  or  in  his
    statement that he had considered Dr Hall's report [52]  indicates  that
    any findings were made, at that stage, as  to  what  weight  should  be
    placed on the evidence.  The  only  place  in  which  the  judge  makes
    findings in relation to suicide risk is at [61] of the decision. As can
    be seen from the findings  outlined  above,  it  is  apparent  that  no
    assessment was made of the evidence, no findings were made as  to  what
    weight should be placed on the evidence. Although  the  judge  directed
    himself to the correct case law there is no assessment of the  evidence
    within the context of the six-step test outlined by the Court of Appeal
    in J v SSHD. The findings in [61] amount to a bare  conclusion  and  do
    not satisfy the duty to give adequate reasons to explain the decision.

9.    I have considered whether this  error  is  likely  to  have  made  any
    material difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  Amongst  other
    evidence relating to the  appellant's  vulnerability,  a  psychological
    report by Dr Jane Anderson dated 09 March 2015  noted  that  there  was
    likely to be an higher risk of  suicide  if  he  experienced  increased
    hopelessness about his situation or if his appeal was dismissed and  he
    was subject to a 'deportation order'[pg.199 AB]. Although I  note  that
    more recent evidence from Dr Jennifer Hall (Freedom from Torture) dated
    14 December 2016 indicated that the appellant reported  fewer  suicidal
    thoughts this seemed to be as a result of the support provided  by  the
    organisation, which had  given  him  "hope  for  future  and  recovery"
    [pg.240 AB]. Although there  was  no  up  to  date  assessment  from  a
    suitably qualified psychiatrist or  psychologist  specifically  dealing
    with the risk of suicide if the appellant were faced with the  prospect
    of removal to Afghanistan, the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  at
    least capable of engaging with the issues outlined in  J  v  SSHD.  The
    reduction in suicidal ideation noted in December 2016 was  said  to  be
    because the appellant felt supported and was  beginning  to  have  some
    hopes for the future. The prospect of removal would  increase  feelings
    of hopelessness, which Dr Anderson noted might  increase  the  risk  of
    suicide. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the error was  material
    to a proper determination of the appeal.

10.    Similarly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  relating  to   the
    appellant's vulnerability and  the  proportionality  of  removal  under
    Article 8 fail to  engage  adequately  with  the  evidence.  The  judge
    recorded the evidence given by  Stefania  Tomasini  of  The  Children's
    Society [30-32 & 52]  but  made  no  findings  on  the  detail  of  the
    evidence. In assessing whether the appellant has, in fact, been able to
    continue his education in any meaningful way  after  the  accident  the
    judge failed to take into account other evidence from  his  tutor.  The
    letter is undated but clearly post-dates the accident. His  tutor  said
    that they were allowing him to attend the course so that he  could  mix
    with his  peers,  but  they  were  in  the  process  of  deferring  his
    qualification because  he  was  not  currently  able  to  complete  the
    assessment because of his brain injury. I conclude  that  the  lack  of
    reasoning and engagement with the evidence produced in support  of  the
    claim amounts to an error of law and that  the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

11.   Although the point is not particularised in  the  appellant's  grounds
    of appeal I note that the same error also occurred in relation  to  the
    judge's findings relating to the protection claim  [59].  Nothing  more
    than a bare statement is made about the  credibility  of  the  evidence
    given by the appellant's cousin and no reasons are given for  rejecting
    the  evidence  he  produced  from  Afghanistan,  which  post-dated  the
    findings made by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall.  Bare  reference  to
    Tanveer Ahmed (which in any event is not authority to say that evidence
    should not be given  weight  simply  because  false  documents  can  be
    obtained in a particular country) is insufficient reason to reject  the
    evidence. It was incumbent on the judge to assess the  content  of  the
    evidence, which on the face of it was material to a  proper  assessment
    of the appellant's claim that his brother was killed by the Taliban.

12.   No assessment is made of the fact that  the  appellant  was  diagnosed
    with PTSD after Judge Hall's decision and whether this might impact  on
    the overall credibility of the appellant's claim. No assessment is made
    of the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan since  the  last
    decision as noted by the Court of Appeal in R (HN & SA) (Afghanistan) v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 123. Even if the judge concluded  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to depart from the earlier  credibility  findings
    about past events, there was no assessment of whether the appellant was
    likely to be at risk in his home area of Nangahar province  given  that
    it is an area of high insurgent activity. The decision  fell  short  of
    giving anxious scrutiny to the protection claim.

13.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
    decision is set aside. Although the case has been heard in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on a previous occasion both parties  considered  that  it
    was appropriate to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
    hearing. It would no doubt assist the Tribunal if there was up to  date
    expert psychiatric evidence specifically dealing with the likely impact
    of removal on the appellant's mental health.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 24 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








