
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00340/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                     s p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  13th  March  1989.   The
    Appellant's immigration history is set out in the decision letter.   On
    10th February 2016 the Secretary of State refused to grant  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection to the Appellant.  The  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was based upon a fear that if returned to Albania she would face
    mistreatment as a victim of trafficking in Kosovo and  therefore  as  a
    member of a particular  social  group,  namely  trafficked  women  from
    Albania would be at risk.  The Appellant appealed the decision and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Moran  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 2nd August 2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated
    on 17th August 2016 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum  and
    human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not to be in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 9th September 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
    refused permission to appeal.

 2. Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 21st September 2016.  On  14th
    October 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted permission  to  appeal.
    Those grounds are of importance.  Judge  Reeds  noted  that  the  judge
    accepted the core of the Appellant's account that she was a  victim  of
    human trafficking and how that had occurred.  Whilst the  judge  sought
    to apply the principles of TD and AD (trafficked women) CG [2016]  UKUT
    00092 when considering return, it was arguable as the grounds contended
    at paragraphs 5 to 11 that in the light of the  Appellant's  particular
    vulnerabilities, and the findings made, that when taken  together  they
    placed her within the category of those who may  be  unable  to  return
    without undue hardship including her circumstances  after  leaving  any
    state-run shelters.

 3. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24
    on 16th November 2016.  It is on  that  basis  that  the  appeal  comes
    before me firstly to determine whether or not there is a material error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel, Mr Bonavero.  The Respondent appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 4. Mr Bramble adopts a most helpful and pragmatic approach to this appeal.
     He indicates that the starting point is the Rule 24 response and  that
    the judge has reviewed the evidence and consequently the finding is one
    of disagreement and not of an error.  He submits that it is  considered
    by the Secretary of State that perhaps the judge having looked  at  the
    Appellant's mental health has just about done enough and  that  he  has
    gone on to look at the risk factors that could apply to the  Appellant.
    However, although he adopts this approach so  far  as  the  Appellant's
    mental health is concerned he acknowledges that the  judge  appears  to
    have  ignored  and  taken  an  improper  approach  to   that   of   the
    consideration of the issues relating to  her  illegitimate  child.   He
    notes that it is necessary to look at the risk factors in TD and AD set
    out at paragraph 12 of the judge's decision.  He wonders why  some  are
    highlighted in bold print and others not.  He is  prepared  to  concede
    that at paragraph 27 there is a material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision if only on the basis that  she  has  failed  to  consider  the
    situation regarding the illegitimate child.  However he notes  that  at
    paragraph 24 it is also necessary to consider the protection the  state
    may be to offer but he  accepts  and  concede  that  the  finding  made
    therein is mere speculation and that the judge has failed  to  consider
    the position of a lone female and her circumstances and how  she  would
    cope on return to Albania.

 5. Mr Bonavero is most grateful, in his opening address, to the  pragmatic
    approach of Mr Bramble  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   He
    effectively endorses all Mr Bramble has to  say.   He  notes  the  risk
    factors that have to be considered in TD as set out at paragraph 22 and
    that the judge has noted that each one applies  to  the  Appellant  and
    then having made such a finding the judge has failed to go on  to  find
    that the Appellant needs protection.  The only reason that he considers
    that the judge has given is to be found at paragraph 25  and  that  the
    judge has not been looking  at  the  basic  principle  of  the  country
    guidance case but of the specific facts of that case and that in itself
    is a flawed approach.  He asked me to find that there  is  not  only  a
    material error of law but to remake the decision forthwith allowing the
    appeal.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 8. Mr Bramble has considerably assisted me in this matter.  I  start  with
    the second aspect, namely the requirement to give due consideration  to
    the position that the Appellant would find herself in on returning with
    an illegitimate child.  The judge has very  helpfully  highlighted  the
    whole of the head  note  of  the  authority  at  paragraph  12  of  her
    decision.  What however Judge Moran has not done is  to  highlight  the
    paragraph relating to  the  position  that  the  Appellant  would  find
    herself in as being a returned trafficked woman  with  an  illegitimate
    child.  It is noted in the head  note  that  whilst  much  of  Albanian
    society is governed by a strict code of honour that the Appellant might
    have difficulty in re-integrating into  her  home  area  and  could  be
    forced to abandon the child.  The head note  at  paragraph  (h)  of  TD
    again is not highlighted and so far as the presence of an  illegitimate
    child is concerned, in fact the judge fails to acknowledge the position
    of the illegitimate child as is shown clearly at paragraph 27.  In such
    instances there has to be a material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 9. I turn briefly to the approach adopted by the judge with regard to  the
    Appellant's mental health.  Whilst that is highlighted in the  darkened
    paragraphs of the head note from paragraph 12, particularly so  far  as
    what support networks are available, it  is  arguable  and  sustainable
    that the judge has failed to give due and proper consideration  to  the
    positions regarding the Appellant's mental health and whilst  accepting
    that paragraph 22 refers to this and noting that the Appellant does not
    have the severity of mental health problems as either the Appellants in
    TD, the only basis upon which the judge has come to the  findings  that
    she has done are to be found at paragraph 24 where the judge  erred  in
    finding that identical facilities could be available to  the  Appellant
    to those that were found in TD.

10. Further I agree with the submission made by Mr Bonavero that  what  the
    judge has failed to do is to apply TD on the facts of this case and has
    very much equated the Appellant as if she were in the position  of  the
    Appellant in the country guidance case and  that  is  an  inappropriate
    approach to adopt.  For such reasons I find  that  there  are  material
    errors of law particularly with regard  to  the  consideration  of  the
    illegitimate child and I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

Re-making of the Decision

11. Both Mr Bramble and Mr Bonavero urged me to go on having  reached  such
    conclusion to address the issue today rather than to go back and  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.  That I  agree  is  the  correct
    approach.  The Appellant is of fragile mental health albeit  that  this
    consideration is  set  out  within  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision,
    particularly at paragraph 22(3).  That has to be  looked  at  alongside
    the position that she would be returned as a person with, as the  judge
    has already found, "a mental  health  problem  worthy  of  recognition"
    along with an illegitimate child.  When all those issues are considered
    alongside the helpful guidance given as to the principles to be applied
    in country guidance cases set out in AM and BM I am satisfied that this
    is an Appellant who for all those reasons  falls  fairly  and  squarely
    within the head note as being an Appellant who  would  be  at  risk  on
    return  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  that  head  note.    In   such
    circumstances I re-make the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds and pursuant  to  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.



Decision

12. Having found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  I  set
    aside that decision and I re-make the decision allowing the Appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

13. The Appellant was granted anonymity by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    No application is made to vary that order and the Appellant's anonymity
    direction is maintained.

Fee Award

14. No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

