
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    N A-F
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo of Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  N
    G Bennett promulgated on 2 June 2015 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 21  November  2014  refusing
    leave to enter the United Kingdom following a refusal of an application
    for asylum.

2.   The Appellant was born on 2 April 1975.   She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 5 September 2013 and applied for asylum on arrival  claiming
    to be an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait.  Her application was  refused
    for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 21
    November 2014.  The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   Her  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett for reasons set  out  in
    his decision.

3.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid on  3  July  2015,  but  subsequently
    granted on renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on  21
    August 2015. Permission to appeal was  granted  in  particular  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had given no  indication  that
    he had taken account of  relevant  country  guidance  or  that  he  had
    considered such guidance in the context of the facts as found.

4.   It was  this  point,  which  was  identified  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    Appellant's grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, that Mr Adebayo today amplified as his first submission  before
    me.  In particular my attention was directed to  the  country  guidance
    case of NM (documented or undocumented Bidoon: risk) Kuwait  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00356 (IAC) and specifically to paragraph 3 of the head note which
    reads: "The evidence concerning the undocumented Bidoon does show  them
    to face a real risk of persecution or breach of their  protected  human
    rights."  Mr Adebayo did not seek to identify any other aspect of  this
    or any other country guidance case that it was suggested that the Judge
    had not taken into account.

5.   In considering this submission I take as a starting point the  RFRL  of
    the Respondent which at paragraph 19 makes reference to  other  country
    guidance cases predating the decision in NM but of  similar  substance,
    and then at paragraph 20 observes: "It is  accepted  that  undocumented
    stateless Bidoons are at risk of persecution in Kuwait."

6.   The principle relied upon in the Appellant's submissions on this  point
    - that undocumented Bidoon are at risk of persecution in Kuwait - was a
    matter of common ground on the basis of the RFRL.  So far as the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is concerned, I note that the Judge summarises  the
    RFRL at paragraph 4 and identifies halfway through that paragraph  that
    the Secretary of State "accepted that  undocumented  stateless  Bidoons
    were at real risk of persecution in Kuwait."   I  also  note  that  the
    Judge summarised the basis of the Appellant's claim at paragraph  3  in
    these terms: "The Appellant claimed political asylum on the basis  that
    she was an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait who had  been  arrested  and
    detained twice by the Kuwaiti authorities."

7.   The Judge in due course rejected  the  Appellant's  account  of  having
    been arrested and detained but nonetheless went on at paragraph  34  to
    say: "It does  not  follow  from  this  that  there  is  no  reasonable
    likelihood that she is an undocumented Bidoon", and then went  on  over
    the course of that paragraph and the following  paragraphs  to  address
    the issue of whether or not the Appellant was  an  undocumented  Bidoon
    notwithstanding the rejection of her claimed personal history  and  the
    events that she said had befallen her whilst in  Kuwait.

8.   In all those circumstances it seems to me  absolutely  clear  that  the
    Judge had at the centre of his considerations the  principle  that  the
    Appellant takes from the country guidance cases - that if the Appellant
    were able to establish that she was an undocumented Bidoon from  Kuwait
    she would make good her claim for international  surrogate  protection.
    The fact that the Judge has omitted to make express reference to any of
    the country guidance cases does not for a moment detract from the  very
    clear  recognition  and  understanding  that  that  was  a  potentially
    determinative issue in this appeal, and accordingly I find no error  of
    law by reason  of  the  mere  omission  in  making  reference  to  that
    principle of a particular case title.

9.   The Appellant's grounds of  appeal  otherwise  in  the  main  part  are
    peppered with such  phrases  as  'contrary  to  the  evidence',  'undue
    weight', 'an erroneous view of the evidence', and in  my  judgment  for
    the most part amount to a series  of  disagreements  with  the  factual
    assessment of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and an attempt  to  reargue
    the merits of the case.  Indeed I  repeatedly  invited  Mr  Adebayo  to
    identify specific errors of law rather than mere disagreements of fact,
    to no good avail.

10.  I do nonetheless accept that a factual error  has  been  identified  in
    the grounds of challenge.  At paragraph 6 of the grounds  of  challenge
    the Appellant criticises the Judge's observations at paragraph 29  with
    regard to whether or not she had spoken to  her  family  prior  to  her
    screening interview.  The Judge says at paragraph 29: "It  is  apparent
    that she had some discussion with her family in this country about what
    she would say when she got here  because  she  said  at  her  screening
    interview that her sister had told her not to give her details  to  the
    Immigration Officer."  It is clear,  and  indeed  Mr  Walker  does  not
    dispute, that in the screening interview the Appellant was referring in
    this context to the sister that was still in Kuwait, and therefore  the
    Appellant was not referring to a conversation with  family  members  in
    the United Kingdom.

11.  However, in the full scheme of this case it seems to  me  that  such  a
    factual error  is  not  material  to  the  overall  evaluation  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.   There  is  very  much  in  the  analysis  of
    credibility that is entirely independent  of  this  narrow  point,  and
    which in my judgment carry sufficient weight to be determinative of the
    issue  of  credibility  notwithstanding  the  specific  factual   error
    identified.

12.  I pause to note in this context that although this is not  specifically
    a matter addressed by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  because  of  the
    mistake that he made, it does not follow that because the Appellant was
    referencing a conversation with her sister based in Kuwait she did  not
    have some conversation with her family in the UK prior to  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom.  In this context it is to be noted that her account
    and her father's account as to the contact they had had  prior  to  the
    Appellant arriving in the United Kingdom were  seriously  discrepant  -
    see further below. Moreover the point remains that  the  Appellant  had
    had some discussion prior to the screening  interview  as  to  how  she
    might present herself. All of these matters, it seems to me,  undermine
    the notion that the Judge's factual error as to  the  identity  of  the
    person with whom the Appellant had discussed what she might  say  prior
    to the screening interview could in any way have been material.

13.  Yet, further in this context it seems to me that the  Judge  identified
    serious discrepancies as between the Appellant's  retelling  of  events
    beyond the retelling of events in the  screening  interview:  in  other
    words, there were discrepancies in the account advanced  subsequent  to
    the screening interview irrespective of any  discrepancies  as  between
    that account and the screening interview itself.

14.  In this context I note that paragraph 7 of the grounds  in  support  of
    the application for permission to appeal focuses in the  main  part  on
    discrepancies as between the screening  interview  and  the  subsequent
    account.  That does not, in my judgment, amount to a valid criticism of
    the Judge's evaluation which as  regards  the  Appellant's  conflicting
    accounts, is not solely rooted in the conflict  between  the  screening
    interview and  later  statements.   This  is  particularly  evident  at
    paragraph 30 of the Judge's decision where he details the conflicts  in
    the Appellant's account with regard to her arrest.   The  discrepancies
    are as between her account at the substantive asylum interview and  her
    account advanced thereafter by way of statement and in oral evidence at
    the appeal.  It is unnecessary to set that paragraph  out,  but  in  my
    judgment  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  has  had  regard  to   these
    discrepancies, has considered the offered explanation for them, and has
    reached a conclusion open to him on the evidence that he did not accept
    the explanation and found the Appellant to lack credibility.

15.  Moreover in this regard,  as  indicated  above,  there  was  a  serious
    discrepancy between the evidence of the Appellant and her father, which
    the Judge identifies at paragraph 31 in these terms:

         "There  were  conflicts  between  her  evidence  and  her  father's
         evidence about whether she told her parents about her second arrest
         before she left Kuwait and whether he was involved in arranging her
         journey.  She said in her  first  statement  that  she  called  her
         parents after she was released and told them what had  happened  to
         her.  She also said that her father contacted his friends to find a
         way for her to leave Kuwait.  Her father nevertheless said that  he
         was not aware of anything and that they did not  have  a  telephone
         because they lived in the desert.  He also said  that  he  did  not
         know who arranged her journey here and that he learnt that she  was
         here from an  Immigration  Officer.   This  leads  me  to  question
         whether I was given a candid explanation about how and why she came
         here."

16.  In my judgment the matters set out at  paragraphs  30  and  31  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in   themselves   render   the
    Appellant's evidence unreliable and are damaging to the credibility  of
    the Appellant and her father, and necessarily therefore her claim.

17.  As regards the discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  father's  evidence,
    paragraph 8 of the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  acknowledges  that
    there was such conflict but seeks to offer an explanation by  reference
    to evidence that the  Appellant's  father  had  suffered  a  stroke  in
    December 2014 which affected his memory, and invites that the  Tribunal
    admit such evidence into these proceedings  at  this  stage.   That  is
    inappropriate.  Those materials were not before the First-tier Tribunal
    and do not  form  any  part  of  the  evaluation  of  'error  of  law'.
    Accordingly I find that ground 8 does  not  constitute  an  attempt  to
    impugn the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by reference to error of
    law but is yet another attempt to reargue the facts of the case.

18.  Over and above the adverse findings at paragraphs 30  and  31  -  which
    are clear and entirely sustainable - it seems to me that for  the  main
    part the Judge was entitled  to  take  the  approach  that  he  did  at
    paragraph 32 with regard to the evidence in relation to the  manner  in
    which  the  Appellant's  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  was  funded.
    Notwithstanding, I do accept that the Judge may have misunderstood  the
    Appellant's evidence with regard to avoiding sanctions from the  police
    for failure to report by pretending that she was ill. The Judge appears
    to have approached this on the basis  that  the  police  would  not  be
    dissuaded from arresting  the  Appellant  simply  because  of  illness,
    whereas it seems to me that what the Appellant was in effect saying was
    that there was  no  need  to  arrest  her  for  failing  to  report  in
    circumstances where the reason for not reporting was illness.  Be  that
    as it may, given that the core of the Appellant's account has not  been
    accepted, and in particular that it  was  not  accepted  that  she  was
    arrested at all, any error in this regard is ultimately immaterial.

19.  In those circumstances,  in  my  judgment  the  Judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 33 that he had not been given a candid account of the reasons
    for the Appellant coming to the United Kingdom was entirely open to him
    on the evidence, and it was  thus  appropriate  that  he  rejected  her
    account of events.  Nevertheless,  as  I  have  identified,  the  Judge
    recognised that that was not the end of the case and that it might  yet
    be that the Appellant was  at  risk  solely  for  reason  of  being  an
    undocumented  Bidoon  (even  though  it  was  not  accepted  that   any
    particular incidents of detention or arrest had transpired).

20.  The Judge went on to consider that aspect of risk at paragraphs 34  and
    35.  In this context one of the key aspects of the Appellant's case was
    the fact that her father had been granted refugee status on  the  basis
    of a claim to be an undocumented Bidoon.

21.  It is clear that the Secretary  of  State  was  alive  to  this  matter
    because it is expressly addressed at paragraphs 21 to 26 of  the  RFRL,
    and in that regard particular reference was made  to  the  case  of  AC
    (Witness with refugee status, Effect) Somalia [2005] UKAIT  00124.   It
    is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge also had reference to  this
    case law.  It is cited in the course of submissions at paragraph 22  of
    the Judge's decision.  This is not a point that can  be  said  to  have
    been disregarded, nor is it a  point  that  was  determinative  of  the
    appeal.  The Judge took the grant of status to the  Appellant's  father
    into account alongside the totality of the evidence and to that  extent
    his decision cannot be said in  any  way  to  have  departed  from  the
    guidance offered by the case of AC Somalia.

22.  Again, in my judgment, it was entirely open to the  Judge  to  conclude
    for the reasons set out at paragraphs 34 and 35 - bearing in mind  that
    he had already  found  the  Appellant  to  be  a  witness  that  lacked
    credibility and that he had also observed that the  Appellant's  father
    had given an account discrepant with the Appellant's account - that  he
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had the status in Kuwait that  she
    had claimed.  Having reached the conclusion that the Appellant had  not
    demonstrated that she was an undocumented Bidoon the Judge  was  acting
    entirely in  accordance  with  the  country  guidance  case  of  NM  in
    concluding that she had not therefore made out the claim for asylum  on
    the basis that she had advanced it.

23.  In all of those circumstances I find no material error and no error  of
    law in the assessment of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  accordingly
    his decision stands and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    stands.

25.  The appeal remains dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

