
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00278/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 October 2016                         |On 14 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [O B]
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by Marsh &
                    Partners, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as "the Appellant", is a  citizen
    of Albania born on [ ]. In 1999 she moved  with  her  family  to  Italy
    where she married in 2010 and has two children by her husband, born  in
    2009 and 2012.  She states he was charged with drug offences  in  Italy
    and eventually deported to Albania in 2013 after which she lost contact
    with him. On 4 March 2015 she returned to Albania to look for him.  She
    states she was attacked by a gang to whom her husband owed  money.  She
    subsequently entered  the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  and  claimed
    asylum on 13 March 2014.  She feared return to Albania as a lone  woman
    who had been trafficked.

 2. On 15 March 2015 her claim was  referred  to  the  Competent  Authority
    which concluded that she was a victim of trafficking whereupon she  was
    granted discretionary leave expiring on 11 September 2016.

 3. She states she was trafficked for prostitution in Albania by  the  gang
    who claimed her husband was in debt to it.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 4. The Appellant, to whom I shall refer to as "the  SSHD",  on  6  January
    2016 rejected the Appellant's claim for asylum and proposed  to  remove
    her under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 as amended.
     The SSHD did not challenge in any  material  respect  the  Appellant's
    account but considered it would be safe for her to  return  to  Albania
    and if necessary she could relocate away from the area  where  she  had
    previously lived.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  Appellant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the  2002  Act)  on  18
    February 2016.  The Grounds were formulaic although reference was  made
    to a statement to be prepared.  The Grounds were substantially  amended
    by her subsequent and current solicitors by a letter dated 23  February
    2016.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 18 August 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Plumptre  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 7. On 12 September 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish  granted
    the SSHD permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had  erred
    in treating the children of the Appellant as illegitimate when she  was
    in fact married and had given insufficient reasons for her  finding  on
    the Appellant's social class.  Having regard to the country guidance in
    TD and AD (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2016] UKUT  00092  (IAC)  this
    reasoning or lack of it was arguably an error of law.

Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 8. The Appellant attended the hearing but understood very little  English.
    I explained in simple terms to her the purpose of the hearing.  At  the
    start of the hearing I asked the parties if in relation to the  grounds
    for appeal identified by the SSHD the Tribunal in assessing the risk on
    return had to take into account whether an individual fell  within  any
    of the recognised risk categories or would be perceived  on  return  to
    fall into any of such categories, analogously to the provisions in  the
    construction  of  the  Refugee  Convention  that  fear  on  account  of
    political  opinion  includes  fear  on  account  of  imputed  political
    opinion.

 9. Mr Staunton for the SSHD acknowledged this and properly stated that  he
    would seek to rely only on the grounds set out in the  application  for
    permission to appeal which regrettably had  failed  to  recognise  that
    risk arises in respect of persons who are or would be perceived to fall
    into any recognised risk category.

10. In these circumstances I indicated to Mr Harding that I did not need to
    hear submissions for the  Appellant.   I  stated  in  relation  to  the
    grounds for appeal referring to the Appellant's  social  class  that  I
    considered the Judge had given reasons for her finding at paragraphs 36
    and 37 of her decision and these in turn were, although  not  mentioned
    in the decision, supported by the replies the Appellant  had  given  to
    questions 14, 18, 19 and 27 when interviewed on 6 November 2014  by  an
    Immigration Officer: see pages C9 and 10 of the SSHD's bundle.

Conclusion

11. Having regard to the points mentioned above, I find that the  SSHD  has
    not shown that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  any
    error of law such that it  should  be  set  aside.   Consequently,  the
    decision shall stand.

Anonymity

12. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain an error of law  and
    shall stand.  The consequence is that  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal
    succeeds.



Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 11. x. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




