
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA005572015
     AA013322015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2016                               |On 24th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     vk
                                     DC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 30th September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  set  aside  Judge
    Dickson's decision on the grounds that he  had  failed  to  assess  the
    prospective risk to the first Appellant in criticising  the  government
    in Cameroon and therefore had not addressed an important aspect of  the
    case.  She set aside the decision stating that the  only  issue  to  be
    determined was whether or not the Appellant is  at  real  risk  in  the
    light of his accepted  claim  that  he  would  speak  out  against  the
    government.  A copy of her decision is appended to this determination.

 2. On 15th February 2016 a transfer order was made allowing the appeal  to
    be heard before a differently constituted Tribunal.

 3. Prior to the hearing the Appellant produced a witness  statement  which
    he adopted to stand as his  evidence-in-chief.   Mr  Diwnycz  confirmed
    that there was no challenge to the Appellant's credibility and  it  was
    accepted that he would criticise the government upon return.  He had no
    submissions to make in relation to the background evidence relied  upon
    by the Appellant.  He acknowledged that the reasons for refusal  letter
    only considered the Appellant's claim in respect of  his  religion  and
    did not address the  question  of  whether  a  vocal  opponent  of  the
    government's failings would be at risk

The Appellant's Case

 4. VN  said  that  he  was  an  evangelist  and  an  active  member  of  a
    Pentecostalist Christian group and upon returning to Cameroon he  would
    be compelled to speak out against the social injustices which he  knows
    exist.  He  would  criticise  the  President  who   has   amended   the
    constitution of  the  country  to  favour  his  dictatorship,  and  the
    election Cameroon (ELECAM) which  is  supposed  to  be  an  independent
    election  regulatory  body  but  in  fact  facilitates  corruption  and
    election fraud.  He  would  also  criticise  government  ministers  and
    directors  of  public  institutions  and   professional   schools   and
    universities who are actively engaged in corruption and bribery.

 5. He would use all in his power  to  evangelise  and  speak  out  against
    corruption  and  other  social  evils  which  he  considers  to  be  an
    assignment from God.  He would speak out in the  streets,  communities,
    neighbourhoods,  offices,   market   places,   businesses,   government
    departments and would contact  the  corrupt  officials  and  government
    directly to speak about his concerns.  He would also attend local radio
    programmes and wishes to set  up  an  institute  to  train  Pentecostal
    Evangelists to oppose the government's  corruption  and  discriminatory
    schemes.  He  also  aims  to  prepare  written  publications   exposing
    injustices in Cameroon society.

 6. Mr Siddique referred  me  to  the  background  evidence  which  he  had
    produced including US State  Department  reports  from  2014  recording
    arbitrary arrest and detention, prolonged and  sometimes  incommunicado
    pre-trial detention and infringement on privacy rights.  Corruption  is
    pervasive  at  all  levels  of  government  and  the   judiciary.   The
    perpetrators were often able to  act  with  impunity.  The  police  and
    military police routinely engage in  bribery  and  detain  and  torture
    anyone who opposes unjust government polices..

 7. Mr Siddique referred me to the 1990 law on social  communication  which
    requires editors-in-chief to deposit copies of each  newspaper  edition
    with  the  prosecutor's  office  for  scrutiny  two  hours   prior   to
    publication.  Journalists and media  outlets  practice  self-censorship
    because otherwise they could not do  their  job.   This  Appellant  was
    intent on not practising self-censorship  and  would  therefore  be  at
    greater risk than the journalists who  themselves  suffer  persecution.
    He referred to a number of reports of the detention of journalists, one
    for three years in 2009, another for six months  in  2014  and  several
    more in 2015.

 8. In the light of Mr Diwnycz's acceptance that there was a  link  between
    the Appellant's religious zeal and his  desire  to  evangelise  against
    corruption, and in the absence of  any  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent to counter the Appellant's  evidence that such conduct would
    be likely to result in major human rights abuse by security forces  who
    are able to act  with  impunity  for  human  rights  violations,  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant has discharged the burden  of  proof  upon
    him and that  accordingly  his  appeal  should  be  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.

Decision

 9. The decision of the original judge has been set aside. It is remade  as
    follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




[pic]
Signed                              Date 22 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
