
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2014                         |On 24th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                           MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                     R M
                            (ANONYMITY RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L. Hirst (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss L Kenny (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 24th March 1981, is a citizen of Namibia.   This
    determination follows the re-hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal by the Respondent of  her  claim
    for asylum and her decision  to  set  directions  for  the  Appellant's
    removal to Namibia. The Appellant was represented  at  the  hearing  by
    Miss Hirst of Counsel.  The Respondent was represented by Miss Kenny, a
    Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. The Appellant had first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  a  working
    holiday visa in 2002 valid until 2004.  She  was  arrested  in  October
    2009 when found to be working illegally and  using  a  false  passport.
    She was sentenced to six months' imprisonment  for  the  use  of  false
    documentation.  Thereafter  removal  directions  have  been   set   and
    cancelled on three occasions.

 3. On 17th March 2010, after the removal directions had been cancelled for
    the second time, the Appellant made an  application  for  asylum.   The
    Respondent refused that application in  a  refusal  letter  dated  12th
    December 2013 followed shortly thereafter by  a  supplementary  refusal
    letter dated 6th January 2014.  Removal directions were again  set  for
    the removal of the Appellant to Namibia.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davda sitting at Taylor House on 2nd May 2014.  The
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  An  application
    for permission to appeal was submitted on 27th May 2014 and granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 9th June 2014.

 5. The matter first came before Judge Lever sitting in the Upper Tribunal,
    on 7th August 2014. The first issue for the Upper Tribunal to decide on
    that occasion was whether or not an error of law had been made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal found a material error of  law
    had been made,  for  the  reasons  provided  within  the  determination
    promulgated on 14th August 2014.  Directions were therefore set for the
    remaking of the decision  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  light  of  that
    finding, and the matter came before this Panel in accordance with those
    directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 6. The Appellant was present at the hearing before  us,  and  required  no
    interpreter;  we  therefore  explained  to  her  the  nature   of   the
    proceedings and the way they would be conducted.  We next  checked  the
    documents available to us in this case.

 7. The Respondent's bundle consists of:

      i) Immigration history.

     ii) Screening interview.

    iii) Personal statement.

     iv) Asylum Interview Record.

      v) Refusal letter - 12th December 2013.

     vi) Refusal letter - 6th January 2014.

    vii) Removal directions.

   viii) Documents relating to history of the appeal process.

 8. The Appellant's documents are contained within four separate bundles as
    follows:

     ix) Bundle 1 - those documents listed at folios 1 to 49.

      x) Bundle 2 - those documents listed at pages 1 to 180.

     xi) Bundle 3 - those documents listed at pages 1 to 265.

    xii) Skeleton argument.

Substantive Issues

 9. In order to assist both representatives and ourselves and  to  minimise
    unnecessary   questioning,   we   sought   the   assistance   of   both
    representatives  to  identify  the  contested  issues  in  this   case.
    Essentially the central issue in dispute was the  truthfulness  of  the
    events described by the Appellant in the period between about 2000  and
    2002, her final two years in Namibia prior to her coming to the UK.  In
    summary, these events comprised her alleged abuse at the hands  of  her
    uncle over a period of approximately 18 months, and  the  circumstances
    in which she claims to have left him and made a successful  application
    to come to the UK on a working holiday visa.

10. We advised the representatives that in light of the central  issue  and
    bearing in mind the basis of the previous error of law finding,  whilst
    we would be considering all the documents  placed  before  us  by  both
    parties we would have particular regard to the following documents:

      i) Letter from Lucy Kralj - 8th June 2010, page 106 Appellant's bundle
         1.

     ii) Statement - Professor Christine Dean - 28th February 2011, page  33
         Appellant's bundle 2.

    iii) Statement - Dr Goldstein - 25th April  2012,  page  21  Appellant's
         bundle 2.

     iv) Statement - Dr Jane Mounty - 23rd April 2014, page  13  Appellant's
         bundle 1.

      v) Statement - Jane Taylor - 25th  April  2014,  page  35  Appellant's
         bundle 1.

     vi) Amnesty International Report - 29th April 2014, page 1  Appellant's
         bundle 3.

Evidence

11. The Appellant had provided a number of written witness  statements  and
    was called to give oral evidence.  She identified her name and  address
    on file.   She  identified  as  being  true  and  correct  her  witness
    statements of 23rd April 2010 and her witness statement of  28th  April
    2014 contained at pages 1 to 12 of Appellant's bundle 1.   She  adopted
    those statements as her examination-in-chief.

12. She was cross-examined by Miss Kenny.  It became readily apparent to us
    from the outset of her cross-examination that the  Appellant  found  it
    difficult, if not impossible, to provide any further oral  evidence  in
    response to the questions that were asked  of  her,  even  though  Miss
    Kenny did her very  best  to  test  the  Appellant's  evidence  without
    causing her distress.  We tried rephrasing questions  to  see  if  that
    would  assist  and  we  also  provided  adjournments  to  provide   the
    opportunity for the Appellant to compose herself.  Despite all  efforts
    there was extremely limited evidence provided by means of questions and
    after a not insubstantial period of time we suggested that  Miss  Kenny
    wrote down a series of questions focusing on  the  central  matters  in
    dispute, and then allowed time for the  Appellant  to  provide  written
    answers.

13. In summary of the limited oral  evidence  obtained  by  questions,  the
    Appellant said that she had lost her grandfather when she was 19  years
    of age in 2000 and had still been at school  at  that  stage  but  left
    school after he died.  She said that it was a  fee-paying  school  that
    she had attended but her uncle did not let her go to school thereafter.



14. The specific written questions and answers provided  by  the  Appellant
    are annexed as part of the  Record  of  Proceedings  but  for  ease  of
    reference are repeated below:

         "(1) Q:  What prompted you to leave Namibia at  the  time  you  did
                  rather than sooner.

              A:  It was not easy for me to leave and I left  at  that  time
                  because I could not have it any more the abuse.

           (2)    Q:   Why did you not seek help from the village elders for
                  your problems.

              A:  As Titus [the uncle] was a well-known person no-one  could
                  believe me I was ashamed I couldn't bring myself  to  tell
                  what has been happening.

           (3)    Q:   Why did  you  feel  you  could  not  relocate  within
                  Namibia either to your cousins or somewhere else with  the
                  money you made from selling the livestock.

              A:  I had nowhere to go knew no-one  as  close  called  family
                  Titus was already warn me I was afraid.  My cousin  was  a
                  child like me.  And I came to the  UK  because  my  cousin
                  told me she will be coming here as she was born  here.   I
                  didn't feel any  protection  or  safety  for  my  life  in
                  Namibia.

           (4)    Q:   Did the farmhands who helped  you  sell  the  animals
                  know what you planned to use the money for.

              A:  I told him I wanted to go  somewhere  because  I  was  not
                  happy and he could see that in me that I was not happy and
                  he was willing to help with no questions.

           (5)    Q:   Did they  the  farmhands  know  anything  about  your
                  problems or that you planned to leave.

              A:  He knew I was not a happy child that I used to be.

           (6)    Q:   How long after selling the animals did you leave your
                  home.

              A:  I left within days."

15. There was no re-examination or other witnesses called.

16. We heard submissions on behalf of the Respondent and we  were  referred
    to the  refusal  letters  and  issues  of  credibility  raised  by  the
    Respondent.

17. We finally heard submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  were
    referred to the skeleton argument.  It was submitted by Miss Hirst that
    the Appellant fell within the terms of the Geneva Convention as being a
    member of a particular social group defined by Miss Hirst  as  being  a
    lone female  without  family/tribal  support  and  with  an  additional
    vulnerability factor such as prior abuse.

18. At the conclusion of the hearing we reserved our decision  to  consider
    the parties' submissions in the light of  the  documents  and  evidence
    submitted, which we now provide with our reasons.

The Law

Asylum

19. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the  applicant  will
    be granted asylum if the  provisions  of  that  paragraph  apply.   The
    burden of proof rests on an Appellant to  satisfy  us  that  she  falls
    within the definition of a refugee in Regulation 2 of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  In essence an Appellant will have to show there are  substantial
    grounds for believing that she is outside her  country  of  nationality
    (or if applicable her country of former habitual residence)  by  reason
    of a well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason,
    and is unable or unwilling owing to such fear to avail herself  of  the
    protection of that country.

Humanitarian Protection

20. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states that  an  applicant  who
    does not qualify as a refugee will be granted  humanitarian  protection
    if the provisions of that paragraph apply.  The burden of  proof  rests
    on an Appellant to satisfy us that  she  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules.  In essence an
    Appellant will have to show there are substantial grounds for believing
    that if returned she would face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm
    and she is unable or owing to such risk unwilling to avail  herself  of
    the protection of the country of return.

The ECHR

21. The burden of proof rests on an  Appellant  to  satisfy  us  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that as a result of the  Respondent's
    decision she will be exposed to a real risk of torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3. We  will  deal
    with Article 8 in a separate section of our determination, as it raises
    entirely discrete issues.

Decision and Reasons

22. We have carefully examined the documents presented to us in  this  case
    together with the evidence referred to above.  In respect of  the  oral
    evidence, as we indicated to both representatives at  the  hearing,  we
    maintained a neutral position on the  inability  of  the  Appellant  to
    provide answers  to  questions  raised.   The  Presenting  Officer  was
    entitled to ask questions and her failure to elicit  answers  from  the
    Appellant did not for that reason diminish the Respondent's case.   The
    failure of the Appellant to answer questions did  not  add  or  detract
    from the body of her written evidence nor was it a matter that we found
    adverse to her credibility.

23. The Appellant claims to be in need of  international  protection  based
    upon events that occurred to her  over  an  eighteen  month  period  in
    Namibia between 2000 and 2002.  In summary the Appellant claims that in
    2000 at the age of 19, and following the death of her grandfather,  she
    was looked after by her uncle, Titus. He prevented her return to school
    to finish her education and made her work in the house.  He abused  her
    sexually over that period of time until she was able to sell  livestock
    to fund her escape from the household,  and  move  to  Windhoek.   Once
    there, with the aid of a female cousin, who lived in Windhoek, but  who
    was a British citizen, she obtained a working holiday visa and came  to
    the UK.  She fears that if returned to Namibia her  uncle  would  track
    her down and will kill her.  It is also said that because she would  be
    returning as a lone female with that background  of  vulnerability  and
    with no tribal protection (since if her fear  of  her  uncle  is  well-
    founded she would not be returning to her home area but to  some  other
    part of Namibia) she is a member of a particular social group  that  is
    vulnerable to risk. She has a well-founded fear that  as  a  member  of
    that group she would face a real risk of harm in terms of ill-treatment
    and/or sexual exploitation, in respect of which she could not or  would
    not receive adequate state protection.

24. The Appellant said nothing to the UK authorities about the sexual abuse
    allegedly perpetrated by her uncle until her claim for asylum in  2010.
    Prior to that claim there had been more than  one  aborted  attempt  to
    remove the Appellant from  the  UK  following  the  conclusion  of  her
    criminal detention for using false documentation.

25. The fact that she delayed in making any reference to  sexual  abuse  to
    the UK authorities until 2010, is not a matter that in itself  we  hold
    adverse to the Appellant for two reasons:

      i) At the conclusion of the Appellant's lawful stay in the UK in 2004,
         there was no attempt to locate or remove her  by  the  Home  Office
         until 2009/2010.  She was able simply to remain, and by  one  means
         or another fund her continuing unlawful stay until she was arrested
         in 2009.

     ii) Delay, which can sometimes  be  very  lengthy,  in  speaking  about
         sexual abuse or reporting it to the authorities is  well-documented
         and known.  That delay can be for a  number  of  reasons  dependent
         upon the individual and circumstances.  It is a feature referred to
         in the report at pages 47 to 53 of Appellant's bundle 2.

26. We have begun by examining the Appellant's mental condition and in this
    respect have examined the reports specifically referred to in paragraph
    10 above in the context of an examination of the whole of the evidence.



27. At pages 37 to 38 of Appellant's bundle 1 is a witness  statement  from
    Miss MO.  She is the British citizen cousin who  helped  the  Appellant
    escape from Namibia.  She states at paragraph 3 of her  statement  that
    the Appellant told her about the abuse.  She did not disclose when  she
    was told that information by the Appellant.  She  did  not  attend  the
    hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  stating  in  her   witness
    statement of 25th April 2014 that she had  educational  commitments  on
    the day of the hearing. Despite the fact  that  we  were  told  by  the
    Appellant that she lives in Surrey, she did not  attend  before  us  or
    provide any reasons for her inability to attend.  She has  provided  no
    further witness statement.

28. It is regrettable that the one family member who knew  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in  Namibia  has  never  attended  to  provide  evidence,
    particularly given that her single witness statement is short and  does
    not contain matters that one may have expected to see, bearing in  mind
    that which was said by the Appellant which we deal with below.

29. There is no evidence of anything that happened during  the  Appellant's
    time in the UK between 2002 and 2009  that  assists  in  terms  of  the
    Appellant's mental condition in that period.  There are,  for  example,
    no GP records or letters or evidence of medication  the  Appellant  may
    have been prescribed.  During that period the Appellant appears on  the
    surface at least to have been able to provide for herself in  terms  of
    housing, employment and  a  social  life.   There  is  no  evidence  of
    recourse to counselling or other such groups or individuals.

30. The first reference made by the Appellant to  any  professional  agency
    about her alleged experiences in Namibia occurred in  about  June  2010
    when, with the assistance of legal representatives  the  Appellant  was
    referred to the Helen Bamber Foundation.   Thereafter  there  has  been
    regular contact between the Appellant and individuals working for or on
    behalf of that organisation who, over a period of three  years  or  so,
    produced the reports referred to above.

31. We have looked carefully at those reports.  We accept that the  purpose
    of those seeing the Appellant and reporting upon her condition  is  not
    necessarily to challenge or analyse the  veracity  of  the  Appellant's
    claim but to provide support to the Appellant, and potentially  in  due
    course if called upon offer an opinion.  Indeed Dr Mounty in her report
    of 23rd April 2014 stated "nothing in my summary of  Miss M's  history
    should be taken as findings of fact in relation to her asylum claim".

32. Dr Mounty's assessment of the Appellant  is  consistent  with  findings
    made by the authors of the other  reports.   At  paragraph  64  of  her
    report (page 13 to 31 Appellant's bundle 1) she opined:

         "She fulfils the  criteria  of  the  DSM4  for  PTSD.   I  base  my
         diagnosis of PTSD on the following features.  She  has  experienced
         severe trauma being held captive and sexually abused and  raped  by
         her uncle ..."

    At paragraph 69 she gave her views on the Appellant's ability  to  talk
about matters:

         "Only  with  the  assistance  of  therapy  and  the  Helen   Bamber
         Foundation has she become more able to put into words  the  details
         of her ordeal and this over a considerable length of time and in  a
         very gentle non-confronting environment."

33. A similar comment was made by Professor Dean  in  her  report  of  28th
    February 2011 when she stated:

         "It was very difficult to coax her to talk about  the  trauma  that
         she suffered even after two and a half hours  because  she  was  so
         terrified."

34. In terms of return to Namibia Dr Mounty at paragraph 72 stated:

         "She views the prospect of a return to Namibia as unthinkable.  She
         made it very clear that she would be greatly vulnerable as a single
         woman ... in  my  opinion  her  fear  is  genuine  whether  or  not
         objectively well-founded.  If she were forced to return to  Namibia
         she  would  feel  unsafe  and  the  successful  treatment  of  PTSD
         particularly the relational trauma depends on  a  safe  environment
         ... it is my opinion that threat of forced return to Namibia  would
         significantly aggravate her already severe PTSD.  She denies active
         suicidal intent at present but has specific thoughts of  ending  it
         all ..."

35. In summary, therefore, the Appellant has  been  assessed  as  suffering
    from PTSD on the basis that she  fulfils  the  relevant  criteria,  and
    because she claims to  have  suffered  a  severe  trauma  (which  is  a
    necessary ingredient for the diagnosis). That assessment of her medical
    condition, and her behaviour, including her reluctance to  speak  about
    what happened, is consistent with her having suffered  the  abuse  that
    she claims.  She has also been assessed as having a subjective fear  of
    return to Namibia because she perceives that as a lone female she would
    not be safe if she is sent back there.  The evidence of all the  people
    (whether or not medically qualified) who have given her  assistance  at
    the Helen Bamber Foundation is of importance, and must be given weight,
    because they all have particular expertise in dealing with  victims  of
    the type of abuse to which the  Appellant  claims  she  was  subjected.
    However, taken at its highest that evidence cannot establish  that  the
    Appellant is telling the truth about what happened to  her  in  Namibia
    and how she came to leave the country and enter the  UK.  Although  the
    diagnosis is potentially consistent with  her  having  suffered  severe
    trauma, it cannot shed any better light on the  cause  of  that  trauma
    than what the Appellant herself has said about it

36. Therefore we turn to consider the Appellant's own evidence.  We accept,
    as unchallenged, the Appellant's account that she was brought up by her
    maternal grandparents.  We find it theoretically possible but  unlikely
    she did not know her mother's name, what happened  to  her  mother,  or
    never even asked her maternal grandparents  about  her  mother  (Asylum
    Interview Record questions 49 to 54).

37. We accept again as unchallenged, that in 2000 her grandfather died when
    the Appellant was 19 years old; her grandmother having died earlier  in
    about 1996.

38. We infer from the evidence that the Appellant came  from  a  reasonably
    wealthy family.  She has spoken about her grandfather  owning  a  large
    farm, land, livestock and  having  cars.   Her  limited  oral  evidence
    suggested that she attended a fee-paying school.

39. Following the death of her grandfather, the Appellant claims  that  her
    uncle, who owned a farm in the same region close by, moved himself  and
    thereafter his wife and seven children into the grandfather's farm.  We
    accept that as a possibility.  It is unlikely that as  a  19  year  old
    schoolgirl the Appellant would have been in a position to run  a  large
    farm or that that would necessarily be a societal norm.  It would  also
    not be unreasonable for her uncle as  her  sole  surviving  male  elder
    relative to be expected to look after her and the family  affairs.   We
    also accept that if the uncle had decided to essentially take over  the
    grandfather's farming assets wholly or in part for  his  own  advantage
    there was probably little the Appellant could have done to prevent such
    action and enforce any inheritance, even  though  on  her  account  the
    tribal elders stood up for her against  her  uncle  and  supported  her
    claim.

40. The Appellant has spoken about the abuse she allegedly suffered at  the
    hands of her uncle in about an eighteen month period but  her  accounts
    contain  material  inconsistencies  that  in  our  judgment  cannot  be
    satisfactorily explained by the passage of time or by feelings of shame
    or  general  distress.  In  the  Appellant's  Asylum  Interview  Record
    question 130 she indicated she had become pregnant once as a result  of
    the alleged rape  and  lost  the  baby  at  an  unknown  point  in  the
    pregnancy.  There was nothing in that interview  to  suggest  that  the
    miscarriage had been induced, but in paragraph 28 of Dr Mounty's report
    of 23rd April 2014  she  claimed  to  have  taken  herbs  to  prompt  a
    miscarriage. In paragraph 4 of her witness statement of 28th April 2014
    the Appellant said (for the first time) at paragraph 4 that she had had
    a number of miscarriages. At question 136 of the Asylum  Interview  she
    indicated her uncle's wife did not believe she  was  pregnant,  but  at
    question 137 she said the uncle's wife did not know she  was  pregnant.
    At question 142 of the asylum interview she said her uncle did not know
    about her pregnancy.  At paragraph 28 of Dr Mounty's  report  of  23rd
    April 2014 she told the doctor that her uncle knew about the  pregnancy
    and had said that she would have to marry his son and pretend the child
    was his.  At other points, including in the asylum interview,  she  had
    said that the suggestion of marriage to her uncle's son was  to  enable
    her inheritance to be secured  within  the  uncle's  family.  This  was
    consistent with her suggestion at that time that the tribal elders  had
    supported her claim to the family inheritance and that  her  uncle  was
    still trying to get his hands on the property for himself and  his  own
    family.

41. At the Asylum Interview Record question 167 she suggested a  number  of
    people (they) helped her sell livestock in order to  fund  her  escape.
    In Dr Mounty's report the Appellant spoke about one person only, namely
    the deputy farmer, Rudolph, who sold some cows on her behalf.  She  had
    indicated a fear of involving him in her decision  to  leave  the  farm
    because he would lose his job, but nevertheless  got  him  involved  by
    selling cows. Her answers to  the  written  questions  before  us  also
    appear to suggest that only one person was involved: "he could see that
    I was not happy..... he was willing to help with no questions".  As  Ms
    Kenny pointed out, the Appellant has never explained how  it  was  that
    anyone on the farm was able to sell livestock on her behalf without her
    uncle's knowledge. We find it  highly  unlikely  that  someone  in  the
    position of deputy  farmer  would  put  his  job  at  risk  by  selling
    livestock that was not  his  to  sell,  merely  because  a  young  girl
    appeared to be deeply unhappy and wanted to leave the farm,  let  alone
    that he would do so without asking her any questions about why she  was
    so unhappy.

42. The Appellant was then, with the proceeds of sale of  cows,  apparently
    able to leave the farm without hindrance, relocate  for  one  month  to
    Windhoek and arrange the necessary visa and paperwork to  come  to  the
    UK.  The uncle appears to have taken no steps  to  track  her  down  in
    Windhoek even though he would presumably have been aware of where other
    family members lived in Namibia, and was likely to have been  extremely
    angry to find that farm livestock had been sold  behind  his  back  and
    that his niece was missing.

43. It appears that the Appellant had her own passport which  she  obtained
    in Namibia in 2002 and was therefore able to leave  Namibia  using  her
    own passport. She did not produce that passport at the  screening  form
    in March 2010. If she did use her own passport and it expired while she
    was in the UK she does not seem  to  have  taken  steps  to  renew  it.
    Instead she was found to be using a false South African passport  which
    formed the basis of the criminal indictment.

44. In Dr Mounty's report the Appellant made not insignificant reference to
    the cousin Miss MO, who she claimed to have told  about  the  abuse  at
    that time.  She even referred to an incident towards  the  end  of  the
    abuse period when she and Miss MO (now privy to the information) walked
    together to the  farm  whereupon  the  uncle  followed  and  raped  the
    Appellant  in  the  fields.   Although  Miss  MO  observed  the   uncle
    following, for reasons which are not explained she did not observe  the
    rape.

45. As we have noted above, those who have written on behalf of  the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation have  suggested  that  it  is  only  recently,  after
    entering into therapy, that the Appellant has been able to  talk  about
    abuse matters and only then with the assistance  of  therapy  gradually
    and in a non-confrontational environment.  That  is  a  not  unfamiliar
    scenario for those who have suffered physical or sexual abuse.  However
    in the Appellant's  case  those  observations  from  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation as encapsulated at paragraph 69 of Dr Mounty's report do not
    tally with the Appellant's own evidence.

46. According to the Appellant she spoke about these matters in  detail  to
    Miss MO in 2002 in Namibia. Thus if that evidence is to be believed she
    did not remain silent about the abuse until she  was  referred  to  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation many years later; on the contrary she told  her
    cousin about the abuse at the time when it was occurring  and  that  is
    presumably why the cousin was willing to help  her  to  get  away  from
    Namibia. As we have noted above it is a great pity that her cousin  was
    not able or for other reasons did not attend as  a  witness  throughout
    any of these proceedings or even provide a far  more  detailed  witness
    statement.  In particular it would have been helpful  (and  perhaps  to
    some extent expected) that her witness statement  would  have  included
    something about the  alleged  incident  when  the  cousin  was  at  the
    Appellant's farm, was told about what the uncle was  doing,  and  noted
    how the uncle followed her from the home into the farm area.

47. If the Appellant's account to Dr Mounty is accurate the  Appellant  had
    not behaved in the way that some highly traumatised victims  of  sexual
    abuse behave and kept silent about what had happened to her until  many
    years later - quite the reverse.  Further, the Appellant  was  able  to
    provide a sufficiency  of  information  during  the  course  of  a  268
    question and answer Asylum Interview Record in April 2010 shortly after
    she claimed asylum and before  she  had  begun  any  therapy.   At  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in May 2014 there is  no  record
    of her experiencing any similar difficulties  in  her  giving  evidence
    that she experienced in the hearing before us.

48. It is difficult to be prescriptive as to how people  deal  with  trauma
    but historically the Appellant appears to  have  been  able  to  relate
    matters both contemporaneously and within the  interview  setting  with
    the Home Office providing not insignificant details about this  alleged
    set of circumstances.  She also appears to have been  able  to  conduct
    her life in the UK for many years without any difficulty in functioning
    before undergoing therapy, whereas  thereafter  she  has  presented  to
    others as lacking in any real  capacity  to  cope,  with  her  position
    worsening or at least plateauing over those three years  that  she  has
    been in therapy.

49. We accept from the totality of  the  evidence  from  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation referred to above that the  Appellant  has  suffered  trauma
    such that she has been diagnosed with PTSD.  We can further  understand
    why more than one report author believes her  account  of  having  been
    raped to be entirely genuine.  We do accept that  the  trauma  she  has
    suffered may well be significant trauma.  However  when  examining  the
    evidence in the round  there  are  matters  which,  even  after  making
    allowances for trauma, distress, feelings of shame, and the passage  of
    time,  seriously  call  into  question  the   Appellant's   credibility
    regarding the specific events she describes in the period 2000 to  2002
    which formed the basis of the opinion that the trauma stems from  those
    alleged events.

50. Not only are there material inconsistencies in her account but we  find
    that the account itself  is  inherently  improbable.  We  have  already
    referred to the improbabilities in the aspect of the  account  relating
    to how the livestock was sold by the deputy manager. We find an  entire
    inconsistency in the account given by the Appellant as being kept as  a
    domestic/sexual slave  being  followed  constantly  by  her  uncle  but
    nevertheless being  able  without  his  knowledge  to  sell  sufficient
    livestock to raise, the money for a passport,  agents,  fees,  flights,
    visas etc. to come to the UK.  She also claims that  she  was  able  to
    leave and relocate to Windhoek without experiencing any difficulties or
    being tracked by her uncle, none of which makes any  sense  if  he  was
    controlling her and abusing her in the manner she described.  The  fact
    that she experienced no problems in Windhoek in  the  month  she  spent
    there arranging her visa before she left the country is  also  at  odds
    with the suggestion that he would track her down and  kill  her  if  he
    knew she was back in the country.

51. She had opportunity to claim asylum on earlier occasions than she  did,
    when removal directions were set for her removal to Namibia.   She  did
    not claim asylum on either of the first two occasions  but  elected  to
    become disruptive and therefore behaved in a  manner  which  physically
    prevented her removal. She claims that she did not know how to go about
    making a claim for asylum, but that does not mean that  she  could  not
    have mentioned the factual basis for her claim to someone  sooner  than
    she did. All that  her  disruptive  behaviour  tells  us  is  that  she
    genuinely does not wish to return to Namibia. It does not explain  why.



52. We can accept without difficulty that at the age of 19,  the  Appellant
    may have become anxious about her future in Namibia following the death
    of the grandfather in 2000 given that he had acted throughout her  life
    in the capacity of her father.  We can also accept  as  reasonable  the
    prospect that her uncle may have essentially taken over  the  farm  and
    assets that rightfully belong to her. Those  stress  factors  may  well
    have caused her to become clinically  depressed.  We  also  accept  the
    Appellant's own evidence that  when  her  position  in  the  UK  became
    unlawful in 2004 thereafter there was a  daily  stress  and  depression
    worrying about being discovered and that may have led to something of a
    dysfunctional existence not conducive to her  wellbeing.   Finally  her
    arrest and imprisonment in 2009 may well have been both a dramatic  and
    traumatic experience particularly as it seemingly brought to an end her
    undoubted desire to remain in the UK.

53. All the above factors could have led to the Appellant  exhibiting  many
    of the symptoms associated with and leading to  a  diagnosis  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder in the ways observed by the  authors  of  the
    reports.  We have  already  accepted  that  she  has  suffered  trauma,
    possibly serious trauma, at  some  point  in  her  life  prior  to  her
    referral to the Helen Bamber Foundation;  that  trauma  may  even  have
    resulted from some form of physical or other abuse in  Namibia.  It  is
    not for us to speculate as to  whom  or  what  was  truly  responsible.
    However in the light of the many inconsistencies in her account and its
    inherent improbability, we do not find as credible her account of  what
    she says occurred at the hands  of  her  uncle  and  the  circumstances
    surrounding that matter in that critical eighteen month period.

54. We have noted that there is no evidence of her uncle attempting to find
    her in Windhoek or thereafter.  There is no evidence in the  subsequent
    twelve years of him, her aunt or her seven cousins seeking to find  her
    write to her or make any form of contact adverse or otherwise.   It  is
    therefore speculative as to  whether  her  uncle  is  still  alive,  or
    remains on the farm. We know nothing that  may  have  occurred  in  the
    intervening twelve years in relation to him or his family.

55. In the light of our findings on fact and credibility  we  do  not  find
    there is any reasonable likelihood  that  the  Appellant  would  suffer
    adversely at the hands of her uncle or his  family  on  her  return  to
    Namibia.  We do not accept any reasonable risk he would  seek  to  kill
    her or indeed harm her sexually or otherwise.  We do accept that if  he
    has acted against her interests by taking control  of  all  assets  and
    potential inheritance he  would  not  welcome  any  challenge  to  that
    position brought by the Appellant, but given the passage of time it may
    in any event be a difficult challenge for the Appellant to undertake.

56. We find the Appellant (as described by Dr Mounty)  to  be  intelligent,
    educated and someone who has displayed a capacity to work in  a  number
    of fields while she has been in the UK.  There are also aspects of  her
    life in the  UK  over  the  years  that  disclose  resourcefulness  and
    resilience at odds perhaps  with  some  of  the  observations  made  by
    authors of reports who  are  looking  at  only  part  of  the  complete
    evidential picture.

57. We have also considered whether  there  is  a  risk  to  the  Appellant
    returning to Namibia in general terms. Even  if  we  had  accepted  the
    Appellant's case that she faces a genuine risk of violence at the hands
    of her uncle, consideration of  the  wider  risk  would  have  been  of
    importance when considering whether she could relocate within  Namibia,
    for example, by returning to Windhoek. We have noted  in  that  respect
    the Amnesty International Report and other country  material.   Amnesty
    International notes that asylum cases from Namibia are rare,  there  is
    no country guidance case and no Home Office  policy.   It  would  be  a
    mistake to assume because of those factors there  are  no  problems  in
    Namibia.  However it does mean there is no body of case law or guidance
    to assist us or  to  necessarily  demonstrate  a  pattern  of  specific
    difficulties for certain individuals when looking at whether or not the
    Appellant falls within membership of a particular social group.

58. Amnesty International did quote a short extract from an Upper  Tribunal
    case in 2012 where their report had been used.  The  extract  does  not
    disclose any facts of that case, including the age of the appellant  or
    her  circumstances.   The  Tribunal's  conclusion  was  also  based  on
    positive credibility findings.  It was  said  in  that  case  that  the
    appellant could bring  herself  within  two  particular  social  groups
    namely women in Namibia and women who are at risk of  trafficking.   In
    respect of the first social group we do not find the  totality  of  the
    evidence discloses that all women in Namibia are at risk and  therefore
    form a particular social group.

59. In fairness Miss Hirst did not seek to draw the net that wide  and,  as
    we have already  indicated,  submitted  the  Appellant  belonged  to  a
    particular social group, namely women  in  Namibia  without  family  or
    tribal support and/or with an additional vulnerability factor.

60. The Appellant is not a child now being 32 years old.   She  was  not  a
    victim of trafficking nor do we find credible evidence that she  was  a
    victim of sexual abuse at the hands of her  uncle  as  described.   Her
    account of physical/sexual abuse and forced domestic servitude in  2000
    to 2002 is in that part of  her  history  that  we  do  not  accept  as
    credible.  The Appellant relocated within Namibia away from  her  home.
    There is no evidence that she was exposed to any risks whilst  she  was
    in Windhoek merely on account of being a lone female whose only  family
    support came from a female cousin of around the same age. The only risk
    of which she spoke was that of her uncle finding her  there  -  but  we
    have concluded that he posed her  no  threat.  She  has  good  physical
    health, intelligence  and  education  and  work  experience.   She  has
    resourcefulness and has demonstrated a capacity to live and work on her
    own even in a strange country where she was resident unlawfully.    She
    has no dependent children.  We find no vulnerability factors that would
    suggest that she falls within a particular social group.

61. In terms of her mental condition we have noted  that  on  the  evidence
    available her vulnerability in that respect has emerged since she began
    therapy and following her claim for asylum.  There are  events  ongoing
    in her life that we have referred to above that no doubt contribute  to
    her condition and presentation that would be  absent  on  a  return  to
    Namibia once the uncertainty of her situation and presence  in  the  UK
    has been resolved.  We find that what residual trauma there may  remain
    would not place her within a particular social group but if therapy was
    regarded as a useful or  even  helpful  mechanism  for  her,  then  the
    material before us shows the availability of such within Namibia.

62. The country of  information  response  noted  the  availability  within
    Namibia of medical  treatment  for  PTSD,  depression  and  psychomotor
    retardation.  This includes the Namibia domestic  violence  and  sexual
    abuse support groups based in Windhoek and  a  number  of  doctors  who
    undertake counselling.  It cannot be said therefore that there are  not
    facilities or counsellors available to deal with these specific issues.



63. When looking at the Amnesty International Report and  country  material
    generally we have noted  the  levels  of  violence  within  Namibia  as
    reported.  We have further noted the levels of  violence  and  domestic
    abuse against women and the concerns for  children.   Namibia  in  2000
    introduced the Combating of Rape Act in response to  increased  reports
    of sexual violence.  The law prohibits rape  and  gives  rape  a  broad
    definition to include marital rape.  The penalty is between five and 45
    years.  There was also introduced the Combating  of  Domestic  Violence
    Act in  2003.   The  government  has  introduced  public  education  on
    violence against women and children  and  set  up  thirteen  women  and
    children protection units.  Having said all  that,  there  are  clearly
    problems  in  enforcement  due  to  lack  of  police  transport,   poor
    communications, lack of expertise and withdrawal of rape charges.   The
    withdrawal of charges partly appears to be when people  deal  with  the
    crime personally with the rapist's family.

64. We have also noted recent matters  following  the  Ministry  of  Gender
    Equality and Child Welfare zero tolerance campaign for  2012  to  2016.
    The government, NGOs and civil society partners continue  to  implement
    the action plan.  Police arrested suspects  in  70%  of  reported  rape
    cases.  A court of law convicted 18%.  There are also available  within
    fifteen separate units, police officers, social workers, legal advisors
    and medical personnel trained to assist victims of sexual assault.

65. In summary therefore the law,  mechanisms  and  infrastructure  are  in
    place in Namibia to assist and deal with sexual and  domestic  violence
    and the government appears genuinely to recognise the problem and seeks
    to deal with it.  The problem seems to  be  in  implementation  and  in
    complainants coming forward, a  problem  not  necessarily  confined  to
    Namibia.  However we do not find that  the  totality  of  the  evidence
    before us suggests that state protection is not available or would  not
    be proffered if an individual suffered abuse and reported it.

66. In summary therefore given our findings on fact and credibility  we  do
    not find that a return of the Appellant to Namibia would be a breach of
    the UK's obligations under the Geneva Convention nor a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's protected rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.   We  do  not
    find evidence that suggests the Appellant is in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection.

Article 8

67. Finally we address Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  Appellant  entered
    lawfully in 2002 on a working holiday visa, valid until  2004.   It  is
    doubtful, on her account, whether she conducted herself  from  2002  to
    2004 within the terms and spirit of that visa.   However  even  if  she
    did, from 2004 until 2009 she remained unlawfully in the UK.  We do not
    make any separate adverse  finding  in  relation  to  her  imprisonment
    because of the length of  that  sentence.   She  resisted  attempts  to
    remove her in 2010 and although her stay in the UK since that time  has
    been lawful whilst her asylum claim and any appeals  are  pending,  she
    has only remained here due to  the  protracted  nature  of  the  appeal
    process begun with her asylum claim in March 2010.

68. She has no family life in the UK.  The only reference to a relative  is
    her adult cousin,  Miss  MO,  about  whom  she  provides  very  limited
    information  (although  she  clearly  knows  where  she  lives).   That
    individual has not attended to support the Appellant at any stage.

69. In terms of  private  life  we  are  bound  to  observe  the  statutory
    requirements of paragraph 117A to D of the 2002 Act brought into  force
    on 28th July 2014 by the Immigration Act 2014. These provisions set out
    the public interest considerations  to  which  the  Tribunal  must  pay
    regard when considering whether the decision to  remove  the  Appellant
    breaches her right to respect for private life under Article 8. We must
    have specific regard to the considerations set out in  paragraph  117B.
    However because her sentence was less than  12  months  paragraph  117C
    does not apply.

70. Her private life we find exists because of the length of time that  she
    has been in the UK. However much of that period - at least  5  years  -
    was spent here unlawfully. During her time in the UK she has  not  been
    resident in  one  locality  or  employed  in  one  job  but  has  moved
    periodically about the country and in different  employment.  There  is
    little or no evidence of  any  deep  rooted  private  life  established
    within a particular locality or a particular  group.   She  does  speak
    English.  Little  is  known  about  her  current  financial  situation.
    Although she was living with a boyfriend at one time, that relationship
    no longer subsists.

71. Article 8 of the ECHR has since 1951 by virtue of Article 8(2)  enabled
    the UK authorities to interfere with private life for reason or reasons
    set out in general terms within Article 8(2).  Recent statutory changes
    referred to above place a clear duty on the judiciary to pay due regard
    to the limitations upon  an  individual's  claim  to  remain  based  on
    private life when set against the rights and  expectations  of  society
    generally for the good of society as a whole. Little weight  should  be
    given to a private life established by someone at  a  time  when  their
    immigration status is precarious.

72.  In  exercise  of  a  residual  judicial  discretion  on  questions  of
    proportionality in terms of removal we find that whilst  the  Appellant
    has established a private life, much of it during a period of  unlawful
    stay in the UK, the Respondent has a clear duty, and an important  duty
    to maintain immigration control and the economic wellbeing  of  the  UK
    for the good of society as a whole.

73. When looking at all the factors in this case we  do  not  find  that  a
    return of the Appellant to Namibia would be a  disproportionate  breach
    of her right to respect for her private life in the UK.

Decision

74. We dismiss this appeal on asylum grounds.

    We do not find the Appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.

    We dismiss this appeal under the Human Rights Act.

75. Anonymity not retained.



Signed        Date 24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
