
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00201/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th August 2015                  |On 21st August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                        Mr Mohamed Wafa Mohamed Nizam
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:   Miss E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke on 12th May  2015  dismissing
    his appeal against the respondent's refusal of asylum on 15th  December
    2014.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cheales  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    arguably had not given anxious scrutiny to the appellant's  claim,  nor
    to the explanation provided by him for the delay in claiming asylum and
    further that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  an
    alleged arrest warrant which was not produced were arguably contrary to
    the background information and the country guidance and that inadequate
    findings had been made regarding the appellant's father.

 3. There is a Rule 24 reply from the respondent dated 19th July 2015.  The
    basis of the respondent's reply, subject to an amendment which was made
    at the hearing, is that the appellant delayed in claiming asylum  until
    he was arrested for  credit  card  cloning  at  his  employer's  petrol
    station.  It appears that no charge arose out of that arrest and that:

         "As to paragraph 4 of the grounds the judge was entitled  to  raise
         the issue of no copy of the arrest warrant being before him despite
         the appellant's claim that he had a lawyer check for him  that  one
         existed in Sri Lanka.  As to paragraph 5 of the grounds - the claim
         at the highest (discounting  the  patently  invented  claim  of  an
         existence of an arrest warrant) the appellant did not work for  the
         LTTE, he was not a member, had no associations with them and has no
         particular sur place  profile  in  the  UK  to  bring  him  to  the
         attention of the authorities on return."

First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. The First-tier Tribunal's decision sets out briefly  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account, without expressly evaluating it, as  well  as  the
    respondent's submissions.  The  judge  correctly  directed  himself  by
    reference to GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  At paragraphs 16-17, the First-tier  Tribunal
    identified that credibility was in issue in this appeal.

 5. However, nowhere in the decision does the First-tier Tribunal  set  out
    the parts of the appellant's account which were accepted, rejected,  or
    on which limited reliance is placed, nor is there a  clear  finding  on
    credibility.  After  setting  out  the  submissions,  the  Judge  moved
    directly to the determination of risk on return, at paragraph 20:

         "20. On the evidence before me the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he
         will be targeted by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  on  suspicion  of
         having helped the LTTE in their activities when  he  lived  in  Sri
         Lanka.  It is also the Appellant's claim  that  in  the  UK  he  is
         currently actively involved in political activities again  the  Sri
         Lankan government's human rights violations.  The Appellant has not
         satisfied me that there is a real risk or a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood of him suffering persecution in Sri Lanka for one of the
         reasons cited in the Refugee Convention.  I say this because:

         (a)  The Appellant came to the UK with a student visa and  did  not
         claim asylum almost 4 years later.  This was  9  months  after  his
         application for further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  had
         been refused in December 2010 and after his arrest.   It  was  also
         the Appellant's own evidence was his claim for asylum was not  made
         until some months after his father had informed  him  that  he  has
         been questioned by the Sri Lankan army.  I do not consider that the
         Appellant has given an acceptable explanation for this delay or why
         did not claim asylum at the earliest opportunity.

         (b)  On the evidence  before  me  the  Appellant  is  not  a  Tamil
         activist working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to  destabilise  the
         unitary Sri Lankan state.  The Appellant's oral evidence  was  that
         he has never been a member of LTTE in  Sri  Lanka,  has  no  family
         associations with LTTE.   The  evidence  before  me  was  that  the
         Appellant has undertaken local community work with Tamils [letter 8
         April 215 from Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam]  and  is  a
         member of the National Liberal Party in the United  Kingdom.   This
         does not support a finding that the  Appellant  has  a  significant
         role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism.

         (c)  I am not persuaded that the Sri Lankan authorities have issued
         a warrant for  the  Appellant's  arrest.   This  document  was  not
         produced at the hearing, there was no evidence before me  that  the
         Appellant had made any attempts to obtain this and I did  not  find
         plausible the Appellant's account as to how he became aware of this
         warrant.  I attach also little  weight  to  the  Sri  Lanka  Police
         Message Form dated 9 October 2014.  This is because I did not  find
         plausible the account of how this came to  be  in  the  Appellant's
         possession, there was no explanation as to why it did not refer  to
         the issue of an arrest warrant and  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
         address the Respondent's stated concerns as to its authenticity."

 6. We do not consider that to be sufficient as an explanation of the First-
    tier Tribunal's reasoning on credibility and fact.

Conclusions

 7. We consider that the allegation of a lack of anxious scrutiny  is  made
    out and that the appropriate course is to set this determination  aside
    and order that it be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to  be
    fixed.

 8. It will be necessary in the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  Tribunal  to
    have the opportunity of considering any evidence  which  the  applicant
    may be able to produce in relation to the alleged arrest warrant.

Directions

We direct that, not later than 2 months from the sending to the  parties  of
this decision:

 1) The appellant may produce evidence in relation to  the  alleged  arrest
    warrant, which shall consist of a letter from a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,
    producing and verifying an original arrest warrant.   In  default,  the
    appellant must explain in a witness statement why such  a  document  is
    not available and what efforts have been made to obtain it.

 2)  The  appellant  shall  give  full  particulars   of   any   additional
    circumstances or matters relied upon in human  rights,  to  include  an
    explanation as to why (if appropriate) they were not disclosed  at  the
    hearing on 16 April 2015.  The appellant is reminded  of  his  duty  of
    full disclosure of all material factors at the person's disposal and  a
    satisfactory explanation regarding the lack of any relevant material as
    set out in to paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.

 3) All other directions as to the remaking of this decision will be  given
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  We continue that order pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date: 12 August 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

