
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2016                       |On 18 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [A S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, HOPO

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1982.   He
    appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 18
    December 2014 to refuse to grant him leave to remain and to  refuse  to
    grant him asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 as amended.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that he used  to  work
    for intelligence along with his brother providing information about the
    Taliban for the government.  His brother worked for the police and  was
    an informer about the trade  in  narcotics  in  the  local  area.   His
    brother was specifically targeted by the Taliban who arrested  him  and
    beheaded him in the summer of 2013 because of his job as an informer.

3.   The appellant said he worked for a man called [M], who  was  linked  to
    the Americans, for which he was paid $500 per month.  He  started  this
    job a year before leaving Afghanistan and  it  involved  observing  the
    local  area  of  [S]  where  there  is  a   large   Taliban   presence.
    Approximately six months after he started  work,  he  reported  someone
    called [K] for having weapons at his house.  [K]'s home was  raided  by
    the Americans and the Afghan army.  During the raid, two  of  his  sons
    were killed but [K] managed to escape.  He went  on  the  run  but  was
    later killed.  In the spring of 2013 the appellant located a man called
    [Mh] in the village of [A] and identified another person  called  [AR].
    In a later raid, the latter was killed and [Mh] was arrested.  He  said
    it was common knowledge that he was involved in the arrest of [Mh].  He
    later learned that [Mh] had been released in a prisoner  exchange.   He
    was informed that some people had come from [A] village to look for him
    and asked about his whereabouts.  He travelled to [J] where he remained
    in hiding with his wife's relatives for a period  of  two  weeks.   His
    father-in-law's house was raided a week before he left Afghanistan.  He
    fears that on return to Afghanistan, he will be targeted and killed  by
    the Taliban.  Internal relocation is not an option as he will easily be
    located and targeted.

4.   I was persuaded by the arguments put forward by  Ms  Physsas  that  the
    judge arguably erred in law in his credibility findings.  The judge did
    not find the appellant credible because of lack of corroboration rather
    than assessing the oral evidence given by the appellant in the  context
    of the objective evidence that was before the court.

5.   Ms Physsas sought to rely on a Country of Origin Information Report  on
    Afghanistan produced by the European Asylum Support Office (ESO)  which
    had been submitted with the application for permission to appeal.  This
    document was not before the judge and was not in the  objective  bundle
    of documents submitted in support of the appellant's  original  appeal.
    Ms Physsas sought to rely on the objective evidence  contained  in  the
    ESO Report to support her argument that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider this report and that  had  he  relied  on  the  ESO
    Report, he would have found  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  not
    lacking in credibility.  I found that the judge could not be criticised
    for his failure to rely on the ESO Report which was not before him.

6.    The  judge  at  paragraph  56  placed  little  or  no  weight  on  the
    handwritten note which the appellant had said had been left beside  his
    brother's body by the Taliban.  In reaching his conclusion, I find that
    the judge failed to consider the objective evidence that was before him
    to the effect that the use of night  letters  was  a  primary  form  of
    communication by the Taliban to express their demands.

7.   I find that the judge  failed  to  consider  that  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's employment was such that he would not have  a  contract  of
    employment.  The judge at paragraph 49 did not believe the  appellant's
    evidence of his employment because he had come to the UK as a matter of
    choice, having travelled through European countries.  This  was  not  a
    safe basis for an adverse credibility finding.

8.   I find that the judge's requirement for the  appellant  to  corroborate
    his claim also makes his decision unsafe.

9.   For the above reasons I find  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    decision.

9.   I was not persuaded by Ms Physsas that the  judge  failed  to  consider
    Article 15C in his determination.  The judge did consider  it  and  had
    regard to the country guidance decision on Article 15C that was  before
    him.  Until that decision is overturned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  it
    remains good law and the judge did not err in law in relying on it.

10.  I take the point that the Court of Appeal granted permission in  Nazari
    and heard it in January 2016. I was informed by Ms Physsas that one  of
    the issues before the Court of Appeal was  the  security  situation  in
    Afghanistan. The judgment is yet to be delivered.

11.  Having found that the judge erred in law, his  decision  cannot  stand.
    It is set aside in order to be re-made by a different judge.

12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted  to  Taylor  House  for  re-hearing.










Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

