
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00596/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th October, 2015                 |On 9th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                         anton valentine christopher
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  23rd  March,
    1978.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  6th  November,  1999,  and
    claimed asylum at the port.  On 30th July, 2000, the respondent refused
    to grant him leave to enter and refused to grant his claim  to  asylum.
    The Notice of Refusal of leave to enter was dated 24th December,  2014.



2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Oakley at Hatton Cross on 30th April, 2015.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Oakley dismissed the appellant's asylum and human  rights  appeals  and
    dismissed his humanitarian protection appeal.  In doing so,  the  judge
    failed to make clear findings of fact in order that he  could  properly
    assess the risk to this appellant were he to be returned to Sri  Lanka.



3.   It appears that the judge may have  accepted  the  appellant's  claimed
    sur place activities, undertaken while he has been living in the United
    Kingdom,  but  it  is  no  means  clear.   At  paragraph  54   of   the
    determination the judge said this:-

         "I need to consider the  Appellant's  activities  that  have  taken
         place whilst he has been living in London.   The  Appellant  claims
         that he has been a member of the British Tamil forum since 2003.  I
         am aware that the  British  Tamil  Forum  was  not  brought  in  to
         existence until 2006 but in particular the Appellant has provided a
         letter which indicates that  he  has  been  a  member  since  2014.
         Whilst I accept he may well have had connections with  the  British
         Tamil Forum there is not one shred of evidence to suggest  that  he
         has any particular role within that forum.  For example he does not
         have  any  position  of  responsibility  in  relation  to  chairing
         meetings or calling meetings or acting as one of the  officials  of
         the forum."

4.   Having noted that the appellant claimed to be a  member  of  the  Forum
    since 2003, the judge then  suggests  that  it  was  not  brought  into
    existence until 2006.  He does not resolve that  discrepancy.  He  does
    not indicate the source of his knowledge; indeed he  has  not  referred
    anywhere to any of the background country material.  The judge goes  on
    to appear to accept a letter indicating that the appellant had  been  a
    member of the Forum since 2014, but he does not actually make a finding
    that he was a member.

5.   At paragraph 55 of the determination the judge said this:-

         "His only activities, and I accept that he  has  been  involved  in
         this respect, is helping with organising National  Heroes  Day  and
         attending Heroes Day activities.  He is a chef and states  that  he
         has provided help to provide food.  He has also sold various  items
         on the stalls in connection with the Heroes Day events.   I  accept
         that he has also attended demonstrations that have taken place  and
         there is evidence to support that."

    However, the judge did not actually say whether he accepts  that  these
    activities were undertaken by the appellant as a member of the  British
    Tamil Forum and does not indicate where the demonstrations took  place,
    how big they were, or give any indication as to whether or not they may
    have come to the attention of Sri Lankan Government  officials  in  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   At paragraph 56 of the determination, the  judge  refers  to  enquiries
    recently having been made about the appellant in Sri Lanka,  but  gives
    no details as to who made these enquiries, whether they  were  the  Sri
    Lankan Government, Sri Lankan Army, the Sri Lankan Police or whether it
    might, for example, have been the Sri Lankan Red Cross.

7.   The judge refers to the medical reports  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, and at paragraph 50 of the determination he  refers  to  the
    fact that he has been provided with a volume  of  background  material.
    Unfortunately, Judge Oakley fails to give any indication  that  he  has
    considered the background evidence, in order  to  put  the  appellant's
    claim into context.

8.   Mr Jarvis who appeared on behalf of the respondent  accepted  that  the
    findings were unclear, but suggested that the appellant would not be at
    risk because he does not have a perceived or actual profile  identified
    in GJ & Others (post war returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  Unfortunately, without clear findings it is simply not possible
    to assess the risk to the appellant on his return to Sri Lanka.

9.   I believe that none of the findings of fact can  stand.   At  paragraph
    50 the judge said:-

         "I have concluded  in  all  those  circumstances  and  taking  into
         account the recent medical reports that it is more likely than  not
         that the events that occurred to the Appellant did in fact  occur."
         [My emphasis]

    Apart from the fact that the sentence makes little  sense,  ("that  the
    events that occurred to the Appellant did in fact  occur.")  the  judge
    appears to apply the wrong standard of proof.

10.  Given the defects in  this  determination  I  regret  that  I  have  no
    alternative but to set it aside.  In doing so I have concluded  that  I
    must remit it for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.   None  of
    the findings of fact are retained.

11.  Devaseelan (second  appeals  -  ECHR  -  extraterritorial  effect)  Sri
    Lanka* [2002[ UKIAT 00702 is relevant,  because,  although  it  is  not
    entirely  clear  from  Judge  Oakley's  determination  an   Immigration
    Adjudicator, Mr Warren L Grant, heard the appellant's appeal  first  on
    6th May, 2010 and made findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh to the First Tier Tribunal.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
