
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00441/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th April 2015                   |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     hm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley-Daley
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 23rd  September  1971.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Iran on 27th November 2011 and  travelled
    through Turkey and onwards across Europe arriving by lorry in the UK on
    13th December 2011 when he claimed asylum.  The Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum is based upon a fear that if returned he would face mistreatment
    due to his imputed political opinion.  The Appellant's claim for asylum
    and for humanitarian protection were refused by Notice of Refusal dated
    3rd January 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Immigration Judge  De
    Haney sitting at Manchester on 19th February 2014.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 3rd March 2014 the Appellant's appeal was  dismissed  on
    all grounds.

 3. On 13th March the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the  judge
    had failed to consider whether the  Appellant  would  face  persecution
    simply because he would be returned to Iran without a  valid  passport.
    On 27th March 2014 Judge Ievins granted permission to appeal.  He noted
    that the basis upon which the appeal was put was  a  matter  raised  at
    some length in the skeleton argument but  was  not  considered  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  He took the view that it may have been that  having
    found the Appellant not credible then the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    consider  it  necessary  to  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  on  the
    alternative basis that had been advanced but that his failure to do  so
    amounted to  an  arguable  material  error  of  law.   The  judge  even
    considered that it  was  arguable  that  on  the  basis  of  background
    information referred to the Appellant might be at risk  simply  because
    he would be returned to Iran having claimed asylum  unsuccessfully  and
    without having a valid Iranian passport.  Further the judge  considered
    it was appropriate to impose an anonymity direction.

 4. On 9th April 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds indicated that the judge may  have
    erred in failing to consider the  Appellant  returning  to  Iran  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and without a valid Iranian passport.  However  it
    was not accepted that the position of this had altered since this issue
    was last considered by the Upper Tribunal and  there  was  no  material
    error in the judge failing to consider the  matter.   It  was  on  that
    basis that the matter originally came before me to determine whether or
    not there was a material error of law.  That hearing was as long ago as
    April 2014 and at that hearing the Appellant appeared by his instructed
    solicitor Mr Medley-Daley and the Secretary of State  appeared  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.  It  is  therefore  helpful
    that these two legal representatives have retained  the  file  and  now
    appear before me on the rehearing of this matter.

 5. It is appropriate to consider briefly the intermediate history of  this
    matter from the time that I heard it  and  decided  that  there  was  a
    material error of law through to the start of this hearing because  the
    issues have to a certain extent shifted.  I  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    these are set out at paragraphs 13 to 15 of my reasons.  Those  reasons
    which were incorporated in directions stated that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge contained a material error of law  solely  so
    far as it related to the position that the Appellant may  find  himself
    in if he is returned to  Iran  as  an  undocumented  Iranian.   It  was
    acknowledged that that issue was  the  sole  extant  issue  before  the
    Tribunal and I gave directions for the rehearing of the  matter  before
    me on that basis.  Thereafter the matter reappeared before me.  It  was
    agreed at that time that the matter be stayed pending the  decision  of
    the President of the Upper Tribunal in the case of Samma on whether new
    country information supports a departure from country  guidance.   Both
    Mr Medley-Daley and Mr Harrison were in attendance on that hearing  and
    they agreed that the matter be listed for mention on a  fixed  date  in
    December 2014 this being a date  that  was  convenient  for  all  legal
    representatives and for myself to be present.

 6. The matter therefore reappeared before me on  16th  December  2014  for
    mention and directions only.  At that stage it became  clear  that  the
    principle thrust of the appeal had changed and I was persuaded that was
    an appropriate approach.  The change of emphasis was not challenged  by
    Mr Harrison on behalf of the Secretary of State.   I  gave  directions.
    Those directions are of some importance.  Findings of fact made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge remained preserved save for the consideration
    of the risk to the Appellant  on  return  to  Iran  as  highlighted  in
    paragraph 14 of the decision the error of law.  However the  issue  was
    not solely whether the Appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  as  an
    undocumented Iranian but whether his conversion to  Christianity  would
    itself place him  at  risk.   Leave  was  granted  to  the  Appellant's
    representatives to  file  an  additional  bundle  of  documents.   Such
    bundles include any documents upon which they seek to rely relating  to
    the Appellant's conversion to Christianity  but  not  exclusively  upon
    this point.  Permission was also granted to the  legal  representatives
    of the Appellant to  adduce  oral  evidence  from  the  pastor  of  the
    Appellant's church.

 7. The issue arose with regard to the expert's report of  Dr  Kakhki.   It
    was agreed that there was  leave  to  the  Respondent  to  put  written
    questions to Dr Kakhki or in the alternative to advise the  Appellant's
    solicitors that they required him to attend for the purpose  of  cross-
    examination.  The matter was adjourned and relisted and it is  on  that
    basis that the appeal at long last comes back before me for  rehearing.



 8. I am gratefully assisted in this matter by the continued continuity  of
    legal representatives and by the concession made by  Mr  Harrison  that
    the critical question to be answered in this matter is now  whether  or
    not to the Appellant is, or is not, a Christian and it is on that basis
    that the thrust of the evidence is forthcoming.

Documents

 9. Following my directions a  further  consolidated  bundle  of  documents
    relied upon is provided by the  Appellant's  solicitors.   This  bundle
    extends to some 443 pages but the critical initial documents for me  to
    consider are as follows:

      i) the witness statement of the Appellant dated 13th October 2014;

     ii) the updated witness statement of the  Appellant  dated  31st  March
         2015;

    iii) the witness statement of Masoud Naserijam dated 31st March 2015;

     iv) the Appellant's baptism certificate;

      v) the expert report of Dr Mohammed Kakhki;

     vi) the list of questions posed by the Respondent to  Dr  Kakhki  dated
         11th February 2015;

    vii) the supplementary response to those questions posed  to  Dr  Kakhki
         dated 10th March 2015.

Evidence

10. It is the Appellant's evidence that since his case last came before the
    Tribunal for full hearing on the error of law back in April 2014  there
    has been a change in his circumstances and that he has been baptised as
    a Christian.  He states that prior to coming to the UK he  had  started
    to slowly doubt his faith and that in  his  previous  role  as  a  taxi
    driver one of his regular passengers had been an Armenian woman who was
    a Christian and that they had detailed discussions about the  Christian
    faith.  He states that he has lived in Liverpool  since  shortly  after
    his arrival in the UK and that at the beginning of 2014 he was  invited
    by a friend to attend a Christianity meeting.  Thereafter he  sets  out
    at paragraphs 9 to 17 details of his route to Christianity and  in  his
    updated witness statement he sets out at paragraphs  5  to  11  further
    information regarding his Christianity and confirmation of his baptism.
     He makes it clear within his witness statements and his oral testimony
    that his fear if returned to Iran is  that  he  will  be  charged  with
    apostasy due to his conversion to Christianity and that he would not be
    able to practise his faith in Iran without coming to the  attention  of
    the authorities.

11. Mr Medley-Daley on behalf of the Appellant poses no further evidence-in-
    chief but the Appellant does confirm and adopt those witness statements
    as his evidence.

12.  Under  cross-examination  Mr  Harrison  enquires  as   to   what   the
    consequences will be to the Appellant turning his  back  on  Islam  and
    becoming a Christian to  which  the  Appellant  responds  he  would  be
    regarded as an apostate and that the consequence is that there would be
    a likelihood that he would face death.   The  advice  is  that  he  has
    family in Iran namely his father, mother, brothers and sisters and that
    they are aware of his conversion.  He states that they are  against  it
    but he believes that this is not specifically due  to  their  religious
    beliefs but because they are concerned that he is putting his  life  in
    jeopardy and that they have advised him that if he decides to return to
    Iran he should be aware that his life will be in grave danger.  He does
    not believe however that he would be in danger from  his  family,  that
    the threat would not come from them or of a fear that they would report
    him to the authorities but that his fear  would  come  from  the  State
    itself if they found out about his activities.

13. Mr Harrison enquiries  to  what  the  Appellant  considers  to  be  the
    difference between having been  a  follower  of  Islam  and  now  as  a
    Christian and he responds by stating that Islam was forced upon him  as
    he had been born into Muslim society but  that  with  Christianity  you
    have the freedom to choose your own religion.  He states  that  he  has
    changed and he sees himself now as a much happier individual  and  that
    he feels much calmer within himself and feels that he interacts  better
    within society.

14. The Appellant states that he is  a  member  of  the  Frontline  Iranian
    Church and that  whilst  he  meets  a  lot  of  Iranians  who  are  not
    Christians he is perfectly prepared to discuss his religion  with  them
    and encourages them to embrace  Christianity.   He  advises  about  the
    baptism process stating that he went to a number of classes and that it
    is for the church  pastor  to  decide  when  he  was  ready  to  become
    baptised.

15. Evidence was provided by Pastor Masoud Naserijam.  The  pastor  attends
    and confirms and adopts  his  witness  statement  of  31st  March.   He
    confirms that he started the Frontline Iranian Church in 2010 and  that
    it  is  an  evangelical  Protestant  church  and  a  free  church  i.e.
    independent.  He states that his church is based in Liverpool and  that
    it is attended exclusively by Iranians and that services are  conducted
    in Farsi.  He acknowledges that the  majority  of  attendees  had  been
    asylum seekers who have now been recognised as  refugees  and  some  of
    whom are naturalised as British citizens.  He sets out in great  detail
    within his witness statement at paragraphs 7  to  18  his  relationship
    with the Appellant, details of the Appellant's conversion  and  baptism
    and his understanding of the Appellant's  faith.   He  acknowledges  at
    paragraph 20 of his witness statement that there may be people who seek
    to take advantage of his church to try and make a claim for asylum.  He
    does not believe that the Appellant falls into that category  and  goes
    on at paragraphs 21 to 26 to state that whilst  he  may  have  baptised
    over 100 asylum seekers the Appellant is only  the  ninth  person  upon
    whose behalf he has attended court and that over  the  years  over  400
    people have been to his church.  He therefore  emphasises  that  it  is
    rare and unusual for him to take the step of attending court to support
    an Appellant but that in this case he has a  genuine  belief  that  the
    Appellant is a convert.  He goes on, particularly at paragraphs 22  and
    23, to set out why he considers the Appellant to be a  genuine  convert
    and thereafter at paragraphs 24 and 25 he goes on  to  reflect  on  the
    baptism process and why he agreed to baptise the Appellant.  I am  also
    referred to photographs of the baptism which took place on  13th  April
    2014 and I note that  Mr  Harrison  does  not  seek  to  challenge  the
    genuineness of the ceremony.

16. Pastor Masoud concludes his written testimony at paragraph 28 with  the
    following:

         "If I was not convinced that HM's conversion was  genuine  I  would
         not be prepared to come to court."

17. It is against that background  that  Mr  Harrison  cross-examines.   He
    enquiries as to what has led Pastor Masoud to conclude the Appellant is
    a Christian convert.  Mr Masoud responds by stating that  he  had  seen
    changes in the Appellant as set out in  his  supportive  statement  and
    that he genuinely believes that there is a capability of  a  person  to
    change from within and that if he had not seen the changes he would not
    set foot in the court supporting him.  He  believes  that  there  is  a
    genuine change in the  Appellant's  mood  that  he  attributes  to  his
    conversion to Christianity.  He emphasises that he is familiar with the
    culture  of  Iranians  and  that  he  believes  he  can  quite  quickly
    differentiate between those  on  a  "pretend"  course  to  Christianity
    against those that are genuine.  He acknowledges that if someone was on
    a pretend course it would not be within his religious calling  to  turn
    them away from his church but they would not obtain his support.

18. Mr Harrison enquires  as  to  how  the  pastor  differentiates  between
    pretend and genuine cases and enquires as to how he has come to believe
    that the Appellant has made a genuine conversion.  The pastor  responds
    by stating that it is actually very easy to  determine  if  someone  is
    pretending or not by observing their behaviour inside and  outside  the
    church and that he has contact with most Iranians in Liverpool be  they
    Christian or non-Christian and as a result of that body of  contact  it
    is actually quite easy to distinguish whose conversion is  genuine  and
    whose is not.  He reaffirms that he has only been to court now on  nine
    occasions and that he has often refused to attend court.   When  pushed
    by Mr Harrison he indicates that there are probably in  excess  of  100
    people who have asked him to attend on an asylum appeal for who he  has
    refused to attend court.

19. Mr Harrison enquiries as to whether he has other people in  his  church
    who have a duty of leadership.  He states that he does and that he uses
    them in the process of evaluating someone's genuineness particularly as
    some are involved in a baptism course.  He therefore emphasised that it
    is not just his opinion that people  are  true  converts,  although  he
    acknowledges that ultimately it is his responsibility, but that he does
    sound out other people before making his decision.

20. The only other evidence to be called related  to  that  of  Dr  Kakhki.
    However Mr Harrison indicated that he did not seek to question  further
    Dr Kakhki and that he was prepared for his expert report to be admitted
    in evidence and to be read alongside the list of questions posed by the
    Respondent and Dr Kakhki's supplementary response.  I  agreed  to  that
    course of action.

Submissions

21. Submissions were relatively brief.  Mr Medley-Daley referred me to  the
    evidence which he  submitted  came  in  distinct  groups.   Firstly  he
    referred to subjective evidence in support of the Appellant namely  the
    Appellant's own witness statement and that of a pastor and  their  oral
    evidence.  He submitted that they had both given credible accounts  and
    that the Secretary of State had not challenged the baptism and he asked
    me to find that on that alone there was clear evidence to show that the
    Appellant was a converted Christian and that the other evidence  showed
    that in the event of his return he would in such  circumstances  be  at
    risk.  He thereafter turned to the expert evidence of Dr Kakhki and  to
    the confirmatory evidence of the baptism certificate.  He asked  me  to
    look at the documentary evidence that had been  produced,  the  country
    material and the relevant case law.  In particular he  referred  me  to
    the Home Office country information  and  guidance  on  Christians  and
    Christian converts.  He asked me in such  circumstances  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal.

22. Mr Harrison indicated that the Secretary of State's position  was  that
    this case would turn very  largely  on  whether  or  not  I  found  the
    Appellant's testimony to be credible and that of the pastor in  support
    to be credible.  He left the matter entirely in my hands.

Findings

23. The starting point in  this  appeal  is  whether  or  not  I  find  the
    Appellant's testimony to be credible.  A proper approach to credibility
    requires an assessment of the evidence and of the  general  claim.   In
    asylum  claims,  the  relevant  factors  are   firstly   the   internal
    consistency of the claim; secondly the  inherent  plausibility  of  the
    claim; and thirdly, the consistency of the claim with external  factors
    of the sort typically found in country guidance.  It  is  theoretically
    correct that a claimant need do no more than state his claim  but  that
    claim  still  needs  to  be  examined  for  consistency  and   inherent
    plausibility.

24. In this case the Appellant has  given  a  very  detailed  and  thorough
    account of his conversion to Christianity.  The fact that he  has  been
    baptised is not challenged by  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  is  the
    credibility and plausibility of that  conversion  that  is  potentially
    under challenge.  To that end I am assisted by the evidence  of  Pastor
    Masoud Naserijam.  The pastor was  a  credible  witness.   He  is  open
    enough to acknowledge that the concerns of  the  Tribunal  have  to  be
    whether or not the conversion to Christianity is genuine or whether  or
    not this is an Appellant who sees such conversion and the following  of
    the Christian faith as nothing other than a means of trying to persuade
    the Tribunal that his asylum appeal should be allowed.

25. I have had the benefit of hearing the evidence both oral and seeing  it
    in writing from the pastor and of listening to  his  replies  to  quite
    sensible  and  proper  cross-examination  from  Mr  Harrison.   It   is
    difficult to  be  anything  other  than  impressed  with  the  pastor's
    testimony.  He is not a na�ve individual.  He is well aware that  there
    are unfortunately many within his community who  would  seek  to  abuse
    their  purported  status  by  making  claims  for  asylum  based  on  a
    conversion/belief in Christianity which is not genuine.  To use a well-
    known phrase it is he believes his responsibility  to  sort  the  wheat
    from the chaff.  He provides statistics of the number of  Iranians  who
    have been through his church.  Those numbers amount to around  400  and
    he acknowledges that that cannot be a definitive figure because some of
    them will have moved to different parts of  the  country.   However  he
    emphasises that this is only the ninth appeal that he has attended  and
    that over 100 congregants have asked him to give evidence  and  he  has
    frequently refused.  He has  further  explained  the  process  that  an
    applicant has to go to prior to being baptised.

26. It is difficult to be other than  impressed  at  the  process  that  he
    follows and his comments  as  to  how  he  and  other  members  of  the
    community can assess whether an Appellant is  or  is  not  genuinely  a
    Christian convert.   Mr  Harrison  does  not  seek  to  go  beyond  the
    testimony.  The burden of proof is on the  Appellant.   It  is  on  the
    lower standard.  I have no doubt that that burden  of  proof  has  been
    discharged and that the Appellant has  through  the  testimony  brought
    before me shown he is a Christian convert.

27. I thereafter turn  to  the  objective  evidence  and  the  most  useful
    guidance  is  to  be  found  in  the  policy  summary  of  the  country
    information and guidance -  Iran:  Christians  and  Christian  Converts
    December 2014 where at paragraph 1.4 it states:

         "The rights of Muslims to change their religion is  not  recognised
         under Sharia law.  The religious conversion of Muslims  is  illegal
         in Iran.  Christians who have converted from Islam are at real risk
         of persecution in Iran, and a grant  of  asylum  is  likely  to  be
         appropriate."

28. This case falls squarely within  such  guidance.   For  all  the  above
    reasons I am satisfied therefore that  the  Appellant's  conversion  is
    genuine and that the Appellant has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    for a Convention reason.  In such circumstances the Appellant's  appeal
    is allowed on asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The Appellant's appeal is also allowed pursuant to Articles 2 and 3  of  the
European Convention of Human Rights.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application has been made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

