
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00641/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2016                             |On 4th July 2016              |
|Prepared on 16th June 2016                    |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               mr abdul basir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not attend and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 6th  July  1988.   He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rowlands
    sitting at  Harmondsworth  on  5th  February  2016  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  8th
    January 2015.  That decision was to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  and  to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   The Appellant was  granted  a  business  visit  visa  valid  until  5th
    December 2014 in order  to  attend  an  international  conference.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 29th November 2014.  He claimed asylum
    on 9th December 2014 ten days after his  visa  had  expired.   On  17th
    December the Respondent took the Appellant's case into the  Fast  Track
    process and  refused  the  Appellant's  application.   The  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
    refused.  Following the Detention Action litigation  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal the President of the First-tier Tribunal set aside  the  earlier
    decision of  the  First-tier  and  directed  that  the  appeal  be  re-
    determined by a different Judge.  In consequence the matter came before
    Judge Rowlands on 5th February 2016.

3.   The Appellant's claim was that he was of adverse interest to  both  the
    Taliban and the  Afghan  authorities  because  of  his  work  for  non-
    government  organisations  particularly   youth   organisations.    The
    Appellant stated that he had set up a shelter for women  who  had  been
    the victims of domestic violence.  He received threats from the Taliban
    and internally re-located to a  town  where  there  was  more  business
    activities and better prospects.  He was chosen to  participate  in  an
    international conference  to  be  held  in  London  and  flew  here  to
    participate.  Whilst in the United Kingdom he was told that  there  had
    been threats from the Taliban alternatively that a letter had been sent
    by the Taliban to his home.  The Afghan police attended  his  house  to
    enquire  about  the  Appellant  after  he  had  failed  to  return   to
    Afghanistan  from  the  conference.   When  the   Appellant's   brother
    complained about  the  threatening  letter  from  the  Taliban  he  was
    arrested and ill-treated by the authorities.  The Appellant argued that
    the Afghan government did not want civil organisations  in  Afghanistan
    making any progress in the country.  Indeed the Afghan Upper  House  of
    Parliament had issued a statement stating that those belonging to civil
    rights organisations were people who had no interest in Afghanistan but
    really wanted to seek asylum in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  could  not
    relocate to Kabul as he would be a target of the Taliban.  The  Taliban
    would not like his attendance at the  London  conference  because  that
    would be to divide their support from anti-government  forces.   If  he
    had known that his name was going to be published  he  would  not  have
    come in the first place.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had established a  fear  of
    the Afghan government to the lower standard.  He commented at paragraph
    20 of his determination:

         "The only mention that there has ever been of this claim about  the
         government is from [the Appellant] saying that he heard about it in
         a radio or television report.  I have had no evidence presented  to
         me to confirm that there has been any kind of  statement  from  the
         government about those  people  who  attended  the  conference  and
         remained nor is there any evidence that any of those  who  returned
         after the conference have been in any way mistreated or targeted by
         the government as 'traitors'.  There is certainly  no  evidence  of
         anybody  in  his  position  being  targeted  in  any  way  by   the
         government".

5.   Although the Judge acknowledged at paragraph 22 that there would  be  a
    risk to the Appellant in his  home  area  the  issue  was  whether  the
    Appellant could safely relocate to Kabul.  At paragraph  23  the  Judge
    dealt with the claim to be threatened by the Taliban, stating  that  he
    had received some new information which showed that the  activities  of
    the Taliban were unfortunately on the increase in Kabul and  there  was
    ample evidence to show  that  certain  high  profile  individuals  were
    increasingly at risk from the Taliban.  The Judge continued:

         "However, high profile is the  appropriate  point.   On  a  factual
         basis I am satisfied that the Appellant has shown that he  received
         threats to cease his human rights work all the way up to the  point
         when he left Afghanistan to come to the London conference and  that
         these were only in his local area  which  is  why  I  have  already
         stated that returning him to his local area would be unreasonable."

6.   The Appellant had family in Kabul and would  not  be  at  anymore  risk
    there than anyone else.  On the Appellant's own evidence he  was  going
    into and working in Kabul on an extremely regular basis up to 2014  and
    nothing had happened to him there, despite the fact there had been some
    kind of Taliban presence in the country throughout that time  including
    a presence in Kabul.  The Appellant would not be refused assistance  by
    the authorities.  The expert evidence  did  not  suggest  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate in Kabul.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The grounds of onward appeal argued that  the  Judge  had  inadequately
    reasoned his conclusion that the  Appellant  was  not  a  high  profile
    target. He had overlooked the Respondent's  country  information  which
    indicated that the authorities  were  unlikely  to  be  able  to  offer
    effective protection in Kabul.  The Judge had  wrongly  concluded  that
    the Appellant had no intention of  continuing  with  his  human  rights
    work, having merely adopted the closing submission  of  the  Presenting
    Officer, when there  was  no  evidential  basis  for  that  submission.
    Further, the Appellant had no family in Kabul and  the  Judge  had  not
    specified what country guidance decisions that he was referring to.   I
    pause to note here that the grounds of onward appeal drafted by Counsel
    who had appeared before the Judge at first instance did  not  cite  any
    country guidance authorities on Afghanistan either.

8.   Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  as
    the application was out of time but  he  otherwise  indicated  that  he
    would have found an arguable error and would  have  granted  permission
    had the application been in-time.  The reason for the delay in  lodging
    the  onward  appeal  was  satisfactorily  explained  upon  renewal  and
    permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    5th May 2016 (who also extended time to appeal).  She wrote:

         "There is merit in the application as decided by Judge  Ford.   The
         issue is relocation as it was agreed that the Appellant would be at
         risk on return to his home area".

9.   The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  23rd
    May 2016.  The letter stated that it may be that the  Judge  had  miss-
    recorded where the Appellant's family were and whether  they  would  be
    able to provide some support on return to Kabul.  However, there was no
    materiality to this error.  The Appellant was an educated and competent
    27 year old male and there did not appear to be any evidence  he  would
    be unable to manage his life if returned to Kabul.  The Respondent  was
    unable to comment on the Judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant  would
    not carry on his civil rights activities upon return.  It was  open  to
    the Judge to conclude that the Appellant would  not  be  identified  or
    targeted in Kabul since his risk was limited to his home area and there
    was no adequate evidence as to how or why he  would  be  identified  in
    Kabul.  The Judge noted that the Appellant was  working  frequently  in
    Kabul up until 2014 without adverse interest.  There  was  no  material
    error in the determination.

The Error of Law Hearing

10.  Notification of the hearing to decide whether there  was  an  error  of
    law was sent by first-class post to the Appellant at his address in  10
    Muirkirk Road, Catford, London SE6 and to his solicitors Messrs  Duncan
    Lewis & Co.  That correspondence was evidently received because  Duncan
    Lewis wrote a letter to the Tribunal on 10th  June  2016  stating  that
    they  no  longer  represented  the  Appellant  in  this   matter.    No
    alternative address for the Appellant was provided.

11.  When the matter was called on before me shortly before  12  noon  there
    was no attendance by the Appellant and  no  explanation  for  the  non-
    attendance.  I was satisfied that the notice of  the  hearing  on  form
    IA113 dated 18th  May  2016  had  been  properly  served  both  on  the
    Appellant and his then  solicitors.   I  considered  whether  I  should
    proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.  The Appellant  was
    under  an  obligation  to  prosecute  his  own  appeal.  There  was  no
    application for an adjournment. As he  had  failed  to  attend  without
    reasonable explanation I determined to deal  with  the  appeal  in  any
    event.

12.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant had told the  Judge
    at first instance that he would be unable to continue with the work  he
    had been doing back in his home area.  He did not think he could do  it
    in Kabul either because of the death  threats.   That  claim  had  been
    rejected by the Judge.  The Appellant's problems were said to  be  with
    the Taliban.  The Appellant  had  spoken  about  more  practical  based
    problems.  The Judge had rejected the claim of threats from the  state.
    The Appellant had been at the conference in the United Kingdom liaising
    with  other  likeminded  people  where  the  Taliban  would  not   have
    influence.  Whether or not the Appellant had family in  Kabul  did  not
    take the case any further.  The Appellant was an  adult  and  had  been
    frequently visiting Kabul.

Findings

13.  The issue in this onward appeal as identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge who granted  permission,  was  whether  the  Appellant  could  be
    expected to internally relocate to Kabul given that he could not return
    to his home area.  In order to assess that possibility the Judge had to
    make findings on the Appellant's personal profile which  he  did.   The
    Judge accepted that the Appellant had received  threats  to  cease  his
    human rights work but there was no danger to  the  Appellant  from  the
    authorities.  The issue was whether there  was  an  adequate  level  of
    protection for the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  had  been  a  frequent
    visitor to Kabul in the past without any harm having been done  to  him
    and the Judge's view was that the Appellant could safely relocate to  a
    city the Appellant knew well.

14.  There is no country guidance authority which indicates that  conditions
    in Kabul  are  such  that  they  would  breach  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The Appellant's  argument  appears  to  be  a
    disagreement with the Judge's  conclusions  as  to  the  level  of  the
    Appellant's involvement with  non-government  organisations  and  takes
    issue with the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant had  no  intention
    of resuming such activities upon return.

15.  Having perused the  file  in  this  matter,  I  cannot  see  where  the
    implication that the Appellant did not wish to  resume  NGO  activities
    upon return has come from.  The Respondent made the  point  in  closing
    submissions  and  that  point  was  adopted  by  the   Judge   in   his
    determination.  Given that there appears to be no evidential basis  for
    it, the  issue  is  whether  that  error  is  material  such  that  the
    determination at first instance should be set aside and the matter  re-
    heard.

16.  The Appellant's evidence indicated that he did wish to resume  his  NGO
    activities upon  return  and  in  the  absence  of  a  general  adverse
    credibility finding, I proceed on the basis that that  was  indeed  the
    Appellant's intention.  The issue  is  whether  in  the  light  of  the
    Judge's other findings, even if the Appellant did intend to resume  his
    NGO activities would he thereby be at risk.

17.  The Judge specifically rejected the argument that the  Appellant  would
    be at risk upon return as a failed asylum seeker.  At paragraph 22  the
    Judge dealt with the issue of whether the Appellant's activities  would
    put him at risk from the government  and  he  rejected  that  argument.
    Thus there could be no material error of law in the Judge proceeding on
    the assumption that the  Appellant  might  not  want  to  continue  his
    activities upon return since whether he continued  them  or  not  there
    would be no risk from the government.

18.  That left the issue of whether the Appellant nevertheless was  at  risk
    from the Taliban if and when the Appellant resumed his  NGO  activities
    in the capital.  Here the Judge's conclusion at paragraph 25, that  the
    Appellant was not of such a high profile as to be one who  would  be  a
    high target for the Taliban, is relevant.  The  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would be of no more risk than  anyone  else  in  Kabul.   The
    Appellant up to 2014 had been going into and working in Kabul for  NGOs
    on what the Judge described as "an extremely regular  basis".   Nothing
    had happened to the Appellant then and there was no reason  to  believe
    that anything would happen to the Appellant in the future.  Thus, while
    the Judge expressed doubts that the Appellant would  in  fact  continue
    with  his  NGO  work  upon  return,  it  is  plain  from  reading   the
    determination as a whole, that the Judge's view was that  even  if  the
    Appellant were to resume his NGO activities in Kabul there would be  no
    risk sufficient to  engage  the  Refugee  Convention  from  either  the
    authorities or  the  Taliban.  Although  there  was  an  error  in  the
    determination in the Judge's understanding of part of  the  Appellant's
    evidence (his intention to resume work upon return) it was not material
    to the determination as a whole.

19.  Accordingly I do not find that there  was  any  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's determination and I dismiss the onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal against it.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.



Signed this 1st day of July  2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal was dismissed there  could  be  no  fee
award.


Signed this 1st day of July  2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
