
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00268/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE G A BLACK OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    J C D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by  the  appellant  in  respect  of  a  Decision  and
    Reasons before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  McIntosh)  ("FTT")  and
    promulgated  on  13  October  2016  in  which  the  FTT  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum.  The grounds of  appeal
    are lengthy and detailed and I do not propose to repeat them save  that
    it is argued that the FTT  failed  to  make  findings  on  whether  his
    detention and torture would place him at risk on return.

2.   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  11
    November 2016.  Judge Parkes stated:

         "It is clear from the decision that the judge found that whilst the
         appellant may have been detained it was not for the length of  time
         he claimed and that he had not been ill-treated as he claimed.  The
         judge rightly  observed  that  there  were  reasons  to  doubt  the
         appellant's claim but he did not address the scarring report of  Dr
         Cohen explicitly.  It is arguable that that is  an  error  although
         following further analysis it may be that  it  takes  the  case  no
         further, the other grounds may be argued but have considerably less
         merit."

3.   This morning I have heard submissions from both representatives,  which
    I have  taken  into  account.   The  FTT  essentially  found  that  the
    appellant was lacking in  credibility  based  on  findings  as  to  his
    ability to leave Sri Lanka, to apply for a visa and the delay in making
    his claim.  The FTT then went on to consider the  material  aspects  of
    his claim and found that "he may have been detained for  a  period  but
    this was not for the duration as reported without the  degree  of  ill-
    treatment reported by the appellant.[50]"

4.   I am satisfied that it was open to  the  FTT  to  reach  findings  that
    certain aspects of the account were credible and others  not  credible.
    The final assessment must involve consideration of the evidence in  the
    round having regard also to the background material and to  any  expert
    evidence that was relied on by either party, and  to  make  appropriate
    findings and give reasons in support of  what  weight  is  attached  to
    evidence.

5.   I am in agreement with Mr Briddock's submissions that in this  instance
    the FTT failed to  make  assessments  as  to  credibility  based  on  a
    consideration of all of the evidence in the round. There was  a  wealth
    of evidence including expert and medical evidence from  the  H.  Bamber
    Foundation before the First-tier Tribunal that should have informed the
    FTT's findings of fact as to material matters  or  for  reasons  to  be
    given for rejecting the same.  For those reasons I  am  satisfied  that
    the grounds for permission argued are sustainable and that there is  an
    error in law.

6.   I have gone on to consider the question of materiality in light of  the
    country guidance case of GJ (post civil war  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD EWCA  2014  Civ  829.
    Given the appellant's claim in  the  main  relates  to  the  historical
    account of ill-treatment, materiality is relevant.  I am just persuaded
    that the error of  law  which  involves  a  failure  to  make  concrete
    findings as to  the  nature  of  the  detention,  are  material  to  an
    assessment of risk in the future.



Notice of Decision

There is an error of law and the decision is set aside.

The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (excluding   Judge
McIntosh) at Taylor house for a hearing afresh on a  date  and  time  to  be
notified.

Anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 13.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 13.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

