
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00235/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 19 April 2017                    |On 10 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 19  October  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Coaster  which  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and human rights claim.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 3. The appellant's claim for protection was  made  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship with another Pakistan national whom she met  after  coming
    to the UK. The relationship was not authorised by members of her family
    in Pakistan and, as a result, she maintained that she and  her  partner
    would face harm on return to Pakistan.

 4. Part of the appellant's claim was that  she  had  been  the  victim  of
    negligence by the first advisers she went to when she realised that she
    had to claim asylum. Her immigration history is that, after  coming  to
    the UK in June 2011 as a student her leave was curtailed in April 2012.
    She has been an  overstayer  since  then.   She  underwent  an  Islamic
    marriage with her partner in August 2012. He is also an overstayer.  It
    is their claim that in 2012 they went to a solicitor, Blakewells, where
    they were advised by a Mr Osman Sadiq on their concerns about returning
    to Pakistan. This person is referred to in the materials as "Mr  Osman"
    and as "Mr Sadiq". I use the name "Mr Sadiq" in this decision.  Instead
    of making an asylum clam, Mr Sadiq advised them to make an  application
    for leave outside the Immigration Rules (the FLR(O) application),  with
    the partner as the applicant and the appellant as his dependant. As  he
    was a legal adviser they thought that  making  the  FLR(O)  application
    must be the correct course of action. The  adviser  did  not  keep  the
    appellant informed of what was happening over a two year  period.  When
    the appellant contacted Blakewells in 2014 she was  informed  that  the
    application outside the Immigration Rules had been refused in 2013  and
    also that Mr Sadiq no longer worked for the firm.  The  applicant  then
    made an asylum claim on 3  February  2015  which  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 12 February 2016.

 5. Permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Coaster was granted on one ground only.  This  was  as  follows,  taken
    from the permission decision dated 22 November 2016:

         "... it is clear from paragraph 86 that the Judge  found  that  the
         delay  in  making  the  claim  for  asylum  seriously  damaged  the
         credibility of the appellant.  The Judge considered the firm to  be
         Blackwells rather than Blakewells and this was  an  error  of  fact
         which raises an arguable error of law.  It is clear from  paragraph
         90 that the Judge gave the matter of delay considerable  weight  in
         rejecting the appellant's credibility overall.  The Judge  arguably
         fell into error in making this delay largely determinative  of  the
         overall credibility of the appellant's account.  These grounds  are
         arguable and permission is granted on this basis solely."

 6. It was argued before me that the judge's finding on delay was a "strong
    finding" and that the mistake about the name of the firm of  solicitors
    tainted the entire credibility assessment.

 7. I did  not  find  this  ground  was  made  out.   Firstly,  it  is  the
    appellant's case that she cannot be fixed with delay in claiming asylum
    because that was the responsibility of  Mr  Osman  Sadiq,  a  negligent
    adviser, shown to have been  fraudulent  in  his  dealings  with  other
    clients. However, the materials before the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    show that the appellant and her partner had  told  Mr  Sadiq  or  other
    legal advisers at Blakewells Solicitors of the facts  of  their  asylum
    claim and wish to claim asylum. Their evidence on the point is recorded
    at [29] of the decision, as follows:

         "The appellant and Mr J were afraid for their  lives  and  did  not
         know what to do.  They therefore went to see Blackwells  Solicitors
         in September 2012 about their circumstances.   The  solicitor  they
         spoke to, a Mr Osman, advised them to submit an FLR(O)  application
         to the Home Office on  the  basis  of  their  circumstances.   They
         submitted an application on 27 September 2012 on  behalf  of  Mr  J
         only for further leave to remain."

 8. This record of the evidence is consistent with the  witness  statements
    of the  appellant  and  her  partner.  The  witness  statements  refer,
    mistakenly, to Blackwells Solicitors, which  is  presumably  led  Judge
    Coaster to the mistake as to the advisers who made the FLR(O) claim  in
    2012. The witness statements also do not indicate  that  the  appellant
    and her partner told Mr  Sadiq  or  anyone  else  that  they  had  been
    threatened by relatives in Pakistan and feared mistreatment on  return;
    see paragraph 55 of the appellant's witness statement and  paragraph  7
    of the partner's statement. The witness statements indicate  only  that
    they  approached  an  adviser  and  were  advised  to  make  an  FLR(O)
    application "on the basis of our circumstances".

 9. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  was  the  same,  paragraph
    [34] of the decision recording as follows:

         "The Appellant and Mr J contacted Blackwells in September  2014  to
         enquire about their application for FLR(O) made in September  2012.
         They were informed that the previous  solicitor  Mr  Osman  was  no
         longer working there as he had been convicted  of  fraud  and  that
         their FLR(O) application had been refused more  than  a  year  ago.
         This was the first time the appellant and Mr J had been notified of
         the Home Office refusal of the FLR(O)."

10. It was therefore open to First-tier Tribunal Judge Coaster to  find  at
    [83] and [84] as follows:

         "83. The appellant and Mr J do not expressly state that  they  told
             the solicitor of the violent threats.   They  refer  to  their
             'circumstances' which could have related to their  overstaying
             their student visas.  It is noteworthy that the appellant  and
             Mr J did not state in either their witness statements, nor  in
             oral testimony that they expressly  told  the  solicitor  they
             visited, Mr Osman, about the appellant's family making threats
             to kill them  both  because  they  had  entered  into  a  love
             marriage whilst the appellant was engaged  in  Pakistan  which
             included a period of living together before the marriage.

         84.  Mr Osman advised them to  submit  an  FLR(O)  based  on  their
             'circumstances' and the FLR(O)  application  was  made  on  27
             September 2012 on behalf of Mr J only.  No reference was  made
             to any claim being made on the appellant's behalf despite  her
             being in the United Kingdom without leave."

11. The First-tier Tribunal was not obliged to accept the evidence  of  the
    appellant and her partner that they had tried to make an  asylum  claim
    in 2012 but been thwarted in that attempt by Mr Sadiq. He  gave  cogent
    reasons in [83] and [84] for not doing so.

12. It was also open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  the  evidence
    before him to find that the appellant and her partner did not  actively
    pursue the application made through Mr  Osman,  [85]  of  the  decision
    stating as follows:

         "The appellant and Mr J then waited for two years  until  September
         2014 before contacting Blackwells again.   Although  the  appellant
         says she and Mr J did  contact  Mr  Osman  to  find  out  what  was
         happening with the application, he had merely  said  it  was  still
         pending.  The appellant does not say when she contacted  Mr  Osman;
         nor is it evident when Mr Osman left the employment of  Blackwells.
         Because the appellant is now claiming that she has been in fear  of
         her life since 2011 and Mr J is in fear of  his  life  since  2012,
         with the threats from Mr A and Mr B being at their height in  about
         November 2013, it is not credible  that  the  appellant  and  Mr  J
         waited for two years."

13. The appellant objects to this finding as she was not requested to  give
    details of when she contacted the solicitor. It was an  important  part
    of her case which had  the  potential  to  undermine  her  credibility,
    however, and she had legal  advisers  in  this  matter.  She  could  be
    expected to put forward her evidence about what happened with Mr  Sadiq
    and Blakewells fully and the judge was  not  obliged  to  seek  further
    information from her. The finding in [85] was one that was open to  the
    judge on the evidence before him.

14. Further, although it is the appellant's case  that  Mr  Sadiq  made  an
    incorrect application and caused a delay of two  years  in  her  asylum
    claim being made, the judge states, correctly, at [89]:

         "There was no evidence that the appellant and Mr J  had  complained
         to Blackwells, the Solicitor  Regulation  Authority  or  the  Legal
         Ombudsman of wrong advice on the basis of  their  circumstances  as
         they had imparted at the time to Mr Osman."

15. Other than the evidence of the applicant and  her  partner,  therefore,
    there was nothing before the First-tier Tribunal judge that obliged him
    to find that in this matter, albeit shown to be involved in immigration
    fraud in other cases, Mr Sadiq was negligent or fraudulent in making an
    FLR(O) claim rather than an asylum claim.  The appellant did not make a
    complaint to that effect. Where such negligence  or  fraud  could  only
    have been a serious issue for the appellant, it was open to  the  judge
    to find that she would have made such a complaint and draw  an  adverse
    credibility finding from her not having done so.

16. The same reasoning applies to the judge's  finding  at  [91]  that  the
    appellant has not only not made a complaint of  negligence  against  Mr
    Sadiq or Blakewells/Blackwells but also had  not  obtained  her  client
    file from that time showing what her instructions were at that time and
    what advice she was given. Without documents from the file showing what
    instructions she and her partner gave to Mr Sadiq it was  open  to  the
    judge to find that he had not been instructed to make an  asylum  claim
    as the appellant maintained.

17. There was therefore a sound basis for the First-tier Tribunal  to  find
    that the appellant had not shown that she had been  misadvised  in  the
    past and that the delay in claiming asylum could be  taken  to  be  her
    responsibility and to undermine her credibility. The  appellant  argues
    that the reasons for  so  finding  are  materially  undermined  by  the
    confusion between Blackwells/Blakewells  or,  as  at  [88],  the  judge
    conducting personal research into the wrong firm, Blackwells. As above,
    the materials before the First-tier Tribunal refer  to  Blackwells  but
    give an address for Blakewells.  The  judge  was  misled  by  this  and
    compounded  this  by  conducting  personal  research  into  Blackwells,
    drawing further adverse credibility findings from their being a firm of
    good-standing. That aspect of the decision is clearly in error but does
    not, in my judgement, sufficiently undermine the  shortcomings  in  the
    appellant's evidence about Mr Sadiq. There was an absence  of  evidence
    on the instructions provided in 2012, of attempts to contact Blakewells
    during a period of two years in the context of the couple being in fear
    of their lives if returned  to  Pakistan,  of  any  kind  of  complaint
    concerning misconduct by Mr Sadiq being  made  and  of  the  file  from
    Blakewells having been requested. The findings made  on  those  matters
    are not materially tainted by the mistake as to the name  of  the  firm
    and the finding at [88] about Blackwells being a reputable firm.

18. In addition, even if this ground were made out, the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge makes sustainable and  unchallenged  findings  that  the  country
    evidence indicated that the appellant and her partner would be able  to
    relocate internally or seek sufficient protection  against  retribution
    from her family. At [72], Judge Coaster indicated that:

         "The Appellant claims that because her four  remaining  uncles  who
         are alive, are well connected with  powerful  politicians  and  the
         police she would obtain no protection from the  State  against  her
         relatives. She does submit that through their criminal  connections
         The (sic) Appellant's uncles would be able to find her anywhere  in
         Pakistan. However her claims of her uncles being well-connected are
         not supported by at least two of her uncles  being  killed  by  the
         police or the State.  In the case of  Mr  S,  the  uncles'  alleged
         powerful connections with police and politicians did not ultimately
         rescue him from the death penalty in 2006 for committing murder."

19. The judge also made a finding at [96] that internal relocation was open
    to the couple.

20. For these reasons, I did not find that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed a material error on a point  of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside.




Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  on
    the point of law and shall stand.
Signed [pic]                                 Date: 9 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
