
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00538/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2013 and 8th July 2013             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  mS a A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (11th June 2012)
     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer (15th July 2013)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 29 October 1989 and  she
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 4 January 2013 to
    remove her from the  UK  following  a  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis of her fear  of  the  general
    state of unrest in Somalia and in particular her  fear  of  Al-Shabaab.
    In her asylum claim the appellant gave two varying accounts.  The first
    that she lived in Bakara district of Mogadishu and  Somalia  until  the
    age of 2, and between 1991 and 2011 she lived with her grandmother as a
    nomad on the outskirts  of  Mogadishu.   She  returned  to  the  Bakara
    district to live with her mother in 2011 until she left.   She  claimed
    to belong to the Bandhabow clan, Bahar Sufi sub-clan and the Amned  Nur
    sub-sub-clan.  The substance of her claim was that she was abducted and
    raped by Al-Shabaab  in  October  2011.   She  claimed  she  stayed  in
    Mogadishu for several months after the incident and left Somalia at the
    beginning of 2012.  She claimed her parent and siblings had  now  moved
    to a place between Mogadishu and Afgoye  due  to  the  general  country
    situation.

 3. By the time of her appeal hearing the appellant stated that she  was  a
    Somali citizen who was born in Afgoye and that she was a member of  the
    Bandhabow clan which was a sub-clan of the Reer Hamar clan.  She stated
    that she had been  untruthful  in  her  original  claim  but  had  been
    confused, scared and distressed at the interview.

 4. She stated that when  she  was  aged  2  she  went  to  stay  with  her
    grandmother in Ethiopia and they had never been back to Somalia.   They
    left in 1991  and  she  described  living  in  terrible  conditions  in
    Ethiopia.  The appellant  claims  it  was  Ibrahim,  her  grandmother's
    explanation-husband's brother who paid for her to leave  Somalia.   The
    appellant referred to her  family  members  including  her  mother  and
    father, three sisters and five brothers.  All but  one  of  the  family
    members are believed to live in Mogadishu.  That was  the  position  in
    2010.

 5. Judge Brown of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  claim
    on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds.  He referred to AMM & Others (conflict - humanitarian crisis -
    returnees FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 and SG (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 940.

 6. At paragraph 28 of his determination the judge identified that  it  had
    been submitted that withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu rendered it
    safe to remove those to Somalia and this was detailed  in  the  refusal
    letter.

 7. He noted paragraph 350 of AMM where it stated that

    "at the present time an Article 15(c) risk exists as a  general  matter
    in respect of the majority of those in  Mogadishu  and,  as  a  general
    matter as to those returning from the UK".

 8. At  paragraph  30  of  his  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's original account was untrue and deceitful and found that if
    she left Somalia at an early age she had not  suffered  persecution  or
    harm.  Further, the appellant if her later account was true,  had  many
    remaining members in Mogadishu as set out in her statement.

 9. The judge found that she was Somalian  because  she  spoke  the  Somali
    language and considered that she had  lived  in  Ethiopia  for  a  long
    period.  He also accepted at paragraph 32  that  the  appellant's  clan
    background was that she was from the Bandhabow clan that  was  part  of
    Reer Hamar.  He determined that  the  appellant  would  be  removed  to
    Mogadishu and he considered her claim on that basis.   Nonetheless  the
    judge dismissed her claim, finding that her parents and siblings  lived
    in a place called Water Wells between Mogadishu and Afgoye.  He came to
    the conclusion that the appellant's family were  likely  to  be  living
    close to Mogadishu and had lived in the area in very turbulent times.

Permission to appeal

10. An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  the  basis  that
    there had been little by way of findings to  support  the  notion  that
    there had been durable change and it  was  safe  to  return  people  to
    Mogadishu.  All that the Tribunal had stated by way of explaining  that
    there had been a durable change of circumstances since the decision  in
    AMM was to be found at paragraphs 34 and 35 and a quote from a BBC  on-
    line report.

11. The Tribunal's reasoning did not establish the existence of very strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence justifying the departure from  AMM
    and the reasoning was therefore inadequate.

12. The fact of Al-Shabaab's withdrawal from Mogadishu in August  2011  was
    known to the Tribunal  in  AMM  (Somalia)  and  its  consequences  were
    considered by the Tribunal in great detail.

13. The sources of Article 15(c) risk identified by  the  Tribunal  in  AMM
    were Al-Shabaab's resort to asymmetric warfare following its withdrawal
    from Mogadishu and the Tribunal needed to rely on cogent evidence  that
    those forces of risk had disappeared  or  materially  and  sufficiently
    diminished.

14. The Tribunal relied on the reports referred  to  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal letter which identified many positive  improvements  in
    the security and humanitarian protection situation in Mogadishu.  These
    reports were relied on to support this submission but only one  of  the
    reports quoted in the refusal letters specifically addressed the  risks
    identified in AMM and that was the report in the Somali Bulletin  dated
    17 August 2012.  This, however,  identified  that  the  Somali  capital
    still encountered terrorism mode.

15. In the light of that evidence and the absence of other evidence  quoted
    in the reasons for refusal letter, it could not be  treated  as  cogent
    evidence that there had been durable change in the security situation.

16. The FCO Report of Al-Shabaab withdrawal of  international  support  was
    that "ultimately this should create the space for  improved  governance
    standards and greater protection of human rights".

17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway
    on the basis that the judge had erred with respect to consideration  of
    the appeal under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  in
    failing to give  adequate  reasons  for  departing  from  the  relevant
    country guidance being AMM.

Conclusions regarding the Error of Law

18. At the hearing Mr Toal confirmed that his  challenge  was  confined  to
    Article 15(c) and the humanitarian protection of the  appellant  rather
    than a claim with respect to asylum or under the Human Rights  Act.   I
    have therefore considered this aspect of the claim only.

19. In his determination [27] the judge correctly  referred  to  SG  (Iraq)
    which established at paragraph 47 that "Tribunal Judges are required to
    take country guidance determinations into account and  to  follow  them
    unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are  adduced
    justifying their not doing so".

20. The country guidance for Somalia is at present and was at the  time  of
    the determination AMM.  AMM reviewed 1,266 pieces of evidence, an index
    of which is annexed at the  end  of  AMM.   The  fact  of  Al-Shabaab's
    departure was considered by AMM and this is referred to at paragraph  3
    of AMM.  Paragraph 342 refers to the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab and there
    are references to the evidence, for example at paragraph 286  that  the
    likelihood was that Al-Shabaab would "employ asymmetrical, hit and  run
    terrorist tactics, such as suicide bombings".  Paragraph 313 refers  to
    the fact that civil war had entered a new phase  in  Mogadishu  and  at
    paragraph 340 of AMM that there "remained places where civilians  could
    properly be said to run Article 15(c) risks both from the  asymmetrical
    warfare which Al-Shabaab was even then tending to use  in  those  areas
    but also from undisciplined elements of the TFG's forces.

21. AMM stated at 350, and indeed  the  judge  quoted  this,  that  at  the
    present time an Article 15(c) risk existed in respect of  the  majority
    of those in Mogadishu.

22. However AMM identified that there would be certain exceptions and these
    were identified at paragraph 357 such as:

         "a category of middle class or professional  persons  in  Mogadishu
         who can live to a reasonable standard, in circumstances  where  the
         Article  15(c),  which  exists  for  the  great  majority  of   the
         population, does not apply.  A returnee from the United Kingdom  to
         such a milieu would not, therefore, run an Article 15(c) risk, even
         if forcibly returned.  Into this category we  place  those  who  by
         reason of their  connection  with  "powerful  actors  such  as  the
         TFG/AMISOM, will be able to avoid the generalised risk".

23. Indeed, at paragraph 358 the Tribunal confirmed that  the  significance
    of that category should not be  overstated  and  "for  most  people  in
    Mogadishu the Article 15(c) risk persists  at  the  present  time"  and
    further "in the case of a claimant for international protection, a fact-
    finder would need to be satisfied that there were  cogent  grounds  for
    finding that the claimant fell within such a category".

24. The judge at the First-tier Tribunal determined that the  situation  in
    Mogadishu had improved to the extent that he could depart from AMM  and
    this I find to be an error of law for these reasons.

25. First he stated at paragraph  34  that  the  refusal  letter  mentioned
    improvements in the situation in Somalia since  the  decision  in  AMM.
    However, it was confirmed that the full reports of which extracts  were
    identified in the Reasons for Refusal Letter were not submitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and thus could not be judged in the overall context
    of the full report.  I find this to be an error.  I can understand that
    the respondent would wish to  outline  the  improved  situation  within
    Mogadishu but I do consider that the  full  reports  should  have  been
    submitted in support of the evidence and to ensure that a balanced view
    of the extracts could be discerned.  Relying on extracts  alone  cannot
    be reliable evidence with which to support cogent findings.

26. Ms Vidyadharan valiantly took me through the reports  and  the  Reasons
    for  Refusal  Letter  but  I  note  that  many  of  the  assertions  of
    improvement in the security situation were in fact qualified and I note
    that the British Diplomatic Mission has located itself in  the  airport
    compound.

27. Further, as Mr Toal pointed out, the Somalia Bulletin which was  quoted
    stated that the allied forces were gaining  military  influence  in  an
    increasingly larger part of south Somalia  but  the  same  report  also
    indicated at paragraph 45 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter  identified
    that "the Somali capital is still in counter terrorism mode".

28. Further the Reasons for Refusal Letter on which the  judge  placed  his
    view that he could depart from AMM and that there was a durable change,
    resulted from the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  Human  Rights  and
    Democracy 2011 Report.  This report stated "the security  landscape  of
    Somalia was changing rapidly" but even this report  stated  "ultimately
    this should create the space for  improved  governance,  standards  and
    greater protection of human rights".

29. A further Report on the International Institute  of  Strategic  Studies
    Armed Conflict Database dated 2011 referred to  the  Al-Shabaab  having
    partially pulled out from Mogadishu and a reference to the  temporarily
    weakened Al-Shabaab.

30. These reports  when  analysed  thoroughly  did  not  constitute  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence and indeed the references  to  the
    reports at paragraphs 46, 47 and 48 of the refusal letter were  reports
    which had already been considered by AMM when it came to the conclusion
    that the majority of those returned to Mogadishu would be  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.

31. The judge also made a reference at paragraph 34 to a BBC on-line report
    that Al-Shabaab had withdrawn from Mogadishu in August  2011  and  also
    the key town of Afgoye in May 2012.  Mr Toal confirmed  that  this  was
    not a report submitted by the appellant's  representatives  and  indeed
    the Home Office Presenting Officer was not  aware  of  a  report  being
    submitted.

32. It is not clear that this was evidence submitted by either party but in
    any event I find that the conclusions by the judge at paragraph 36 that
    there had been a durable change of circumstances since AMM could not be
    supported by adequate reasoning or in the identification of reports  to
    support the concept of durable change.

33. As such, I find that there is an error by the judge in  departing  from
    the country guidance and that the decision should  be  remade  only  in
    respect of the assessment of 15(c) risk to  the  appellant  should  she
    return to Somalia.

34. At the  error  of  law  hearing  Ms  Vidyadharan  attempted  to  submit
    documentation to which Mr Toal objected.  As directions  had  not  been
    issued for a substantive hearing the matter was adjourned to 15th  July
    2012 in order to allow time for further documentation to be adduced  by
    the Secretary of State.

The substantive hearing

35. At the hearing on 15th July 2013 Ms Isherwood  attempted  to  submit  3
    further documents.  This was a Somalian  Bulletin  dated  May  2013,  a
    Landinfo update dated October 2012 and Danish Immigration Report  dated
    January 2013.  Mr Toal objected to their production.  Bearing  in  mind
    that there had been an adjournment specifically for the  production  of
    further evidence I refused to admit lengthy documents at  such  a  late
    stage.  The second and third documents had been superseded  by  further
    information submitted for example by a Landinfo report dated  May  2013
    and which was before me.

36. Mr Toal made submissions that there had been no  durable  change  since
    AMM.  The Landinfo report of May 2013 indicated  asymmetrical  warfare,
    hit and run  attacks  and  assassinations  and  violence  from  militia
    groups. This was the position before AMM.  The  report  indicated  that
    violence went up and down and there had been  an  increased  number  of
    sexual based assaults.  In addition the government forces were a source
    of  risk.  Further  the  Amnesty  International  report  indicated  the
    fragility of the situation.  There were no cogent reasons for departing
    from the country guidance or finding that  the  appellant  was  in  the
    exempted category referred to in paragraph 357 of AMM.

37. Mt Toal asserted that at paragraph 31 of the  determination  the  judge
    accepted some of the appellant's account.  When civil war broke out she
    could not return and she had no experience  of  living  in  Somalia  or
    Mogadishu. She had lived, according to her witness statement, in  harsh
    conditions in Ethiopia and yet had chosen not to return to Somalia.  If
    she had belonged to a group affording  her  protection  she  could  and
    would have returned to Somalia.   Paragraph  35  of  the  determination
    indicated that her parents and siblings lived in  Mogadishu  but  there
    was no evidence that they belonged to the middle classes.   Her  mother
    sold tomatoes and the father did not work.  Her parents  lived  in  the
    Afgoye corridor which was the location  of  many  refugees.   In  other
    words the family had been internally  displaced.    AMM  had  indicated
    that those in the Afgoye corridor were at risk. The judge accepted  the
    evidence that the family moved because of  war  and  her  evidence  was
    consistent with the time that there was mass displacement. Further  the
    judge found  that  she  belonged  to  a  minority  clan.   The  Amnesty
    International report indicated that minority clans remained at risk and
    were discriminated against.

38. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge had found the appellant deceitful
    and her account untrue. It was accepted that she  had  been  living  in
    Ethiopia. Her family had, however, remained in Mogadishu.  This  was  a
    female with family who had remained in Mogadishu and who had  not  been
    found to be truthful. She was a Somali national but  the  rest  of  her
    account was found to be untruthful. The Amnesty Report  indicated  that
    the situation was improving. The Human Rights Watch report  dated  31st
    January 2013 at Page 46 of the appellant's bundle showed the  situation
    was  moving  forward  and  it  was  acknowledged  that  things   needed
    improvement but the problems were being addressed.  Although  abuse  of
    females was an issue this was someone with family. The Landinfo  report
    was evidence that Al Shabaab were  weakening.   Targeted  attacks  were
    reducing. The government were  addressing  concerns.  Page  31  of  the
    report indicated that the appellant was not at risk from being  from  a
    minority clan. People were able to move about. Her family had been able
    to remain in Mogadishu and she would be returning to  a  large  family.
    The reports indicated durable change.

39. Mr Toal responded that the fact that the family remained  in  Mogadishu
    did not confirm that the appellant was part  of  the  exempt  category.
    Paragraphs 346 to 350 of AMM identified that the risk  was  because  of
    the nature and pattern of  violence  and  this  had  improved  but  the
    improvement in the security situation was not sufficiently durable.

Conclusions

40. I preserved the findings of the previous  determination  save  for  the
    assessment in relation to Humanitarian Protection.  The  appellant  was
    found not to be credible and the question at hand was whether a  woman,
    who had been found not to be a credible witness, was a Somali  national
    who had lived in Ethiopia for much of her life and was a  member  of  a
    minority clan, could be safely returned to Somalia.  The judge appeared
    to accept in his determination [33] that the family lived in the Afgoye
    corridor.

41. The respondent maintained that the appellant as a woman could be safely
    returned.

42. The question is what is the effect of the adverse  credibility  finding
    against the appellant?  AMM gave guidance on this and stated  that  the
    significance or negative pull of the lie would depend not only  on  the
    strength of the background evidence but on whether the lie was about an
    issue that was central to the disposition of the appeal.  It  was  open
    to the Tribunal to approach with such  caution  the  person's  evidence
    regarding matters that are central to the current claim.

43. I refer to AMM 568 which addressed MA (Somalia) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department and the question of  the  extent  to  which  an
    appellant who has been found  to  have  told  lies,  should  have  that
    finding held against him in determining  entitlement  to  international
    protection.   The  first  task  is  to  decide,  on  the  evidence  and
    circumstances  other  than  the  evidence  given  by   the   individual
    concerned,  what  the  likelihood  of  him  being  without   sufficient
    protection if returned to Somalia and secondly it should be  considered
    whether the particular evidence establishes  a  reasonable  possibility
    that he or she has no protection on return to Somalia.

44. The question is whether the lies have an  impact  on  the  humanitarian
    protection by  virtue  of  the  findings  regarding  the  socioeconomic
    position and connections of the appellant.  The appellant's  claim  was
    disbelieved in relation to her rape and abuse and the hands of  the  Al
    Shabaab but she stated that she had lived in Ethiopia for most  of  her
    life and was in contact with her family in Somalia.    I  do  not  find
    that the lies in this instance show a cogent reason  for  finding  that
    she was connected to powerful actors or was otherwise exempted from the
    category of those requiring humanitarian protection. I accept that  the
    appellant's family are  living  in  the  Afgoye  corridor  which  would
    indicate that they are probably amongst the internally displaced.  I do
    not find that the appellant, on the  account  which  was  accepted,  is
    anything other from a family of modest means who appeared to have  been
    displaced.

45. In relation to Article 15(c), AMM (Somalia) CG [2011] UKUT  00445  gave
    clear guidance as to the proper  approach  to  the  assessment  of  the
    Article 15(c) risk to returnees to Mogadishu and concluded that such  a
    risk existed for the great majority of returnees.   At  paragraph  357,
    and which is cited above, the Tribunal acknowledged that  there  was  a
    category of middle class or professional people in Mogadishu who  could
    live to a reasonable standard in the  circumstances  of  their  Article
    15(c) risk which existed for the great majority of people did not apply
    but added at paragraph 358:

         "The significance of the category we have just identified  relating
         to middle class professional and well connected  people  living  in
         Mogadishu should not however be overstated.   For  most  people  in
         Mogadishu the Article 15(c) risk persists at the present time.   In
         the case of the  claimant  for  international  protection,  a  fact
         finder would need to be satisfied that there  were  cogent  grounds
         for finding that the claimant fell within such a category."

46. The appellant's particular personal circumstances are that  he  claimed
    she had lived in reduced circumstances in Ethiopia and in  crowded  and
    harsh conditions.  She was also found to be a member of a minority clan
    and therefore there was absent a cogent ground  for  finding  that  she
    fell within the category of middle class or  professional  persons  who
    can live to a reasonable standard or someone who  has  connection  with
    "powerful actors".   I note that at paragraph of  the  significance  of
    the category identified was not to be  overstated  and  that  for  most
    people in Mogadishu the Article 15(c) risk  persisted  at  the  present
    time.

47. I was invited to consider that the situation in Mogadishu had  improved
    considerably such that I should no longer follow AMM.

48. SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    940 at para 47 states

    'decision makers and tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take  Country
    Guidance determinations into account, and to follow  them  unless  very
    strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence  are  adduced  justifying
    their not doing so'.

49. Nonetheless it is clear at paragraph 363 of AMM that in assessing cases
    judicial fact-finders must decide whether the evidence was the same  or
    similar to that before the Tribunal  when  deciding  AMM  and  to  that
    extent are not required to have the findings as authoritative.

50. I therefore turn to a consideration of whether the facts before me  are
    so different in relation to Mogadishu to enable me to depart from  AMM.



51. The legal burden of proving a place is safe  does  not  rest  with  the
    respondent, but at paragraph 345 the Tribunal in AMM confirmed that any
    assessment that  material  circumstances  have  changed  will  need  to
    demonstrate that

    'such changes are well established evidentially and durable'.

52. Much of the background information cited in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter by the respondent was either material considered in  AMM,  which
    reviewed reports and evidence to 28th September 2011 or  extracts  from
    reports.  The full reports identified in the reasons for refusal letter
    were not produced to me.  Even within the extracts given in the reasons
    letter there  were  ambiguous  statements.   For  example  the  Somalia
    Bulletin dated 17th August  2012  although  used  to  assert  that  the
    situation had improved still referred to allied forces as only 'gaining
    military influence in an increasingly larger part of S-C Somalia'.

53. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office report extract dated 30th June 2012
    referred to 'working to deliver urgent stabilisation assistance in  the
    newly-recovered areas' and that  'ultimately  this  should  create  the
    space for improved governance standards and greater protection of human
    rights. I do not find that the statement at  4.3  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter confirming  durable  change  was  substantiated  by  the
    extracts produced.   Paragraph 45 of the letter referred to the Somalia-
    Bulletin 17/08/12 stated that 'the Somali capital is still in  counter-
    terrorism mode, and kidnap, and ransom,  improvised  explosive  devised
    and suicide bombers remain an everyday threat'.

54. The reports identified at paragraphs 46, 47 and 48 of the  reasons  for
    refusal letter were cited in AMM but nonetheless appeared to be used by
    the respondent to demonstrate durable change.

55. I considered the situation in the light of further reports produced.

56. The Somalia Operational Guidance Note October 2012  recorded  at  3.6.7
    that the security situation was reported to remain volatile as at 1 May
    2012 and the terrorist attacks from Al Shabaab remained  constant.   At
    3.6.6 the report  cited  a  Danish  Immigration  Service  fact  finding
    mission in February 2012 which identified that Mogadishu was much safer
    environment in terms of civilian causalities.  But at 3.6.10 the report
    stated that the number of injuries  or  loss  of  life  resulting  from
    unconventional warfare and insecurity remained very high. At 3.6.12 the
    security situation was cited as remaining unpredictable.

57. The Amnesty International public statement dated 15th May  2013  stated
    that

         "In the light of the above the organisation has no doubt  that  the
         security situation  within  south  and  central  Somalia  including
         Mogadishu  remains  extremely   volatile.    Lack   of   authority,
         discipline and control of government forces and its armed  militias
         mean the government forces  both  fail  to  provide  protection  or
         security  for  its  civilians  and  are  themselves  a  source   of
         insecurity."

         And further

         "In Mogadishu there is ongoing violence through both indiscriminate
         and targeted attacks.  Al Shabaab though weakened retains influence
         and despite their diminished capacity is still able  to  carry  out
         direct attack  on  civilians  and  indiscriminate  attacks  through
         suicide  bombs,  improvised  explosive  device  (IED)  and  grenade
         attacks.

58. The Landinfo report dated 16th April to 17th May 2013  identified  that
    in Mogadishu there continued to be  underground  Al-Shabaab  cells  and
    terrorism despite Al-Shabaab's partial combat withdrawal from Mogadishu
    in August 2011.  Some security  improvements  were  identified  and  Al
    Shabaab target specific groups, although I note groups  which  did  not
    include the appellant.  However there are still hand  grenade  attacks,
    improvised explosions and when staging a large scale attack  Al-Shabaab
    'did not mind if civilians were killed'.  UNHCR Somalia stated that  al
    Shabaab maintained its intent and  capabilities  in  Mogadishu.    Also
    identified were crimes committed by SNAF forces against  civilians  and
    an increase in sexually based crimes, although the report  stated  that
    'when things are normal people do not fear police or SNAF soldiers'.

59. In relation to security based improvements  in  Mogadishu  at  1.6  the
    Landinfo report explained that  although  'the  security  situation  in
    Mogadishu steadily improves there is still a lot of  uncertainty.   The
    situation is not stable and it  is  not  just  serenity  and  peace  in
    Mogadishu.  The overall context in Somalia is still fragile,  in  spite
    of the security improvements and progresses that have been  made  since
    August 2011'.  Recent attacks, for example on the Supreme Court on 14th
    April 2013 were also highlighted.

60. With regard to the position on  clan  protection  the  Landinfo  report
    stated that 'clan protection is  no  longer  an  issue,  as  al-shabaab
    soldiers   do   not   differentiate   between    clans,    they    kill
    indiscriminately. And people of the same clan do not trust  each  other
    either anymore so it is not enough to be affiliated by clan to  someone
    to gain their trust or protection.  This is a general development'.

61. Overall, the information cited to  show  improvement  in  the  security
    situation did not lead me to find the change was durable as  identified
    by AMM. For the reasons given above the appellant is not in  an  exempt
    category  and  the  reports  overall,  do   not   demonstrate   durable
    improvement in the  security  situation.  I  therefore  find  that  the
    appellant is at risk in relation to an Article 15(c)  risk  should  she
    return to Somalia.

62. There was no challenge in respect of the dismissal of Articles 3 and 8.
     I therefore allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  alone
    and I dismiss the appeal in relation to Articles 3 and Article 8.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 6th August 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

