
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00443/2011
                                                               AA/00447/2011
                                                               AA/00446/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination Sent         |
|On 19 August 2013                               |On 20 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                         Muhammad Yousuf Nasir khan
                             Naureen Yousuf khan
                          Muhammad Umer Yousuf khan
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Rackstraw, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is  the
    husband of the second appellant and father of the third appellant.  The
    appellants appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Buchanan) which had dismissed their appeals against  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated 21 December 2010 refusing their claims for asylum  and
    making directions for their removal from the United Kingdom.  The first
    and second appellants had first come to the United Kingdom as students.

 2. The initial hearing of the appeal took place  in  North  Shields  on  3
    August 2011.  Following that hearing I set aside the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and made  directions  for  a  resumed  hearing.
    Unfortunately, there has been a very  considerable  delay  between  the
    initial and resumed hearings in this appeal.   A  period  of  over  two
    years has elapsed during which the first and second appellant have  had
    a further child (Moosa) who was born on 20 February 2012.

 3. Notwithstanding the directions which I made for further evidence to  be
    adduced, the first appellant told me that he understood  the  statement
    on the face of the notice of hearing  ("the  Upper  Tribunal  will  not
    consider evidence which was not before the First-tier  Tribunal  unless
    the Upper Tribunal has specifically decided to admit that evidence") as
    meaning that he  was  unable  to  adduce  new  evidence  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It is not clear to me why the first  appellant  (who  is  an
    intelligent educated and resourceful individual) should have failed  to
    understand the meaning of paragraph 2(ii) of my directions of 4  August
    2011.

 4. The first and second appellants gave oral evidence at the hearing on 19
    August 2013.  They  were  cross-examined  by  Mrs  Rackstraw,  for  the
    respondent. The first appellant explained that he had, since  the  date
    of the initial hearing, lost  contact  with  both  of  his  parents  in
    Pakistan.  They  had  fallen  out  over  questions  of  money  and  his
    marriage.  Further, the first appellant explained  that  he  had  moved
    away in social terms from the Pakistani community in the North East  of
    England and had moved towards a  greater  involvement  with  the  wider
    community.  He had been involved in voluntary work (including work  for
    the Mayor's Charity in Hartlepool) and  had  also  become  involved  in
    politics (he has been a member of the Labour Party  for  the  last  two
    years and has been encouraged  to  believe  that  he  could  stand  for
    election as a local councillor, if his immigration status  were  to  be
    regularised).  The second appellant has also been involved  in  charity
    work and has used her skills as a qualified accountant  to  help  local
    organisations.

 5. I shall deal first with the error of law of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Granting permission, Judge Chalkley had criticised the lack  of  detail
    in the Immigration Judge's determination.   He  noted,  in  particular,
    that there was no determination of the Article 8 ECHR appeal in respect
    of the private lives of the  appellants.   At  [20.1]  the  Immigration
    Judge had written:

         "There was no suggestion that the appellant and his spouse and  his
         child would be separated on a  return  to  Pakistan.   They  are  a
         family unit and the appellant's claim having  failed  their  claims
         fail too.  There would be  no  interference  with  family  life  or
         indeed private life such as to give rise to a potential  breach  of
         Article 8 of the ECHR by removal of the family to Pakistan."

 6. At [20.2] he went on to say:

         "In my opinion, had the issues turned on proportionality,  I  would
         have determined that the  legitimate  interest  of  maintaining  an
         effective immigration control would have rendered  removal  of  the
         appellants proportionate in this case."

 7. I find that those paragraphs are insufficient as a determination of the
    Article 8 ECHR appeal.  What the judge says about family life is cogent
    but very brief and he has not sought at all to examine the interference
    to the private lives of the appellants which might be caused  by  their
    removal.   The first appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  in  May
    2004, nearly seven years before the First-tier Tribunal  hearing;  that
    fact alone should have indicated to the judge that the first  appellant
    had developed some degree of private life in this country.  I find that
    the judge should have considered the private lives  of  the  appellants
    or, at the very least, have given an explanation as  to  why  he  found
    that any interference which would be  caused  to  those  private  lives
    would not be sufficiently grave as to engage Article 8 ECHR.

 8. I consider that Judge Chalkley believed that the asylum/Article 3  ECHR
    determination was not arguably open to  challenge,  although  I  accept
    that the grant of perm is not entirely clear on that matter.  The First-
    tier Tribunal judge has given a number of detailed credibility findings
    (in particular, from paragraphs 13 onwards) which, in my opinion, fully
    supported and justified his dismissal  of  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.  I can find no error of law in that part of the
    determination. The resumed hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  been
    concerned only with the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 9. In her submissions, Mrs Rackstraw referred to the negative  credibility
    findings made by the Immigration Judge.  Those findings should, in  her
    submission, be given weight in the Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  new
    evidence relating  to  the  private  lives  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants, although she did not go so far as  to  say  that  I  should
    reject the account of an increased involvement in the  local  community
    which those appellants gave to me at the resumed hearing.

10. I find that the appellants could and should have  supported  their  own
    evidence with evidence from those members of their local  community  in
    Hartlepool with whom they claim now to be so actively involved.   I  am
    prepared to accept, however, that both the first and second  appellants
    have been involved to a greater extent than  before  with  their  local
    community. There was certainly little evidence of any such  involvement
    at the time of the first  appellant's  asylum  interview  (13  December
    2010).  In answer to question 18 ("have you made any other  significant
    relationships in the  UK?")  the  first  appellant  had  replied,  "Not
    really.  I have not such a strong circle.   I  have  friends  obviously
    they support a little bit."   The  appellants'  increased  involvement,
    therefore, seems to have occurred since that date and,  from  the  oral
    evidence given, would appear to have gathered pace during the two years
    since the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

11. I agree with Mrs Rackstraw that the appellants' poor credibility cannot
    be ignored.  Whilst I accept the account of the recent  involvement  of
    the appellants in local affairs I find that their lack  of  credibility
    as witnesses as identified by the Immigration Judge  touches  upon  the
    question of  motive.   I  find  it  likely  that  the  appellants  have
    increased their involvement very largely with a view to impressing this
    Tribunal with the extent of their new private life ties in  Hartlepool.
    That finding, in turn, leads me to conclude  that  those  private  life
    roots are not as strong or as durable as the appellants would  have  me
    believe.  But for the existence of these proceedings, I do not  believe
    the appellants would have been  involved  in  the  local  community  in
    Hartlepool to anything like the same extent.  If they  are  removed  to
    Pakistan, I accept that they will lose those  private  life  ties  but,
    given what I find to be their motivation for creating them in the first
    place, I do not find that the distress or inconvenience the severing of
    those ties will cause will make a significant impact upon their private
    lives.

12. I acknowledge that the third appellant is doing well at  school.   This
    is perhaps  not  surprising  given  that  his  parents  are  themselves
    intelligent and well-educated individuals.  The first appellant told me
    about his interest in knowledge of information technology.  His  skills
    in this field  would  be  easily  transferrable  to  business  life  in
    Pakistan.  The same is true for the second  appellant's  qualifications
    in accountancy.  I agree with Mrs Rackstraw that this family will  find
    little, if any difficulty reintegrating into the Pakistan workplace and
    society  and  I  find  that  the  first  appellant,  as  a  resourceful
    individual, would rapidly find employment with  which  to  support  his
    family.

13. Set against the (relatively modest) interference which would be  caused
    to the appellants by their removal to Pakistan is the  public  interest
    concerned with that removal.  The first and second appellants  came  to
    the United Kingdom as students and I find that they  can  have  had  no
    justifiable expectation of being allowed to remain  here  indefinitely.
    They have advanced an asylum claim which has been found to be false.  I
    find that the public  interest  concerned  with  the  removal  of  such
    individuals in the furtherance of immigration control is a strong  one.
    In my opinion, that interest outweighs any inconvenience and disruption
    which would be caused to the private lives of  these  appellants  as  a
    consequence of their return to Pakistan. Their family life  may  suffer
    some dislocation but they will, of course, be  removed  together.   The
    Article 8 ECHR appeals are dismissed accordingly.

DECISION

These appeals are dismissed.



Signed                              Date 1 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
