


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number:     AA/00339/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 7th June 2017                   |On: 27th June 2017                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S. Khan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Albania  date  of  birth  1988.  Her
    dependants are her two minor children, born in  March  2007  and  March
    2009.  She has permission[1] to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK  Lawrence)  to  dismiss  her  protection
    appeal. The determination was promulgated on the 15th January 2017.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a  claim  for  protection  involving  two  minors.
    Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an  order  in  the
    following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Matters in Issue, Discussion and Findings


 3. The decision under appeal was  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  17th
    December 2015 to refuse  to  grant  protection.  That  was  the  second
    decision in this case, asylum having been first  refused  on  the  31st
    August 2014, and the matter  revisited  following  receipt  of  further
    evidence. The Respondent asked that the Tribunal consider both  refusal
    letters.  The Respondent did not challenge the Appellant's account that
    she had in the past been subjected to serious domestic violence at  the
    hands of her husband.  The  claim  was  nevertheless  rejected  on  the
    grounds that the threat did not persist, that the Appellant could  turn
    to the Albanian authorities for assistance and /or that she could avoid
    any future harm to herself or her children by going to  live  somewhere
    in Albania other than her home town of Durres.  When  the  matter  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal, these then were the matters in issue.


 4. This appeal raises a short point. That is that at  the  outset  of  its
    reasoning [at paragraph 11 of its determination] the  Tribunal  rejects
    outright the Appellant's claim to have ever been  subject  to  domestic
    violence.  It is from this  starting  point  that  it  evaluates  risk,
    sufficiency of protection and internal  flight  alternatives.  Mr  Khan
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in going  behind  the
    express concession as to fact made in the refusal letters. He submitted
    that the rather thin reasons given for rejecting the evidence could not
    be sustained given the concession and the fact that the  Appellant  had
    been deprived of an  opportunity  to  address  the  concerns  that  the
    Tribunal had apparently had about her claim.

 5. For the Respondent Mr Harrison conceded, having had regard to the notes
    of his colleague who represented the Respondent at first instance, that
    the Appellant must have left the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  entirely
    unaware that the Tribunal had  doubts  about  the  credibility  of  her
    claim. He confirmed the Respondent's position that the account  is  not
    challenged.  He further agreed that the reasons given by  the  Tribunal
    were weak.

 6. I am satisfied that the Tribunal did err in the manner  agreed  by  the
    parties. It was manifestly unfair for the Appellant to  find  her  case
    dismissed on grounds that she had  believed  were  settled.  These  are
    adversarial proceedings and  absent  particular  reasons  the  Tribunal
    should accept concessions as to  facts  made  by  the  Respondent.  The
    reasons given in this  instance  did  not  amount  to  good  ones.  The
    Tribunal dismissed the entire claim  on  the  grounds  that  a  violent
    husband would have come to 'get' the Appellant in  the  week  that  she
    stayed with her parents, about an hour away from the matrimonial  home.
     That assumes a number of things that without further evaluation  could
    simply not be assumed, not least that a violent perpetrator of abuse is
    likely to act in a predictable  and  logical  manner.    I  have  given
    consideration to whether  the  decision  could  be  maintained  on  the
    grounds that the appeal  was  also  dismissed  with  reference  to  the
    Respondent's  arguments  as  to  internal  flight  and  sufficiency  of
    protection, but upon reflection I  agree  with  the  parties  that  the
    entire body of the reasoning must be tainted by the error identified in
    the grounds. If the Appellant was, for instance,  a  survivor  of  very
    serious domestic abuse, this might be relevant to her ability  to  cope
    living alone with two children (one of whom has a severe disability) in
    Albania.


      Decisions


 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 8.  The  parties  agreed  that  the  most  appropriate  disposal,  in  the
    circumstances, would be for the matter to be heard de novo in the First-
    tier Tribunal. I agree.

 9. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                 31st May 2017




                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on the 22nd
March 2017


