
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00221/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2016                           |On 25 January 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  imran [y]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 21 January
    2016 refusing further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge
    dismissed his appeal, attaching particular weight with  regard  to  the
    protection claim on the earlier decision by a First-tier Judge in  2011
    on an upgrade appeal.  As  regards  the  Article  8  claim,  the  judge
    concluded that the factors weighing  in  the  appellant's  favour  were
    outweighed by the respondent's right to exercise effective  immigration
    control and as a consequence dismissed the appeal.

2.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    first that the judge had attached undue weight to the earlier  decision
    and had failed to take account of subsequent  country  guidance  in  AA
    [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) which was relevant bearing in mind that, though
    the appellant was 18 by the time of the hearing,  there  is  no  bright
    line distinction between a person who was almost 18 and  a  person  who
    was just 18, and there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  as  how  the
    appellant appeared to be young and vulnerable looking.  In addition  it
    was argued that the judge had failed  to  make  clear  findings  as  to
    whether or not he accepted that the appellant would have family to whom
    he could return if he were removed to Afghanistan and had also erred in
    finding that the appellant could safely relocate.  Criticism  was  also
    made of the Article 8 findings with regard to paragraph 276ADE(iv)  and
    it was argued that, given his age and circumstances there would be very
    serious obstacles to his  integration  in  Kabul.   The  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules was also argued to be flawed on  the  basis
    that the wrong test had been applied and there was a lack of reasoning.
     Permission was granted on all grounds.

3.   In his submissions Mr Lay argued that permission had  been  granted  on
    the basis the judge was obliged to deal with the matters that had  been
    raised in the skeleton argument rather than essentially basing  herself
    on the determination in 2011.  Two aspects of the protection claim were
    advanced: first with regard to the asylum claim and also  the  position
    of the appellant as a vulnerable young returnee to  Nangahar.   Clearly
    the judge had to have regard to  the  earlier  determination,  but  the
    country guidance in AA was more generous than the position in 2011 with
    regard to risk categories concerning children.  The  treatment  of  the
    2011 determination as determinative was  therefore  problematic.   Also
    there was not a full consideration of the alternative protection  claim
    and the claimant was vulnerable.  In  addition  there  was  mention  of
    Article 15(c) at paragraph 57 of the skeleton argument with  regard  to
    risk on return to Nangahar, and that had not been addressed.

4.   On the appellant's behalf it was argued  that  the  2011  determination
    lacked  clear  findings  of  fact.   There  was  no  clear  finding  on
    credibility and whether the appellant had family support in Kabul.   In
    any event there was fresh oral evidence in 2016 about contact with  the
    lost family, and a fresh analysis was required with regard  to  support
    in Kabul.  There was no finding in  the  current  determination  as  to
    whether there were any family members who could help the  appellant  in
    Nangahar as the focus was on Kabul, but a lot had been said  about  his
    current circumstances.

5.   As a separate point, since the appellant was just 18  at  the  time  of
    the determination the judge should have considered whether to treat him
    essentially as a child.  Within this regard the witness statements were
    relevant and it was not enough to  say  he  was  an  adult  purely  and
    simply.

6.   The assessment of paragraph 276ADE lacked full  reasoning  with  regard
    to very significant obstacles.  The appellant had been only 13 when  he
    came to the United Kingdom.  The judge did  not  say  he  could  go  to
    Nangahar but said he could go to Kabul so it was necessary to  consider
    obstacles to him living there for the first time as an  adult  who  had
    been in the United Kingdom since  the  age  of  13.   The  evidence  of
    Antonia Young required to be considered.

7.   The judge accepted that the appellant had family life with  his  foster
    family but there  was  no  analysis  of  the  proportionality  of  that
    separation.  He had a maternal uncle in Kabul but not his  mother.   It
    was necessary for there to be a full Article 8 assessment  outside  the
    Rules and that would need to be consistent with former  children  cases
    as he had only recently become an adult.  In effect the  2011  decision
    had been treated as a finishing point and not a starting point.

8.   In his submissions Mr Whitwell argued that the submissions went  beyond
    the grounds with regard to the  reference  to  Article  15(c)  and  the
    challenge  to  the  lack  of  reasoning  concerning  very   significant
    obstacles.  He relied on the Rule 24 response.  No  material  error  of
    law in the determination  had  been  identified.   It  was  clear  from
    paragraph 12 of the judge's decision that Counsel  had  not  sought  to
    persuade the judge  to  depart  from  the  previous  determination  and
    factual findings in respect of the asylum claim  and  at  paragraph  27
    background evidence had not been identified that would enable a finding
    that the appellant would face very serious obstacles to his integration
    if returned to Afghanistan.  The grounds complained  about  matters  of
    weight and that was a matter for the judge.   The  Devaseelan  guidance
    had been properly applied.

9.   To an extent the issues raised in  Article  8  were  parasitic  on  the
    matters with which grounds 1 and 2  are  concerned.   If  the  Tribunal
    agreed with Mr Whitwell with regard to grounds 1 and 2  then  ground  3
    could not succeed.  It  was  unhelpful  that  the  judge  had  employed
    concepts from Article 8 for  example  the  reference  to  very  serious
    obstacles to integration, in  the  course  of  the  evaluation  of  the
    protection claim, but that was to be found in the human rights  section
    of the determination.  Paragraph 25 was of relevance setting out as  it
    did the public interest question and the relevant factors  there.   The
    appeal should be dismissed.

10.  By way of reply Mr Lay argued that the  substantive  protection  points
    made in the skeleton had not been conceded, as the judge had  accepted.
    It was unclear exactly how the hearing had proceeded.   The  errors  of
    law complained of concerning the proper application of the  Devalseelan
    guidance and a failure to deal with AA and the bright line point.   The
    skeleton raised paragraph 276ADE  and  that  assisted  with  regard  to
    Article 8 even if there was no appeal  on  that.   Evidence  about  the
    problems that would be faced in Kabul had been put to the judge.  There
    were  also  the  subjective  issues  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  It was accepted that  the  Article  15C  reference  was
    rather a buried  point  in  the  skeleton.   However  many  significant
    matters had not been dealt with and the appeal should  be  allowed  and
    the matter remitted.

11.  I reserved my determination.

12.  It will be helpful to begin with the  decision  of  the  judge  in  the
    upgrade appeal in 2011.  It is right to note, as  Mr  Lay  has  pointed
    out, that there are no clear credibility  findings  in  that  decision.
    The judge noted some inconsistencies in the appellant's  interview  but
    reminded himself that he had to  be  very  cautious  about  credibility
    bearing in mind  the  appellant's  age  and  he  had  decided  that  no
    reference could be made to section 8 of the 2004 Act  in  that  regard.
    Essentially he based his decision on internal relocation,  saying  that
    even if the appellant's account was true or mainly true, on  the  basis
    of the relevant country guidance it  had  been  found  that  appellants
    could safely relocate to  Kabul.   He  noted  that  the  appellant  was
    clearly a resourceful young man who had travelled  halfway  across  the
    world, entering various countries,  and  appeared  to  have  integrated
    himself relatively well in British society and that he would be able to
    the same in Kabul, where he had an uncle and also he had two uncles  in
    Jalalabad.  He considered that there was no reason not to believe  that
    the appellant's family would not travel to Kabul to meet him  there  on
    return.  He was not satisfied  the  appellant  could  not  contact  his
    family in Afghanistan particularly as he had a family member  currently
    living in London who provided the wherewithal for the  contact  on  the
    previous occasion.

13.  In the skeleton argument  before  the  judge  in  2016  the  Devaseelan
    guidance is noted, and also the fact that the judge  did  not  in  fact
    make any credibility findings but took the  case  at  its  highest  and
    concluded that the appellant could internally relocate.  It was  argued
    that the claim was credible and plausible, and also that  the  guidance
    in AA was relevant with regard to the risk  of  ill-treatment  of  lone
    children.  The point was made that the appellant  had  had  no  contact
    with his family since a call with his mother in  2011,  that  Jalalabad
    where he had two uncles was only 30 minutes or so from his home village
    and it was reasonably likely that he would not be safe there  from  the
    Taliban, and he had never had any contact with the paternal  uncle  who
    lived in Kabul.  The "bright line" point from KA [2002] EWCA  Civ  1014
    was also made with regard to the potential ongoing vulnerability  of  a
    person who was still only 18 who it was said faced the same risks as  a
    child particularly from the statements in the bundle indicating that he
    appeared to have certain vulnerabilities.

14.  The judge  at  paragraph  12  noted  that  no  new  evidence  had  been
    identified that would have enabled a departure from the  first  judge's
    findings and concluded, applying the  Devaseelan  principles,  that  in
    respect of the protection element  of  the  appeal  the  appellant  was
    seeking to rely on facts which were not materially different from those
    before the first judge and  that  he  should  regard  those  issues  as
    settled by the determination of the first judge and  make  findings  in
    line with that.  But essentially that was all the judge said about  the
    protection issues in the case, having noted what had been said  by  the
    judge in 2011.
15.  The difficulties with this approach in my view  are  essentially  those
    as set out in the grounds and developed by Mr Lay.  The judge  in  2011
    did not make clear findings on the credibility of the claim.  He  noted
    the presence of two uncles in Jalalabad and an uncle in Kabul  and  the
    fact that the appellant had spoken to his mother on the  telephone  and
    adverted to the likelihood that the family would  travel  to  Kabul  to
    meet him there on return.  By contrast it was said  in  2016  that  the
    appellant had had no further contact with his family since 2011, he had
    never had any contact with the uncle in Kabul, and there was  potential
    risk from the Taliban in Jalalabad where he had two uncles.   To  these
    points require to be added the AA issue as to risk  to  lone  children,
    the  bright  line  point,  and  the  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    appearance and the vulnerability that  he  presented.   None  of  these
    matters either separately or cumulatively is  in  any  sense  a  killer
    point for the appellant.  But they were matters  that  required  to  be
    evaluated by the judge rather than, as she essentially did, taking  the
    2011 determination as determinative.  We do not know  exactly  how  the
    hearing was conducted, but it is clear that there are  were  number  of
    points made over several pages in the skeleton argument concerned  with
    the protection issues which appear not to have been taken into  account
    by the judge.  These are matters that require to  be  considered  by  a
    judge in a proper  evaluation  of  this  claim.   To  that  extent  the
    determination is marred by an error of law.

16.  I am less concerned with the points made with regard to the  Article  8
    claim.  In essence I think the judge carried out a careful and thorough
    evaluation of the issues and this  was  done  in  the  context  of  the
    relevant legal tests.  However it seems to me that  if  the  protection
    issues are to be re-heard and argued then  that  will  inevitably  have
    some implications for the Article 8 points, and  therefore  I  consider
    that the proper resolution of this appeal is that the matter will  have
    to be reconsidered in its entirety by a  First-tier  Judge  other  than
    Judge Morgan at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
