
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 May 2014                              |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ATB
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr G Jack a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: Mr M Ume-Ezeoke of
           counsel instructed by the
                            Legal Resource Partnership

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Nigeria who was born on 7 April 1977. I will refer  to  him
      as the claimant. The Secretary of State has been given  permission  to
      appeal the determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  J  Bennett
      ("the FTTJ") who allowed, on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds,  the
      claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  19
      December 2013 to give directions for his removal from the UK following
      the refusal of asylum.


   2. The claimant arrived in the UK on 11 January 2002 with entry clearance
      as a student. His leave was extended twice and expired on 30 September
      2004. He made a further application for  leave  to  remain  which  was
      refused on 13 November 2007. He was arrested in late July  2008  after
      he was stopped by the police. He claimed asylum on 10  July  2008  and
      had a  screening  interview  on  24  February  2011.  His  substantive
      interview took place on 17 June 2011.  There  is  a  detailed  refusal
      letter dated 19 December 2013.


   3. The claimant claimed to fear persecution in Nigeria because he  was  a
      Christian. He said that his father was a Muslim but his mother  was  a
      Christian and he had become a Christian when he was about seven  years
      old. However, at the hearing before the FTTJ he  abandoned  his  claim
      for asylum.


   4. The claimant said that he was the father of a child  from  a  previous
      relationship who was born on 26 May  2009.  He  was  no  longer  in  a
      relationship with the child's mother and had not seen the child  since
      January 2011. The relationship came to an end in late 2010. On 31 July
      2013 the claimant married another woman  who  had  recently  become  a
      British citizen. She has a daughter by a previous relationship who was
      born on 30 July 2007. The daughter is a British citizen.


   5. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard his  appeal  on  13  February
      2014. Both parties were represented and the FTTJ heard  evidence  from
      the  claimant  and  his  wife.   Submissions   were   made   by   both
      representatives. The FTTJ found that the claimant's evidence could not
      be accepted unreservedly. He "has a tendency to say whatever he thinks
      will best suit his case, even if it is at the expense of  the  truth".
      His wife was found to be a credible witness. The  FTTJ  accepted  that
      they were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  intended  to
      live together permanently as spouses. She was pregnant  and  expecting
      his child.


   6. The FTTJ gave detailed consideration to the question  of  whether  the
      claimant could succeed on Article 8 human  rights  grounds  under  the
      Immigration  Rules,  reaching  the  conclusion  that  there  were   no
      insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  the  claimant's  wife
      continuing outside the  UK  whilst  the  claimant  applied  for  entry
      clearance as a spouse from outside the country. The claimant could not
      succeed on Article 8 human rights grounds under the Immigration Rules.
      The FTTJ went on to  consider  the  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  found  that  there   had   been
      substantial  delay  in  determining  the  claimant's  application  for
      asylum. This had been made in 2008. The claimant was  not  interviewed
      until 2011 and the decision was not  made  until  December  2013.  The
      Secretary of State had provided no explanation for the delay and there
      was no indication that the claimant had been responsible for any  part
      of it. The delay reduced the extent to which it could be said that the
      claimant's removal was necessary for the  enforcement  of  immigration
      control. On the other hand, Article 8 was not a means of punishing the
      Secretary of State for the delay.


   7. After consideration  of  the  relevant  case  law  the  FTTJ  said  in
      paragraph 76 and in relation to the proportionality  of  removing  the
      claimant who would then have to make an  entry  clearance  application
      for leave to enter the UK as a spouse; "In my judgement, it  would  be
      disproportionate to do so in view of  the  delay  without  giving  the
      appellant a proper chance of making an application for leave to remain
      as a spouse from within the United Kingdom that will  not  fail  under
      Section E-LTRP2 of Appendix FM because  of  his  lack  of  immigration
      status. The  length  of  the  grant  is  entirely  a  matter  for  the
      Respondent. I would only wish to make it  clear  that  nothing  in  my
      decision should be construed as meaning that I consider that he should
      be granted the full period of leave usually granted under  Article  8:
      in my view a considerably shorter period  would  be  appropriate,  but
      this is a matter for the Respondent."


   8. The appeal was allowed on Article  8  human  rights  grounds  to  this
      extent. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal
      arguing that the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by  incorrectly  applying  the
      consequences of delay by the Secretary of State, failing to take  into
      account his own conclusions that the  delay  had  not  prejudiced  the
      claimant and that he had brought an asylum  claim  which  was  without
      merit. Article 8 was not a general dispensing power enabling an appeal
      to be allowed which failed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  FTTJ
      failed  to  take  into  account  the   lack   of   any   compassionate
      circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules.


   9. Mr Jack relied on the grounds of appeal and summarised the position in
      the light of the findings made by the FTTJ. I note that  none  of  the
      findings of fact are disputed. The FTTJ had  concluded  that  for  the
      claimant to return to Nigeria in order  to  make  an  entry  clearance
      application would not cause hardship. He had  properly  dismissed  the
      appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds under the Immigration  Rules.
      Delay by the Secretary of State had not prejudiced the claimant and in
      any event the asylum claim, which had no merit, had been withdrawn  at
      the last minute. The claimant had not made an application to remain as
      a spouse whilst in this country. There was a strong public interest in
      removing him. The FTTJ appeared to have reached conclusions which were
      inexorably leading towards dismissing the appeal  yet,  in  his  final
      decision, he reached the  opposite  conclusion,  allowed  the  appeal,
      albeit to a limited extent. This was a material error of  law.  I  was
      asked to set aside the decision and to remake it without the  need  to
      hear any further evidence. No further evidence had been submitted  and
      none was required.


  10. Mr Ume-Ezeoke accepted that the  claimant  had  not  made  a  marriage
      application. However he pointed out that his solicitors had  kept  the
      Secretary of State informed of the position, submitting information as
      to changes in personal circumstances as they arose. He submitted  that
      the FTTJ had correctly assessed all the relevant  Article  8  factors,
      including delay. The delay by the Secretary of State had been extreme;
      more than 5 years without any explanation. Having considered  all  the
      evidence and the overall position in the round it was open to  him  to
      come to the conclusion that it would be right to give the claimant the
      opportunity to make a marriage application from within this country. I
      was invited to find that there was no error of law and to  uphold  the
      determination.


  11. Mr Ume-Ezeoke accepted that if I was against him and found that  there
      was an error of law such that the decision should be set aside then  I
      could remake the decision without hearing any further evidence.


  12. In reply to my question, Mr Jack accepted that  if  the  claimant  now
      made an in country application for leave to  remain  as  a  spouse  it
      would be bound to fail under E-LTRP2 because of his  lack  of  status.
      Whilst the FTTJ did not look at delay in isolation in the body of  his
      reasoning this was the only factor he set out in  reaching  his  final
      conclusion in paragraph 76.


  13. I reserved my determination.


  14. The grounds of appeal make little criticism and  in  my  judgement  no
      valid criticism of  most  of  the  FTTJ's  assessment  of  the  facts,
      reasoning and conclusions but are directed to whether, in the light of
      these, his final conclusion to allow the appeal  on  Article  8  human
      rights grounds was open to him. I find no merit in the submission that
      in reaching his final conclusion in paragraph 76 the FTTJ's  reference
      to; "in my judgement, it would be disproportionate to do so in view of
      the  delay..."  indicates  that  the  only  or  main  reason  for  the
      conclusion was the delay on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State.  I
      consider that what is said in paragraph 76 relies on  and  is  derived
      from all of the FTTJ's reasoning starting at paragraph 54.


  15. The Secretary of State agrees with  the  FTTJ's  conclusion  that  the
      claimant could not succeed on Article 8 human rights grounds under the
      Immigration  Rules.  I  can  find  no  fault  with  the  reasoning  or
      conclusion set out in paragraphs 68 and 69 that the element  of  delay
      was such as to make it necessary for the FTTJ to consider the  Article
      8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules.


  16. I find that the conclusion which the FTTJ reached in paragraph 76 was,
      whilst  unusual,  open  to  him  and  appropriate  to  the  particular
      circumstances of this case. Clearly, it was not intended that it would
      result in the more usual consequence of allowing an appeal on  Article
      8 human rights grounds which would give an individual a finite  period
      of leave to remain which would be likely to lead to indefinite  leave.
      The course of action advocated by the FTTJ which, in my judgement, the
      Secretary of State would be entitled to follow  would  result  in  the
      grant of a limited period of leave sufficient to enable  the  claimant
      to make an in country application for leave to  remain  as  a  spouse.
      Such an application would not be  bound  to  fail  because  he  lacked
      immigration status. If the application failed for other reasons on its
      merits then the claimant would have a right of appeal which,  if  that
      failed, would lead to the Secretary of State being able to remove  him
      from the UK. Looked at on his own  the  claimant's  circumstances  had
      little merit. However, I find that the FTTJ properly assessed all  the
      circumstances  including  those  of  his  wife,  the  child  she   was
      expecting, his stepdaughter and delay without giving  disproportionate
      weight to the delay in reaching a conclusion which was  open  to  him.
      The FTTJ did not take into account delay  as  a  factor  which  should
      benefit the claimant by way of punishing the Secretary  of  State.  It
      was during the period of delay that the claimant started and built  up
      what the FTTJ concluded was a genuine and subsisting relationship with
      his wife.


  17. The anonymity direction made by the FTTJ must continue in force.


  18. I find that there is no error of law and I uphold the decision of  the
      FTTJ.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 2 May
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

