



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00581/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Sent         |
|On 10th June 2014                               |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              Mr philip bangura
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Murphy of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal the Appellant is the Secretary of State. For the sake of
    clarity however throughout this determination  I  shall  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State "the Respondent" and Mr Bangura as "the Appellant".

 2. This is an appeal against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Blake) following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds was allowed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone  whose  recorded   date  of
    birth throughout much of the documentation is 23rd March 1959.  However
    the following exceptions to this are his copy birth  certificate  which
    records it as 23rd March 1960, his passport which records  it  as  23rd
    March 1960 and his screening interview in which it is recorded that his
    date of birth is 1953.

 4. It is right to say that the Respondent also  initially  challenged  the
    Appellant's nationality and removal directions were set for both Sierra
    Leone and Guinea. The First-tier Tribunal found  as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant is a Sierra  Leonean  and  judging  by  the  grounds  seeking
    permission, this  finding  is  not  now  seriously  challenged  by  the
    Respondent.

 5. Whilst it is accepted that the Appellant has visited the United Kingdom
    in the past, so far as these proceedings are concerned,  the  Appellant
    is recorded as having entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2009
    travelling here on a Guinean passport. He applied  for  asylum  on  1st
    October 2009. That  application  was  refused  but  the  Appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain until December 2012 on account of
    his medial condition. He suffers from kidney failure requiring  him  to
    undergo dialysis three times a week. He is also HIV positive. There was
    no challenge by the Appellant to the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum at that stage.

 6. On 12th November 2012, the  Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain. He once more claimed asylum and breach of his Article 3/8  ECHR
    rights. This is the appeal which came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and it is this decision that the  Respondent  now  appeals,  permission
    having been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes   in  the
    following terms;

         "The Respondent seeks permission to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blake  who,  in   a
         determination promulgated on 18 March 2014, allowed the  appeal  of
         the Appellant against the refusal of his asylum claim.

         The grounds of appeal complain that the Judge failed to give any or
         adequate reasons for finding the  Appellant  credible  or  that  he
         would be at risk 44 years after his father had been  executed,  had
         failed to take background evidence into  account  relating  to  the
         Appellant's medical condition and, in respect of  that  issue,  had
         reversed the burden of proof.

         The grounds reveal arguable errors of law".

 7. Mr Saunders on behalf of the Respondent relied on the  broad  lines  of
    the  grounds  seeking  permission.  He  observed  that  there  are  two
    components to the First-tier Tribunal's error.

      i) The first part is that the present  danger  to  the  Appellant  was
         inadequately reasoned. The Appellant's claim is that  he  would  be
         targeted by the present regime, because he is his father's son. The
         Appellant's father died 48 years ago and contrary to the First-tier
         Tribunal's findings, the same party was not back in power in Sierra
         Leone.

     ii) The Judge's reasons for his  findings on the medical  evidence  are
         also inadequate. The latest medical report at paragraphs 32  to  33
         of the reasons refusal letter  showed  that  there  was  nephrology
         treatment available in Sierra Leone. This was research completed by
         COIS. The Judge appeared to overlook this crucial point.  This  was
         illustrated in  [90] of his determination.

 8. Mr Murphy on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the grounds seeking
    permission were advanced as a "reasons" challenge in fact evolve into a
    rationality challenge based on the premise that the Appellant could not
    be at risk some 40 years or so after his father had been  executed.  He
    submitted that the grounds amounted to no more  that  a  thinly  veiled
    attempt to reargue the case. The Respondent did not like  the  decision
    which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  and  the  grounds  seeking
    permission amounted to no more than a disagreement with that decision.

 9. Likewise with regard to the medical evidence, the  Judge  had  properly
    directed himself. He noted under the policy in existence in  2009,  the
    Respondent  had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  should   be   granted
    discretionary leave because of the lack of available medical  treatment
    in Sierra Leone (and Guinea).  By  2012  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    reversing that policy and therefore it could  not  be  claimed  as  the
    Respondent had done  so,  that  the  burden  of  proof  fell  onto  the
    Appellant to prove adequate treatment was available in Sierra Leone.

Has the Judge Erred?

10. I have considered  the  submissions  of  the  representatives  and  the
    documents which the Appellant sought to rely  upon  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  hearing.  The  difficulty  that  I   see   in   the   Judge's
    determination is that his finding on what is the  core  issue  of  this
    claim, amounts to one extremely short paragraph which is  contained  in
    [73] of the determination. It amounts to this;

         "I noted that the All People's Congress had returned  to  power  in
         Sierra Leone. I accepted that the Appellant would be identified  as
         a possible threat to the regime by reference to his history and the
         fact that his father was the former Brigadier General".

    The Judge has outlined the Appellant's history and has made  a  finding
    that the Appellant is from Sierra Leone and is  the  son  of  the  late
    Brigadier General Bangura. What the Judge appears  to  have  overlooked
    and failed to resolve, are the discrepancies in the Appellant's various
    accounts. For example the Appellant claims that  he  cannot  return  to
    Sierra Leone because there would be no family  there  to  help  support
    him.  His  latest  witness  statement  states  that  he   is   not   in
    communication with his wife and children. An earlier  statement  showed
    that the Appellant's wife and children live  in  Sierra  Leone  in  the
    Appellant's father's house and that he (the Appellant) keeps in contact
    with them by mobile phone. These are matters which must go to the  core
    of the Appellant's claim and must be dealt with.

11. I find that Judge Blake has based his assessment of the  risk  to  this
    Appellant upon an incomplete and therefore possibly inaccurate  factual
    matrix. The problems with the Judge's assessment of the evidence  which
    I have identified above go to the  core  of  the  Appellant's  account.
    Without clear and  accurate  findings  of  fact,  it  is  not  possible
    properly to assess the risk this Appellant may or may not  face  if  he
    returns to Sierra Leone. I also agree with the  Respondent  that  Judge
    Blake has dealt inadequately with the very serious doubts cast over the
    Appellant's credibility in the various accounts given by him.  A  Judge
    is able to form an assessment that an Appellant is or is not a credible
    witness (as the Judge has done here) but that  assessment  must  tackle
    thoroughly any  doubts  which  have  been  cast  over  the  Appellant's
    credibility such  as  those  raised  by  the  Respondent  against  this
    Appellant.

12. Because I have found that the factual matrix established by Judge Blake
    is flawed, it is necessary  to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings of fact. It will be necessary for the case to be  heard  again
    afresh and for new findings to be made. I consider that it will be more
    appropriate, in the light of  the  quantity  of  oral  and  documentary
    evidence to be considered, for the decision to be remade in the  First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that it remitted to that Tribunal accordingly.

DECISION

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 13th  March
    2014 is set aside. I direct that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Blake).

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated: 16 July 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

