
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/00185/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                   |            Decision & Reasons          |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 6 April 2017                     |            On 9 May 2017               |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Frantzis, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran who was born in 1992.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in January 2015  and  claimed  asylum.   His
    application was refused by a decision of the respondent dated  17  June
    2015.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a
    decision promulgated on 10 October  2016  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are a number of grounds of appeal all of  which  predicated  upon
    the understanding that the  appellant  had  proved,  to  the  necessary
    standard, that he was a  citizen  of  Iran.   The  difficulty  for  the
    appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that Judge  Myers  in
    her decision at [21] found as follows:

         In my judgment the appellant's claim was undermined by his  failure
         to clarify the dates in his  account  but  further  representations
         were made by his solicitor.  I accept that there can  be  confusion
         between the Gregorian and Iranian calendars but the  appellant  was
         asked on two occasions during his interview which calendar  he  was
         using and he stated that it was the Iranian.  In his oral  evidence
         he claimed to have been confused and he  did  not  know  the  dates
         because he was an illiterate farmer.  If that is the case it  would
         have been an easy enough matter for him to have simply said that he
         did not know.  The burden is on the appellant to prove his case and
         he has not submitted any information  which  would  establish  that
         Iranian Kurds used the Gregorian calendar.  I  find  the  appellant
         has not established even to the lower standard of proof that he  is
         an Iranian.  However, if I am wrong on this I will now consider the
         claim on the basis that he is Iranian.

 3.  The  last  ground  of  appeal  [14]  challenges  this  finding  as  to
    nationality.  It  is  asserted  that  the  appellant  had  not  only  a
    "theoretical but also a practical knowledge  of  life  in  Iran."   The
    questions in the interview to which the judge  has  referred  [102-103]
    are dismissed by the  grounds  of  appeal  as  of  little  significance
    because they relate to the appellant's claim  to  have  been  a  cross-
    border smuggler.  The grounds assert  that  the  answers  were  "proper
    evidence in respect of a claim to have been engaged in smuggling  on  a
    date it is submitted they were capable of bearing far  less  weight  in
    regard to nationality."

 4. I find that the ground of appeal has no merit.  At his  interview,  the
    appellant gave evidence which the judge, supporting  her  finding  with
    clear and cogent reasoning,  proved  that  the  appellant  was  not  an
    Iranian citizen.  It does not matter in what context the appellant gave
    his evidence; the suggestion in the grounds that it was in some way not
    fair for the judge to find  that  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding
    smuggling activities undermined his claim to  Iranian  nationality  is,
    frankly, nonsense.  The appellant's subsequent attempt to  explain  his
    inconsistencies (by claiming that he is an illiterate farmer)  put  the
    appellant into deeper problems; as the judge observed, if  he  did  not
    know an answers to  questions,  he  should  have  said  so  instead  of
    attempting to invent false answers.

 5. I find that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal do  nothing  to
    disturb the judge's primary finding at [21] that the appellant  is  not
    an Iranian citizen.  For the sake of thoroughness, she went on to  make
    alternative findings on the basis that  the  appellant  is  an  Iranian
    citizen.  It is those findings which the remainder of  the  grounds  of
    appeal seek to challenge.  However, because I find that her finding  as
    to nationality should stand and has not been successfully challenged by
    the appellant, it is unnecessary for me to consider grounds  of  appeal
    which are predicated on the notion that the  appellant  is  an  Iranian
    citizen.  Having found that the appellant was not  Iranian,  the  judge
    was not obliged to go on and make a finding as to his true nationality;
    the  Secretary  of  State  will  now  take  steps  to  determine   that
    nationality.  In the meantime, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 29 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 29 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
