
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00698/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th March 2015                   |On 13th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     CJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Andrew Joseph, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

Decision

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal.  Neither party  invited  me  to  rescind  the  order  and  I
      continue it pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   2. The appellant is male national of Afghanistan, who claimed asylum  and
      leave to remain in August 2008.  The claim was refused in April  2012,
      but the appellant  appealed  that  decision  before  Designated  Judge
      Phillips on 26 June 2012.  That appeal  was  dismissed  and  leave  to
      appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   was   refused.    The   appellant's
      representatives made further submissions in September 2012, which,  in
      the view of the respondent, did not amount to  a  fresh  claim.   That
      decision was challenged upon judicial review and as  a  result  via  a
      consent  order  further  representations  were  permitted,  which  the
      respondent did treat as a fresh claim, but still resulted in a refusal
      by a decision letter dated 10 January 2014.   The  appellant  appealed
      that decision.

   3. The appellant's appeal  then  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Whiting sitting at Newport in June 2014.  An oral hearing was
      held.  Both parties were represented (in the  appellant'  case  by  Mr
      Joseph).  In  a  determination  dated  23  June  2014,  Judge  Whiting
      dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The appellant sought
      leave to appeal.  The grounds alleged error in a number of areas,  but
      in summary the allegations involve a failure to engage  properly  with
      the medical evidence  and  with  comments  made  by  Designated  Judge
      Phillips, and Upper Tribunal Judge Storey (who had dealt with  the  JR
      application).  In addition allegations  criticised  the  determination
      with regard to the findings under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

   4. The application for leave came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal
      Reid, who refused the application for the following reasons:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Whiting)  who,  in  a
         determination  promulgated  on  25   June   2014,   dismissed   the
         Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  10
         January 2014 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove the  Appellant
         from the UK.

         2.   The grounds argue inter  alia  the  judge  erred  in  law:  by
         ignoring or inadequately considering the observations made by Upper
         Tribunal Judge Storey in his oral judgment on 26 March 2013; by not
         taking as his starting point the findings of DJ Phillips nor did he
         demonstrate good reason to depart from them; by failing to  address
         adequately the formal diagnosis since the June 2012  determination;
         by not  considering  or  assessing  the  totality  of  the  medical
         evidence; by failing to consider adequately the Articles  3  and  8
         arguments.

         3.   The judge's findings are based on the evidence  presented  and
         are supported by a careful  analysis  and  detailed  reasons  in  a
         lengthy determination.  The judge at paragraphs 35 - 51 records the
         Appellant's mental health  problems  and  at  paragraphs  56  -  65
         considers the implications for the  Appellant  on  his  removal  to
         Afghanistan.  Article 8 was dealt with at length at paragraphs 64 -
         80.  The grounds amount to little more than a disagreement with the
         judge's findings which were properly open to him.

         4.   The grounds do not disclose an arguable error of law".

   5. The application was renewed before the Upper Tribunal and in  granting
      leave Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan gave the following reasons:

         "1.  The appellant, aged 26,  has  suffered  from  enduring  mental
         health problems.

         2.   I have not had the  opportunity  of  considering  the  medical
         evidence in detail and, therefore, cannot say  whether  the  First-
         Tier Tribunal Judge's assessment of it is adequate.

         3.   Given the fact that Judge Storey was obviously concerned about
         the case when he considered an application for judicial review  and
         the appellant is currently admitted to a  psychiatric  unit,  there
         are reasons why the Upper Tribunal  should  make  an  authoritative
         decision on his mental health and the consequences of removal".

   6. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   7. In  his  submission  Mr  Joseph  confirmed  that  the  arguments  were
      "threefold".  The judge had failed to consider adequately the totality
      of the medical evidence.  He had cherry picked from  various  opinions
      to suit the outcome of the determination.  The previous  determination
      of Judge Phillips should have been the starting point.  Whilst it  was
      accepted that the judge had used that term, in reality he had not used
      that determination as the starting point.   The  appellant  had  never
      been to Afghanistan.

   8. Mr Joseph indicated that Article 8 had been inadequately dealt with by
      Judge Whiting and there had  been  a  failure  to  take  into  account
      comments made in the decision of Upper Judge Storey.  The  appellant's
      situation had been considered  on  the  narrower  issues  of  suicide,
      rather than the appellant's psychotic behaviour.   Judge  Whiting  had
      not taken all the evidence in the  round.    The  appellant  had  been
      sectioned under the Mental Health Act on two occasions.   It  was  not
      sufficient to give him 6 months supply of drugs and merely arrange for
      somebody to meet him upon return.  The necessary daily support was not
      available in Afghanistan.  Judge Whiting had  placed  the  appellant's
      situation along with other Afghanistan mental  health  patients.   The
      appellants specific difficulties related to the level of his  illness,
      level  of  intervention  needed,  the  fact  he  had  never  been   to
      Afghanistan and that he would have no support  whatever  upon  return,
      together with the length of time that  he  had  spent  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  One piece  of  medical  evidence  was  focused  upon,  which
      indicated the appellant did not suffer from a mental illness,  whereas
      the respondents own conclusions (refusal  letter)  accepted  that  the
      appellant does have a mental illness and there  is  a  possibility  of
      being suicidal.

   9.  Mr  Richards  in  his  submission   commented   upon   the   detailed
      determination produced by Judge Whiting.  The judge had considered the
      mental health issues (paragraph 9).  With regard to  the  point  about
      Judge Phillip's determination being the starting  point,  Mr  Richards
      pointed out that Judge  Phillips  had  dismissed  the  appeal.   Judge
      Whiting may not have listed everything in the appellant's case, but he
      didn't need to.  He has set out a comprehensive record and he directed
      himself appropriately.  All findings have open to the  judge  who  had
      undertaken  a  pain  staking  exercise  for   which   he   should   be
      complimented.  There was no material error of law.

  10. In response Mr Joseph drew my attention to certain  paragraphs  within
      Upper Tribunal Judge Storey's decision notice.

  11. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision,  which  I  now  give
      with reasons.

  12. Having considered in detail the determination of Judge Whiting, I have
      also considered the determination of Designated Judge Phillips and the
      comments made by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.  I have then  considered
      the grounds seeking leave and  the  two  decisions  based  upon  those
      applications.   I  have   noted   the   submissions   made   by   each
      representative and, where appropriate, I have considered  the  medical
      evidence that was before Judge Whiting.

  13. I find there has been no material error of law shown to exist  in  the
      determination of Judge Whiting.  My reasons are set out below.

  14. I would however comment on the circumstances in which this matter came
      before me.  As indicated above, Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Reid
      refused leave for the reasons set out  above.   Judge  Reid  concluded
      that there was no arguable error of law.  The application was  renewed
      on the same terms before the Upper  Tribunal.   My  colleague  in  the
      Upper Tribunal granted  permission  and  again  I  have  set  out  his
      reasons.  It is worthy of note that in granting leave the  judge  said
      "I have not had the opportunity of considering the medical evidence in
      detail and  therefore  cannot  say  whether  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      judge's assessment of it is adequate".   I  also  note  that  he  said
      "....there  are  reasons  why  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  make   an
      authoritative decision on his mental health and  the  consequences  of
      removal".  No arguable error of  law  was  identified  and  of  course
      before I am able to  make  any  decision  on  the  appellant's  mental
      health, and consequences of removal, I must indentify an error of  law
      within Judge Whiting's determination that was material to the outcome.
       I consider it of importance to focus upon the task before  me.   Also
      of importance is that I must not ask myself the question as to whether
      or not I agree with Judge Whiting's decision, but whether  he  made  a
      material error of law in reaching that decision.

  15. Mr Joseph very carefully and succinctly explained  the  basis  of  the
      appellant's application.  Did Judge Whiting cherry  pick  the  medical
      evidence? Did he properly deal with the  determination  of  Designated
      Judge Phillips (and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey)?  Finally  did  he
      properly deal with human rights considerations?

  16. In summary I find that Judge Whiting did  not  cherry  pick  from  the
      medical  evidence.   He  did  properly   deal   with   decisions   and
      determinations that had previously been taken in this matter,  and  he
      did properly deal with all relevant aspects of the European Convention
      on Human Rights.  It is  my  view  that  Judge  Reid  was  correct  in
      refusing to grant leave because the grounds do indeed amount to little
      more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings,  with  those
      findings being properly open to Judge Whiting.

  17. It is of course necessary to read the whole of  the  91  paragraph  of
      Judge Whiting's determination as  a  whole.   His  assessment  of  the
      appellant's  medical  condition  starts  at  paragraph  27,  continues
      through paragraph 34 to 38 and then through paragraphs 41  through  to
      51.  A reading of these paragraphs  shows  that  Judge  Whiting  fully
      engaged with the medical evidence that was before him.   The  comments
      and findings made by Judge Whiting amount to a very fair summation  of
      that evidence and the judge has properly directed himself with  regard
      to how that evidence is assessed, and that  once  findings  have  been
      made, how they might relate to the appellants situation  upon  arrival
      in his country of nationality.

  18. Judge Whiting has been criticised for placing too much  reliance  upon
      the views of Dr Mahdi, in that it contradicts the  acceptance  in  the
      refusal letter of a mental health problem.  However  despite  what  is
      said in the refusal letter, Judge Whiting was entitled  to  go  behind
      that, given the nature of the medical evidence that  was  before  him.
      An important question is what is likely  to  happen  upon  arrival  in
      Afghanistan.  Judge  Whiting  engaged  with  that  question  and  made
      specific findings (including paragraphs 57 and 58).  The  case  of  GS
      mentioned in paragraph 57 has of course now been  brought  before  the
      Court of Appeal and the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  now  have
      confirmation from the Court of Appeal.

  19. I am therefore satisfied that Judge Whiting properly  dealt  with  the
      medical evidence before him and that he reached conclusions  to  which
      he was entitled.

  20. Dealing now with the challenge based upon the view of Judges  Phillips
      and Storey.   Judge  Whiting  was  obliged  to  take  Judge  Phillip's
      determination as the starting point.  At  paragraph  9  Judge  Whiting
      recalls that he has done that and he uses the words  "which  I  adopt"
      before directing himself via the case of  Devaseelan.   Having  stated
      that direction there is nothing to suggest that Judge Whiting departed
      from that  direction.   Judge  Phillips  did  of  course  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal and I note that both he and Judge Whiting  referred
      to an Administrative Court decision of Mr Justice Ouseley dealing with
      an age dispute involving this appellant.  Judge Phillips was conscious
      that "there is no diagnosis and  no  prognosis".   Putting,  from  the
      position of the appellant, the most favourable view of Judge Phillip's
      decision, it could be said that with such diagnosis and prognosis  the
      appeal would have been allowed.  That does not necessarily follow, but
      putting the appellant's case at its highest that might be an argument.
       However Judge Whiting  did  have  medical  reports  before  which  he
      carefully analysed before reaching  the  conclusion  that  he  did  in
      dismissing the appellant's appeal.  In short, Judge  Whiting  properly
      directed himself as to the findings of Judge Phillips.  He used it  as
      a starting point to which he added, and reached conclusions, upon  the
      medical evidence before him.

  21. There is an argument that the judge erred in not taking  into  account
      the views of Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.   Judge  Whiting  refers  to
      that judgment and, to a limited extent,  he  quotes  from  it.   Judge
      Storey was clearly not seeking to tie the hands of any  judge  hearing
      an appeal in the future.  At the end of the judgment he says "I am far
      from saying that success  before  such  a  judge  is  inevitable....".
      Judge Storey offers an opinion that Judge Phillips found the appellant
      to be a vulnerable person with a history of mental illness and he says
      in the final sentence of paragraph 3 "a future Tribunal judge will  be
      quite likely to attach  significant  weight  to  these  observations".
      Clearly Judge Whiting did have regard to the mental condition  of  the
      appellant and a reading of the determination showed that he did attach
      significant weight, not only to Judge Phillips  views,  but  also  the
      evidence that was before him.  That  evidence  was  not  before  Judge
      Phillips.

  22. I have considered the way in which Judge Whiting deals with the appeal
      under ECHR and in particular Article  8.   This  is  dealt  with  from
      paragraph 64 on, wherein the judge has considered  his  assessment  of
      the findings that he has made against the authorities that he  has  to
      follow and paragraphs 81 through 85 give a clear  explanation  of  the
      conclusions that he reached.  It is worth noting  that  paragraphs  77
      and 80 draw upon the findings and conclusions of Judge Phillips, which
      again shows that Judge Whiting used that determination as  a  starting
      point on factual issues.

  23. For all these reasons, I find that there is no material error  of  law
      contained within Judge Whiting's  determination  and  the  appellant's
      appeal is accordingly dismissed.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
