

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00657/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2014                                |On 5 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     F B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This appeal is brought with permission  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
   against a decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bircher dismissing
   an appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant is a national of Algeria born on 9 November 1985.  He  came
   to the UK in August 2013 and claimed asylum in September  of  that  year.
   The appellant claims to  fear  persecution  in  Algeria  because  of  his
   homosexuality.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  appellant  is  a
   homosexual but did not accept the  appellant's  account  of  how  he  was
   detected by his older brother having sex  with  a  male  partner  in  the
   family home in Algeria.  The judge accepted that the appellant had formed
   a same sex relationship in the UK  with  a  Pakistani  national  who  was
   without any immigration status in this country.

4)  In  assessing  whether  the  appellant  had  a  well  founded  fear   of
   persecution in Algeria the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had regard to
   the country guideline case of OO (gay men: risk) Algeria CG  [2013]  UKUT
   00063.  In that case the Tribunal concluded that criminal prosecutions of
   gay men in Algeria were rare.  The  evidence  did  not  suggest  that  in
   general societal and familial disapproval of male gay identity in Algeria
   reached levels that were persecutory under Article 9 of the Qualification
   Directive or otherwise reached  the  threshold  required  for  protection
   under Article 15(b) of this Directive,  or  under  Article  3.   A  small
   number of gay men were able to live openly in  Algeria  and  did  not  in
   general suffer serious harm amounting to persecution.

5) The judge was not satisfied that the appellant had fled  Algeria  in  the
   circumstances he claimed.  The judge was  satisfied  that  the  appellant
   would be able to engage in homosexual activity discreetly in Algeria.  He
   had conducted a discreet sexual relationship in the past and there was no
   reason why he should not do so again.

6) The grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal was made  chiefly
   on the basis of the judge's treatment  of  the  appellant's  relationship
   with his partner in the UK.  At paragraph 65 the judge commented that the
   appellant's partner had no status to  remain  in  the  UK  and  he  could
   therefore accompany the  appellant  to  Algeria  or,  alternatively,  the
   couple could relocate to Pakistan, which was  the  partner's  country  of
   origin.  In granting permission the Upper Tribunal Judge noted  that  the
   partner had been found by another Judge of the First-tier Tribunal not to
   be gay.  Putting that on one side  and  having  regard  to  the  couple's
   circumstances and the background evidence, it was arguable that more  was
   required in the determination than the brief finding about the  countries
   in which the relationship might be carried on, as made by  the  judge  in
   the present appeal.  In granting permission, however,  the  grounds  were
   not limited.

Submissions

7) At the hearing before me Ms Brakaj stated that she had  not  had  contact
   with the appellant immediately prior to the hearing.  For the  respondent
   Mr Mangion reported that he had no knowledge of the  Home  Office  having
   lost  contact  with  the  appellant.   He  reported,  however,  that  the
   appellant's partner in the relationship referred to by the Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal was removed from the UK on 13 May 2014.

8) Ms Brakaj explained that although  she  had  not  had  contact  with  the
   appellant immediately prior to the hearing she was satisfied that she had
   instructions to pursue the appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that
   there was an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge.  She confirmed  that  she  had  also  acted  for  the  appellant's
   partner.  If the appellant were to succeed in his appeal this might  have
   a bearing on his partner's prospects of returning to the UK.

9) Turning to the substantive  issues,  Ms  Brakaj  addressed  me  first  in
   relation to the credibility findings made by the Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The judge found it was not credible that the appellant and his
   partner in Algeria should have engaged in  sexual  acts  in  an  unlocked
   bedroom in the family home where there  was  the  possibility  that  they
   would be discovered by the  appellant's  siblings  or  parents.   In  the
   application for permission to appeal it was submitted that  this  finding
   failed to have regard to  the  country  information  and  other  evidence
   available on how  a  couple  could  conduct  their  relationship  in  the
   prevailing circumstances in Algeria.  It was  difficult  to  envisage  an
   alternative or safer option  than  meeting  in  the  appellant's  private
   bedroom.  As homosexuality  was  rare  in  Algeria  the  appellant  being
   visited by a friend would not cause suspicion.

10) Ms Brakaj  submitted  that  there  would  be  a  greater  risk  for  the
   appellant and his partner having sex elsewhere than in a private room  in
   the appellant's  own  home.   An  individual  engaging  in  a  homosexual
   relationship had to place himself at a certain level  of  risk.   It  was
   more risky to use a hotel room.  The judge's finding did not consider the
   risks and the possible alternatives.  The appellant's account  of  having
   sex in his own bedroom was not implausible.  The question of whether  the
   appellant was detected having sex in his own  room  was  central  to  the
   findings as to the risk to him in Algeria.

11) Ms Brakaj further submitted that the issues raised by  the  case  of  HJ
   (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 were not addressed in the determination.  The judge
   did not consider whether the appellant was deterred from  practising  his
   homosexuality by fear of persecution or serious harm.  The judge did  not
   address how the appellant would be able to engage in sexual  activity  in
   Algeria in the future, particularly where his partner might be subject to
   immigration control.  The judge's findings, at paragraph 65, with  regard
   to the couple  carrying  on  their  relationship  either  in  Algeria  or
   Pakistan  was  not  a  viable  option  for  partners  in   a   homosexual
   relationship  and  gave  rise  to  a  potential  future  risk.   If   the
   appellant's behaviour in Algeria was shaped by more than the  disapproval
   of his family then the might be able to establish a need for  protection,
   notwithstanding the case law on the risk of persecution for  gay  men  in
   Algeria.  Very few gay men were able to  live  openly  in  Algeria.   The
   evidence before the judge, particularly the US State Department  reports,
   showed harassment of gay men amounting to more than discrimination.  This
   risk was not fully taken into account in  the  determination,  where,  at
   paragraph 56, the judge found that the appellant had conducted a discreet
   sexual relationship in Algeria in the past and could do  so  again.   The
   evidence given by the appellant in his witness statement of  20  February
   2014 at paragraph 16 was that he would not be able to hide his  sexuality
   or behave differently wherever he went.  He would not be able to  live  a
   normal life in Algeria.  The appellant did not want to continue living in
   a country where homosexuality was hated by society.  This point  was  not
   considered in the determination.

12) For the respondent Mr Mangion submitted that the issue was  not  whether
   the appellant conducted his sexual relationship in the  family  home  but
   whether this was specifically conducted in an  "unlocked  bedroom".   The
   appellant said at interview that he usually locked the door (Q66) and  it
   was open to the judge to make an  obvious  inference.   The  grounds  for
   permission to appeal suggest the bedroom door was not normally locked but
   this was a speculative point.  On this issue it was  reasonable  for  the
   judge to make the finding she did and at paragraph 56 she found that  the
   appellant had conducted a relationship discreetly in the  past.   He  had
   lived discreetly for a number of years and would be able to  continue  to
   do so.  Some family members  were  still  supporting  him.   His  younger
   brother had not turned against him.

13) Mr Mangion continued that the judge had applied the  provisions  of  the
   relevant case law.  If the judge had erred in considering that the couple
   could live together  in  Algeria  or  Pakistan,  there  was  now  further
   evidence.

14) Ms Brakaj responded on the issue of whether the appellant conducted  his
   relationship in Algeria in a locked  room.   She  pointed  out  that  the
   appellant said there was a lock but that the door was not  always  locked
   and on this occasion they had forgotten to lock it.  It was  not  a  door
   that would lock automatically on entry.  It was not incredible  that  the
   couple became careless and it was not incapable of  belief.   The  couple
   had been attempting to conduct their relationship privately but in shared
   accommodation.  The judge made findings very briefly to the  effect  that
   this would not happen.  The account given by the  appellant  was  not  so
   incapable of belief that further reasons were not required,  particularly
   having regard to the evidence on societal discrimination and  the  likely
   attitude of the appellant's family.

Discussion

15)  The  principal  issue  in  this  appeal  is  not  whether  the  judge's
   credibility findings are sound, or whether her assessment of whether  the
   appellant would be able to carry on his relationship with his partner was
   properly reasoned, but whether the appellant would face a  real  risk  of
   persecution or serious harm in Algeria because of his homosexuality.  The
   judge made a clear finding that the appellant is a  gay  man  who  had  a
   sexual relationship in Algeria.   The  judge's  conclusions  need  to  be
   considered in accordance with this finding.

16) The appellant maintains that he fled Algeria because his  older  brother
   found out about his relationship.  At no point has the appellant  claimed
   that the authorities in Algeria were  looking  for  him  because  of  his
   involvement in a homosexual relationship.  The finding made by the  judge
   was that the appellant stayed for two months in a town 30 kilometres away
   from his family home  after  he  left  the  family  home.   He  helped  a
   fisherman and was given a holiday home in which to live.  It appears that
   he was able to leave Algeria without difficulty.  Taking the  appellant's
   case at its highest, it was familial  disapproval  which  caused  him  to
   leave the family home and  to  leave  Algeria  and  not  a  fear  of  the
   authorities.

17) In his witness statement the appellant expressed a fear of his  brothers
   and a fear that he would be unable to have a normal life in Algeria.   He
   states that he decided that the best solution was to leave Algeria and go
   somewhere where "being gay was not a crime and  not  hated  by  society".
   These are indications that it was familial and societal disapproval  that
   led the appellant to conduct his homosexual  relationship  discreetly  in
   Algeria.  It is understandable that he would prefer to live in a  country
   where such discretion was not so necessary.   It  does  not  follow  from
   this, however, that he faces a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm
   in Algeria.

18) Indeed, the case law and  much  of  the  country  information  indicates
   otherwise.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find
   that in general societal and familial disapproval of gay men  in  Algeria
   does not reach levels that are persecutory or  amount  to  serious  harm.
   This does not mean that there would be no  risk  to  the  appellant  from
   conducting a homosexual relationship in Algeria but  it  means  that  the
   level of risk would be low.

19) Reference was made  before  me  to  the  case  of  HJ  (Iran).   It  was
   submitted that there was a failure by the judge to address the  terms  of
   HJ (Iran) in considering the appeal.  I am satisfied,  however,  that  on
   the evidence before the judge the test for persecution set  out  by  Lord
   Rodger at paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran) was not met.  The fear  expressed  by
   the appellant, as found by  the  judge,  was  of  societal  and  familial
   disapproval and discrimination.  It was familial disapproval which caused
   the appellant  to  conduct  his  relationship  discreetly.   It  was  not
   necessary for the judge to give express consideration to the test  in  HJ
   (Iran) because the conditions for establishing persecution were not  met.



20)  The  remaining  question  relates  to  the  relationship  between   the
   appellant and his partner  in  the  UK,  who  has  now  been  removed  to
   Pakistan.  In granting permission to  appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   commented that the judge's reasoning in relation to the  future  of  this
   relationship was arguably insufficient.  The judge said only at paragraph
   65 that the appellant's partner could accompany him  to  Algeria  or  the
   couple could  relocate  to  Pakistan.   The  position  now  is  that  the
   appellant has failed in his claim for international protection in the UK,
   as it appears  his  partner  did  also.   The  question  of  whether  the
   appellant and his partner will remain in contact and  will  endeavour  to
   see each other again  is  largely  a  matter  for  them.   They  have  no
   entitlement to do so at present in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  does  not
   follow from this that they cannot pursue their relationship discreetly in
   another country.

21) For the reasons I have given I do not consider that  the  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal made an error of law such that her decision should be
   set aside.  The conclusions  she  reached  were  open  to  her  upon  the
   evidence.  The question of whether the appellant would have forgotten  to
   lock his bedroom door is not material to the  judge's  finding  that  the
   appellant is a gay man who conducted a relationship discreetly in Algeria
   to avoid societal and familial disapproval.

Conclusions

22) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

23) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

24) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.   I  continue  that
   order for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal                        5 November 2014


