
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00672/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th July 2014                               |On 3rd November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mr abdallah ramadhan said
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    North promulgated on 13th March 2014, following a hearing at  Stoke-on-
    Trent on 6th March 2014.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the
    appeal of Abdallah Ramadhan Said.  The Appellant applied for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Tanzania, who was  born  on  10th
    October 1975.  He entered the UK on 6th September 1994  as  a  visitor.
    He then overstayed and applied for asylum on 23rd July 1995.  This  was
    refused on 10th April 1997.  The refusal notice was served  on  him  on
    15th June 1998.  The Appellant then  made  further  representations  in
    2010 and these were refused on 9th December 2013.  It is  against  that
    refusal, that there is now an appeal.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is essentially based upon his Article  8  rights.
    He claims that he has a private life on account of having lived in  the
    UK for nineteen years.  He was a teenager when he came to the UK and is
    now 38 years of age.  He had grown up in Tanzania.  In the  UK  he  had
    formed a relationship with a woman and  her  child  but  they  had  now
    separated.  His case was that he had developed a strong private life by
    virtue of residence, relationships, and friendships  and  he  was  more
    accustomed to the way of life in the UK now than in Tanzania,  that  he
    would find it very difficult to resettle (see paragraph 5).



The Judge's Findings

 4. The  judge  found  that,  notwithstanding  the  Appellant's  claim,  no
    witnesses attended the hearing to support his  claim.   There  were  no
    letters written in support of him.  Although he claims to have lived in
    the UK all these years, he still spoke the local language  in  Tanzania
    and the judge held that he had continuing ties to his country of origin
    (paragraph 9).  The Appellant claimed he had a  partner  and  that  the
    partner had a daughter and grandchildren but he was not the  father  of
    any of the children (paragraph 10).  The judge held that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances (paragraph 11) such that  would  require  the
    judge to consider the situation on the basis of Article 8 ECHR  rights,
    given that he could not succeed under Rule 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 5. In his grounds of application, the Appellant relied upon  the  case  of
    Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 where it was held by the Court  of  Appeal
    recently  that,  although  a  person,  who  cannot  show  twenty  years
    residence in the UK, cannot come under the current Immigration Rules of
    paragraph 276ADE, nevertheless, if he had made his application,  before
    the coming into force of the current Rules, then he would  be  able  to
    point to the fact that he had lived in the UK for fourteen  years,  and
    this could properly be taken into account in his favour under the "long
    residence policy".

 6. On 1st May 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not take into account the judgment of the
    Court of Appeal in Edgehill, because it was not handed down until April
    2014, whereas the determination of the judge was  promulgated  on  13th
    March 2014.  The failure of the judge to consider the issue of fourteen
    years residence constitutes an arguable error of law.

 7. On 19th May 2014 a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect  that
    Edgehill did not alter the  position  because  the  Appellant  was  not
    prejudiced by the Secretary of State considering the  circumstances  in
    respect of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE, even though the  Appellant
    made his application on 16th May 2013.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 27th July 2014, the Appellant, who appeared
    in person, read out from a letter, which he claimed had  been  prepared
    for him by the British Red Cross, copies of which he handed up both  to
    the Bench and to Mr Smart who appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  He explained that he had been in the UK since  the
    age of 19 years of age and was now approaching almost 40 years.  He had
    made his fresh claim application in May 2012 on the basis  of  fourteen
    years residence in the UK.  The case of Edgehill fell to be  considered
    in his favour.  He should be granted indefinite leave to remain because
    he complied with the fourteen year long  residence  Rule  in  the  Home
    Office Policy.  He is a person of good character and he  had  a  strong
    claim to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  the  government's  Legacy
    Programme anyway.

 9. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that the fourteen year  Rule  was  now
    included in paragraph 276(B) of HC 395.   However,  the  Appellant  had
    been sent a notice of removal in 1998, following the rejection  of  his
    asylum claim in 1997.  This meant that the clock stopped at this stage.
     Second, the Appellant had not offered any evidence that he had been in
    the UK continuously since his arrival as a 19 year old in 1994.  Third,
    if the Appellant had been in this country for that period of time, then
    in September 2014, next month, he would have been in the UK for  twenty
    years and he could  properly  apply  under  the  Immigration  Rules  of
    paragraph 276ADE and succeed in showing Article 8 human rights  grounds
    under the Immigration Rules themselves.





Error of Law and Remaking the Decision

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  this  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are that although the case of  Edgehill  had  not
    been promulgated by the  Court  of  Appeal  until  a  month  after  the
    determination of the judge was promulgated, nevertheless,  it  was  the
    applicable law to consider the application of the "fourteen year  Rule"
    in cases where that  application  had  been  made  before  the  current
    Immigration Rules came into  effect.   In  the  Appellant's  case,  his
    application was made on 16th March 2013.  In the refusal letter of  9th
    December 2013, it is stated (see last paragraph at page  5)  that,  "at
    the time of writing, you have been resident  in  the  UK  for  nineteen
    years, having arrived on 26th September  1994  as  a  visitor.   It  is
    acknowledged that in the time since you arrived you will have developed
    a limited private life".  The relevant paragraph  goes  on  to  explain
    that although the Appellant's asylum claim was rejected on  10th  April
    1997, and that he subsequently appealed that decision, he then withdrew
    his appeal on 17th September 1998 and his appeal rights were  exhausted
    on 24th April 1997.  The refusal letter then adds that,

         "You should have voluntarily left the UK at the very latest on 17th
         September 1998 when you withdrew your appeal.  Instead you remained
         in the UK illegally.  You did not commence regular reporting to the
         Home Office until March 2012".

11. There is no mention  here  of  any  notice  having  been  sent  to  the
    Appellant that he was subject to removal.  All that is said is that  he
    should have left well and truly at the latest on 17th  September  1998.
    That being so, I conclude that the Appellant stood to benefit from  the
    fact that he had been in the UK for fourteen years.  It was  recognised
    in the refusal letter itself that he had been in the  UK  for  nineteen
    years in any event.

12. In coming to this conclusion, I have taken into account the findings of
    the original judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I
    have heard today.  I take into account a  number  of  circumstances  in
    this regard.  First, the Appellant has been  in  the  UK  for  nineteen
    years.  Second, he is a person of good character and there  is  nothing
    before me to suggest that he is not.  Third, the case of Hakemi  [2012]
    EWHC 1967 suggested that under the Legacy Programme of the government a
    person should be granted leave if  that  person  has  been  in  the  UK
    continuously for six years and  the  Appellant  potentially  stands  to
    benefit from this provision.  Fourth, the government's own Home  Office
    long residence and private life guidance  (dated  11th  November  2013)
    states (at page 2) that,

         "However, a person  granted  an  extension  of  stay  following  an
         application made before 9th July 2012 can still be considered under
         the Rules in force before that date.  This means a  person  granted
         leave to remain on the basis of fourteen years residence in the  UK
         can still be granted ILR once the requirements are met".

I find that the requirements have been met and  that  there  is  nothing  to
suggest that they have not been met for the grant of a  right  of  residence
on the basis of the Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for  fourteen  years.
Accordingly, this appeal is allowed.



Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014

