
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00500/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 25th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     ET
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell of Counsel instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Baldwin of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Albanian citizen born in May 1997  who  applied
    for asylum on 23rd June 2014.  The Appellant claimed to be  the  target
    of a blood feud.  He had been in a relationship with a girl who was the
    daughter of a retired police officer.  Her family did  not  approve  of
    the relationship and ET was beaten up by the girl's brothers, and  ET's
    uncle killed one of the brothers.  The uncle fled Albania, as  did  ET,
    and ET's father remained in isolation in Albania.

 3. The application was refused on 19th December 2014  and  the  claimant's
    appeal was heard by the FtT on 25th September 2015.  The FtT found that
    the Appellant had not proved that a blood feud existed and  found  that
    he was not entitled to asylum or  humanitarian  protection  because  he
    would not be at risk if returned to Albania.  For the same  reason  the
    FtT found that there would be no breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The FtT found that to remove the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds, those being:

    (1)  unfairness,

    (2)  failure to place weight on a relevant consideration,

    (3)  placing weight on irrelevant considerations against the weight  of
         background evidence, and

    (4)  reaching a Wednesbury unreasonable conclusion.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  White  of  the  FtT  on  4th
    November 2015.

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    dated 19th November 2015, pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In summary it was contended that the  FtT
    had not erred in law and had accurately  considered  objective  country
    information, and the applicable case law,  that  being  EH  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).  It was not accepted that the  FtT  had  acted
    unfairly in noting the absence of objective evidence to corroborate the
    Appellant's case.  It was submitted that  the  FtT  had  made  findings
    which were open to it on the evidence and had  given  adequate  reasons
    for those findings.

 8. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Mr Pretzell relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  It was submitted  that  the  FtT  had  acted
    unfairly by raising a completely new issue,  not  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter, relating to  the  absence
    of documentary evidence to show that blood feuds occur  in  the  Tirana
    area, or that Kanun law  operates  in  the  Appellant's  home  area  of
    Tirana.  It was submitted it was not  possible  for  the  Appellant  to
    provide documentary evidence on this issue, as he had not been  put  on
    notice that this was relied on in refusing  his  application.   In  any
    event, Mr Pretzell referred to the Respondent's Country Information and
    Guidance on Blood feuds which was before the FtT, and pointed out  that
    paragraph 2.4.1 conflicted with the FtT finding in paragraph 23 that  a
    blood feud in Tirana "would be a most exceptionally unusual  event  and
    self-imposed isolation virtually unknown".

10. Mr Pretzell submitted that the FtT  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    contents of this report, and this had infected the findings  made,  and
    the FtT had applied an  incorrect  standard  of  proof  by  finding  in
    paragraph 24 that the  claim  needed  "to  be  considered  particularly
    carefully, though the standard of proof of course remains low".

11. Mr Pretzell argued  that  the  FtT  acted  unfairly  in  expecting  the
    Appellant to provide evidence in support of his claim, to confirm  that
    he had taken time off school as a result of the beating up, or  medical
    records of his injuries, a record of complaint to  the  police  by  the
    Appellant's mother, an official record that the Appellant's  uncle  hit
    someone with an iron bar and killed them, a  newspaper/news  report  of
    the  murder  committed  by  the  Appellant's  uncle,  and  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the uncle had left Albania.

12. It was argued that the above had not been raised by the Respondent, and
    an  objection  was  made  before  the   FtT   when   the   Respondent's
    representative raised in cross-examination  the  suggestion  that  some
    documents could have  been  obtained  in  support  of  the  claim,  the
    objection being based upon the fact that this was a new issue raised in
    cross-examination, giving the Appellant no opportunity to address  such
    matters.

13. In relation to the other grounds contained within the  application,  it
    was contended that  the  FtT  had  not  taken  into  account  that  the
    Appellant was a child when he arrived in the UK.  The FtT had placed no
    weight on the most recent background evidence, bearing in mind  one  of
    the parties to the blood feud was a retired police  officer,  and  that
    there was corruption in the Albanian police and judiciary.

14. The FtT made a finding the Appellant had had  over  a  year  to  obtain
    evidence from Albania in support of his claim and  had  discussed  this
    with his representative.  It was contended that the Appellant was asked
    in evidence whether it was his idea to produce a declaration  from  his
    mother, and he said that it was his  solicitor  who  had  told  him  to
    obtain this.  There was no evidence before the FtT  that  there  was  a
    discussion about any other supporting evidence, and to place weight  on
    such a matter, was, it was submitted, Wednesbury unreasonable.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Mr Bramble had no oral submissions to add to the rule 24 response.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I announced at the hearing that I found a material error of law in  the
    FtT decision which was set aside with no findings preserved.

17. I find that there was unfairness in the FtT raising an issue  that  had
    not been relied upon by the Respondent, without  giving  the  Appellant
    the opportunity to address this.  The FtT found that blood feuds in the
    Appellant's home area of Tirana would be "a most exceptionally  unusual
    event and self-imposed isolation virtually unknown".  Because  of  this
    finding  the  FtT  found  that  the  claim  needed  to  be   considered
    particularly carefully, although the FtT did go on to  state  that  the
    standard of proof remained low.  The FtT also found that there  was  no
    evidence that Kanun law dominates in the Appellant's home area.   Again
    this was not an issue raised by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter,
    and the Appellant had no adequate opportunity to address this.  I  find
    there is some merit in Mr Pretzell's submission that these  conclusions
    may in any event not be correct, taking into account paragraph 2.4.1 of
    the Respondent's own Country Information and Guidance on  Blood  feuds,
    which indicates there were  200  families  in  Tirana  in  self-imposed
    isolation because of blood feuds, although I note that these statistics
    are of some age and relate to 2009.  That issue can be considered  when
    the appeal is heard again.

18. In my view the error of law is in raising an issue that  had  not  been
    raised by the Respondent, which meant that the Appellant had  not  been
    put on notice, and was not given an  adequate  opportunity  to  address
    that issue.  The finding by the FtT that blood feuds in the Tirana area
    would be exceptionally unusual, affected other findings made by the FtT
    in this appeal.

19. The FtT erred in law in raising the issue of absence of  documentation,
    when this had not been raised by the  Respondent  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, without giving the Appellant an adequate opportunity to
    address this issue.  The FtT drew adverse inference from the absence of
    supporting evidence, such as lack of confirmation from the  Appellant's
    school that he had taken time off school as a result  of  being  beaten
    up.  I can find no reference in the Appellant's account to  him  having
    made a claim that the extent of his injuries was such that he took time
    off school.  When interviewed (question 72) he said that this  was  not
    reported  to  the  school  authorities.   When  asked  about   injuries
    (questions 75 and 76) he said he received bruises.   Adverse  inference
    is drawn from the lack of medical records of the Appellant's  injuries,
    although he did not claim to have received any  medical  attention  for
    bruises.

20. Adverse inference is drawn from a lack of news reports  of  the  murder
    committed by the Appellant's uncle, although the country guidance  case
    law indicates that  news  reports  in  Albania  may  not  be  reliable.
    Adverse inference is drawn from a lack of corroboration  to  prove  the
    Appellant's claim that his uncle fled from Albania.  The FtT  does  not
    state what evidence would be expected to confirm this claim, and it  is
    difficult to see what further independent evidence the Appellant  could
    provide to prove that his uncle had left Albania.

21. For the reasons given above, the decision of the FtT is set aside  with
    no findings preserved.  I decided that it was appropriate to remit  the
    appeal back to the FtT to be heard again.  In making  this  decision  I
    considered paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,
    and decided that it was appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FtT
    because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that would be
    necessary in order for this decision to be re-made.

22. The appeal will be heard at the Hatton Cross  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other  than  Judge  Baldwin.   The  time
    estimate for the hearing is three hours  and  an  indication  has  been
    given that no interpreter is required.  If that is  not  the  case  the
    Appellant's solicitors must notify the Tribunal immediately.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction and  I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date 19th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date 19th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

