
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00393/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 31st July 2013                               |on 27th August 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                         Mohamed Waheer Ahamed Lebbe
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr P Saini, counsel, instructed by Nag Freshlaw
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes before  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal in the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge King
    on 15th April 2013.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 5th January 1990.   He
    advanced a claim for  asylum  on  the  basis  that  his  father  had  a
    transport business.  On 23rd May 2010 the appellant was taking a  lorry
    load of iron belonging to a customer of his father and was  accompanied
    by the driver of the lorry and two of the customer's employees, when he
    was detained at a checkpoint at  Omanthai  where  the  security  forces
    accused him of smuggling weapons.  He was taken to a nearby camp  where
    he was questioned about the weapons and his involvement with the  LTTE,
    which he denied.  He was moved to another camp when he was beaten up by
    CID officers and forced to give his father's  customer's  address.   He
    was later moved to a jail  where  he  was  detained  for  a  month  and
    tortured every day until he went to court on 24th June  2010,  when  he
    was charged with supporting the LTTE.  He was made to sign  a  document
    in Sinhalese which he could not read and was released on 17th  December
    2010 with a condition that he signed on  once  a  week  at  Polonnoruwa
    Police Station.  On his release he telephoned his mother who  told  him
    that his father and uncle had been  arrested.   Therefore  he  went  to
    Colombo where he stayed at a friend's house for eight months whilst  an
    agent applied for a visa.  The agent got him past the  security  checks
    at Colombo Airport and he arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st  August
    2011 where he was permitted to  enter  because  he  had  a  visa  as  a
    student.

 3. After a hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  on  12th  February  2013,
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fitzgibbon  QC  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made  on  23rd  December
    2012, to remove the appellant from the United  Kingdom  to  Sri  Lanka,
    following the refusal of his asylum and human rights claims.  The First-
    tier Tribunal judge indicated in his determination, promulgated on 26th
    February 2013, that he rejected the appellant's account  as  not  being
    credible.

 4. It is clear from the comments which Upper Tribunal Judge King  made  in
    granting permission to appeal that he did not think  that  any  of  the
    grounds numbered 1 to 4 demonstrated that there was an  arguable  error
    of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  appeal.   He  expressly  gave
    permission to appeal in relation to grounds 5 and 6.

 5. When the appeal came before me, Mr Saini, on behalf of  the  appellant,
    sought to renew his arguments on grounds 1 to 4, as he put  in  it  his
    skeleton argument, dated 30th July 2013.

 6. The first ground of appeal  asserted  that  the  consideration  of  the
    appellant's case  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  lacked  anxious
    scrutiny.  The appellant relied upon  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in ML (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 844, in which Moses LJ noted the meaning given  to  the
    phrase "anxious scrutiny" by Carnwath LJ, as he was then, in R  (YH)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 16, when  he
    said that it underlined "the very special human context in  which  such
    cases are brought,  and  the  need  for  decisions  to  show  by  their
    reasoning that every factor which might tell in favour of an  applicant
    has been properly  taken  into  account."   It  is  well  to  remember,
    however, that in the passage of his judgment in which he  set  out  his
    interpretation of "anxious scrutiny" Carnwath LJ also said  that  there
    was a balance to be struck and anxious scrutiny might work  both  ways.
    He said the cause of genuine asylum seekers  would  not  be  helped  by
    undue credulity towards those advancing stories which  were  manifestly
    contrived or riddled with inconsistencies.

 7. In ground 1 it was said that there was no ostensible  consideration  of
    the appellant's response to paragraph 33 of the  refusal  letter  on  a
    point by point basis.  It  was  also  said  that  in  disbelieving  the
    appellant's evidence the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  to  examine
    his evidence which rebutted the  refusal  letter  and  then  failed  to
    explain why that rebuttal evidence did not satisfy  him  to  the  lower
    standard.  It  was  suggested  that  the  analysis  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge in paragraph 17  of  his  determination  was  scant  and
    unsatisfactory.

 8. In paragraph 33 of the letter of refusal the respondent said  that  the
    appellant said that the Sri Lankan authorities were looking for him  on
    25th December 2010 as he was supposed to sign on on 24th December 2010.
     When asked why the authorities were looking for him he said "Because I
    have connections with the LTTE, they assume things"  (AIR  Q92).   This
    claim was inconsistent with his earlier evidence in interview  when  he
    said he knew no LTTE people (AIR Q24).

 9. It is apparent from reading paragraph 21 of the determination that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge did consider the appellant's explanation  for
    this apparent inconsistency but in his view  the  appellant's  comments
    did not explain it and it remained an  inconsistency.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge made it clear by reference to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, dated 12th February 2013, that he had indeed considered  his
    comments.

10. As to the assertion that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  failed  to
    examine the appellant's evidence which rebutted the refusal letter,  it
    is apparent from reading paragraph 3  of  the  determination  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge read with care all of  the  material  in  the
    appellant's bundle of documents, which included his witness  statement.



11. In paragraph 27 of the letter of refusal the  respondent  said  it  was
    noted that the appellant had failed to adequately explain why  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities decided he  was  transporting  weapons  and  started
    beating  him  when  he  had  no  affiliation  with  the  LTTE  and  was
    transporting iron materials.  There was no reason from the  information
    he had provided why the Sri Lankan authorities decided he was  carrying
    weapons when he was carrying iron material which he had brought cheaply
    to sell.  The reference  to  the  iron  materials  having  been  bought
    cheaply to sell came from the appellant's answer to question 20 in  his
    asylum interview, in which he  said  because  the  war  was  over  iron
    materials were cheap so they used to buy them from there  and  sell  in
    Colombo.  The explanation offered in the appellant's witness  statement
    was that he was not told the reason why they had arrested him.  What he
    was told was that he had been involved with the LTTE and had helped the
    LTTE to transfer weapons to Colombo.  He said from the  information  he
    received from the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  he  believed  that  these
    people (the people in  the  lorry)  were  LTTE  members  and  they  had
    transferred weapons to Colombo during the time of the  civil  war.   As
    they had been involved with  them  in  the  business,  the  authorities
    suspected that they had also been involved with this and had helped the
    LTTE to transfer weapons to Colombo.  It is  the  case,  however,  that
    this response  contradicted  what  the  appellant  said  in  answer  to
    question 21 in his asylum interview in which he said:

         "After that they took me to the camp.  They  questioned  me  there.
         They asked me where I was taking the weapons to and  from  where  I
         was bringing them.  They said that there  were  weapons  there.   I
         came to know about the weapons only after they told me.  I did  not
         know they were on the lorry.  They asked me how  long  I  had  been
         doing this."

12. In his witness statement the appellant dealt with a number of points of
    criticism advanced by the respondent in the letter of  refusal.   These
    included criticism of the appellant  for  not  having  adduced  medical
    evidence to support his assertion of  having  been  tortured,  when  he
    claimed that his friend had brought a doctor to his house  and  treated
    him for his injuries, criticism of the appellant  for  his  claim  that
    notwithstanding his army pass and ID card were taken  off  him  in  the
    camp when he was arrested, he was able to identify  himself  merely  by
    name when he went to the police station every week and criticism of the
    appellant for an inconsistency in his account since notwithstanding  he
    claimed he was charged with supporting the LTTE when he was produced at
    court on 24th June 2010, he also claimed he was later released  without
    charge.  The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  identified  these  points  of
    criticism in paragraph 11 of his determination.

13. The Upper Tribunal judge dealt with these points of criticism by saying
    that the comments on the reason for refusal in the appellant's  witness
    statement added little to the case for the appellant as set out in  the
    determination.  It is clear from paragraph 18 of the determination that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had   regard   to   the   appellant's
    explanations. He said that  if  the  appellant  had  been  transporting
    weapons it was extremely unlikely that  he  would  have  been  released
    because (so far as the authorities were concerned) he would  have  been
    an active terrorist who was continuing on  the  LTTE's  armed  campaign
    after the formal end of hostilities.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    said the appellant did not say that he paid a bribe for his release and
    he had given contradictory evidence as to whether the case against  him
    was formerly discontinued.  He went on to say that the appellant stated
    that a friend (unnamed) told him that people who had been released were
    later killed by the authorities as a tactic but no  evidence  had  been
    produced  to  support  this.   He  said  he   asked   the   appellant's
    representative if he could  point  to  any  background  evidence  which
    showed the authorities did this to LTTE suspects instead of  continuing
    with Court proceedings but he had been unable to do so.

14. It is clear from what Upper Tribunal Judge King  said  that  he  agreed
    with the First-tier Tribunal judge that  what  the  appellant  said  in
    relation to these points of criticism added  little  to  his  case  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge King was also of the view that it was  clear  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  had  regard  to  certain  of  the
    appellant's comments in any event.  In my view is apparent from reading
    the determination as a whole that in giving  his  reasons  for  finding
    that the account of the  appellant  was  not  credible  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  demonstrated  that  he  had  taken  account   of   the
    appellant's comments.  It is particularly significant that in paragraph
    14 of his determination he said that in determining the appeal  he  had
    given consideration to the totality of the evidence as well as  to  the
    appellant's submissions and the respondent's reason  for  refusal.   He
    said if an item of evidence, or a  point  taken  in  argument  was  not
    specifically referred to, it did not mean that he  had  not  considered
    it.  He said he had been aware of his duty to give each relevant matter
    the most anxious scrutiny but for the purposes of justly  deciding  the
    appeal he  had  concentrated  on  what  he  regarded  as  the  critical
    determinative issues.

15. Ground 2 criticised the statement by the First-tier Tribunal judge,  in
    paragraph 17 of his determination,  that  it  appeared  to  him  to  be
    extremely unlikely that if the LTTE were using the appellant's father's
    lorry to transport weapons, they would have allowed someone who was not
    a member or closely connected to the organisation to be  involved.  The
    determination did not reveal whether the matter had  been  put  to  the
    appellant when it should have been.  Mr Saini had to concede  that  the
    record of evidence made by the First-tier Tribunal judge had  not  been
    called for to show what had transpired.  In any event I take  the  view
    that the appellant was represented by counsel at  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal and could not  reasonably  have  expected  that  the  points  of
    adverse credibility ultimately taken against him would be put  to  him.
    It was the duty of his counsel to seek an explanation for  any  obvious
    points such as the one in question. It was then said that there was  no
    evidence that the Home Office Presenting Officer had taken the point in
    his closing address so that  the  appellant's  representative  was  not
    given the opportunity to address the  point  in  his  closing  address.
    What I have said above applies equally to  that  proposition.   It  was
    said in the third place that in making such a  finding  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge had not demonstrated that  it  was  based  on  necessary
    evidence elicited from the appellant which would explain how  the  LTTE
    would even have a say in who drove the appellant's father's lorry.   In
    my view the finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge was not  based  on
    direct evidence.  It is impossible to see how it could have  been.   It
    was an inference which he  was  properly  entitled  to  draw  from  the
    evidence as a whole.  Upper Tribunal Judge King said that  the  comment
    was open to be made and was made in the overall context of the evidence
    of the appellant's arrest.

16. Ground 3 criticised the First-tier Tribunal judge for stating  that  he
    agreed with the Secretary of State that it was extremely unlikely  that
    the appellant would have been released under any  circumstances  as  he
    would have been viewed as an active terrorist who was  continuing  with
    the LTTE's armed campaign after the formal end of hostilities.  It  was
    suggested that nowhere in the letter of refusal did  the  Secretary  of
    State advance such an argument and there  was  no  background  material
    advanced by the respondent to support such a theory.  It was said  that
    clearly courts granted bail to all variety of persons but  it  had  not
    been shown by reference to any objective or  background  evidence  that
    due to his specific category of LTTE association  the  appellant  could
    not have been released by the court.

17. It is the case in paragraph 38 of the letter of refusal the  respondent
    stated that it was considered the appellant had  failed  to  adequately
    explain why the Sri Lankan authorities took him to court on  24th  June
    2010, charged him with supporting the LTTE, put him in jail for another
    six months and then released him without  charge  to  sign  on  at  the
    police station.  Therefore it undermined his claim that he was detained
    or released as claimed.  While it may be the case that the Secretary of
    State did not aver that the appellant  would  not  have  been  released
    under any circumstances, in my  view  the  comment  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was fully justified having regard to  the  determination
    of the Tribunal in TK (Tamils, LP updated) Sri Lanka (rev 1) CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00049.  In that determination the Tribunal found that  since  the
    military defeat of the LTTE in May 2009  the  principal  focus  of  the
    authorities continued to  be  persons  considered  to  be  either  LTTE
    members, fighters or operatives or persons who  had  played  an  active
    role in the international procurement network responsible for financing
    the LTTE and ensuring it was supplied with arms.  In my view the First-
    tier Tribunal judge was perfectly entitled to draw the conclusion  that
    if the appellant had been arrested after the  defeat  of  the  LTTE  on
    suspicion of supplying the LTTE with arms  it  was  extremely  unlikely
    that he would have been released.

18. In his  skeleton  argument  Mr  Saini  said  that  ground  3  would  be
    supplemented by excerpts from the recent country guidance  case  of  GJ
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC)  but  in
    my view neither  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  a  determination
    promulgated after the determination of this  appeal  nor  the  evidence
    which was adduced before that Tribunal, which was not  adduced  in  the
    instant appeal, are capable of  supporting  the  proposition  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge made an error of law in his determination  of
    the appeal.

19. Upper Tribunal Judge King expressed the view that although possibly not
    said by the  respondent  in  terms,  it  was  clear  that  it  was  not
    considered credible that, having been detained  for  seven  months  for
    smuggling arms, the appellant would be released on  bail,  albeit  with
    reporting  conditions.   That  was  a  finding  open  to  be  made.   I
    respectfully agree.

20. Ground 4 suggested that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  unfairly
    criticised the appellant for failing to  produce  medical  evidence  of
    torture when the appellant had made it clear and openly  admitted  that
    he had no scars.  As has been pointed out, however, the appellant  said
    that he was treated for his injuries which he sustained as a result  of
    torture by a doctor called by his friend.  It is perfectly  plain  from
    reading the determination that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  did  not
    expect that a medical report could  deal  with  non-existent  signs  of
    injury.  What he said in paragraph 20 of his determination was that  it
    was striking that despite his claim that he was tortured every day  for
    a month, he had produced no medical or psychiatric evidence.  The First-
    tier Tribunal judge mentioned that the appellant said that  his  friend
    in Colombo brought a  doctor  to  the  house  who  gave  him  Aryuvedic
    treatment.  He said there was no  statement  from  the  friend  or  the
    doctor.  Either of them could have described how the appellant was when
    he got out of prison.  As it was he only had his  account  of  it.   He
    said in answer to his question about what the 'torture'  consisted  of,
    the appellant said that his captors hit him while they questioned  him.
    The appellant said he had back pain as a result but no  scarring.   His
    suffering was mainly mental.  The First-tier Tribunal judge  said  that
    the vagueness of his account and the lack of any  supporting  evidence,
    which should in principle have been available, detracted  further  from
    the credibility of his claim.

21. Upper Tribunal Judge King said that the criticism in ground 4 had to be
    seen within the overall context of paragraph 20  of  the  determination
    with beatings every day for a month without physical  injury.   It  was
    clear that the judge had engaged with the account of the ill-treatment.



22. Had permission to appeal been granted in respect of grounds 1  to  4  I
    would not have found that the First-tier Tribunal judge made  an  error
    of law as therein alleged so that in these circumstances  there  is  no
    point in interfering with the order of Upper Tribunal Judge King.

23. Ground 5 argued that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed  to  properly
    assess the appellant's exit from Sri Lanka.  It was said that he failed
    to assess the appellant's evidence that he employed an agent to  obtain
    an entry clearance permit which enabled the appellant to flee Sri Lanka
    on his own passport.  The First-tier Tribunal judge stated at  the  end
    of paragraph 22 of his determination it was not credible the  appellant
    would have fled Sri Lanka on his own passport as  he  would  have  been
    identified as an absconder.  It was said that this reasoning conflicted
    entirely with the COIS Report on exit checks  from  Sri  Lanka  at  the
    airport which had long made it  clear  that  a  person  could  only  be
    stopped from exiting Sri Lanka if his passport had been impounded by  a
    court or if he had had an arrest warrant issued against him  or  if  he
    was on a rare and case  specific  wanted  list.   The  source  of  that
    evidence was paragraph 25.21 of the COIR on Sri Lanka, dated 7th  March
    2012, which referred to a letter  from  the  British  High  Commission,
    dated 5th January  2012.   An  earlier  identical  letter,  dated  14th
    September 2010, was referred to  in  paragraph  45  of  the  letter  of
    refusal.

24. The difficulty with the complaint made on  the  appellant's  behalf  is
    that as he made clear in his witness statement the appellant's  account
    was that he had been charged before a court with  supporting  the  LTTE
    and the charges had not been dropped.  Moreover he failed to report  on
    24th December 2010, which was about eight months prior to  leaving  Sri
    Lanka.  In his witness statement the appellant  said  he  breached  his
    bail conditions so that there must be an arrest warrant issued  against
    him.  In my view it is likely that if the appellant  were  telling  the
    truth an arrest warrant would have been issued against him prior to him
    leaving Sri Lanka.  There is every reason to believe, therefore that if
    he had been released on bail notwithstanding that he had  been  charged
    with helping the LTTE by the supply of arms, an  arrest  warrant  would
    have been issued against him soon  after  his  failure  to  report  and
    certainly by the time that he left Sri Lanka.  As the Tribunal noted in
    TK (Tamils, LP updated) the records the Sri Lanka authorities  keep  on
    persons  with  some  history  of  arrest  and  detention  have   become
    increasingly sophisticated; their greater accuracy is likely to  reduce
    substantially the risk that  a  person  of  no  real  interest  to  the
    authorities would be arrested or detained.  That suggests  in  my  view
    that someone falling into the category of a person that  the  appellant
    claimed to be, that is to say someone suspected of  being  involved  in
    supplying the LTTE with arms who had  absconded,  would  inevitably  be
    made subject to an arrest warrant.  He would have been  placed  on  the
    DIE's database as a wanted person.

25. In relation to  ground  5  in  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King pointed to the fact that the exit had to be seen in
    terms of the claim that  the  authorities  were  actively  seeking  the
    appellant on 25th December 2010 and he not leaving until  eight  months
    later.

26. Ground 6 asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  failed  to  have
    regard to the risk factors set out in LP and TK.   At  the  hearing  Mr
    Saini conceded that if the findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge as
    to the appellant not being on reporting conditions or  having  no  LTTE
    connections could not be impugned the only relevant factor would be the
    fact that he left Sri  Lanka  unlawfully.   It  is  difficult  to  see,
    however, how the appellant would have left Sri Lanka unlawfully when he
    left on his own passport with  a  student  visa  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  Upper Tribunal Judge King  said  that  the  grounds  did  not
    identify what were the risk factors absent any detention or release  of
    the appellant.

27. In paragraph 24 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that he rejected the account of the appellant.  He  was  not  satisfied
    that there was a realistic possibility that he could  face  persecution
    for a Convention reason or grave breaches of his  human  rights  if  he
    went back to Sri  Lanka.   He  said  having  reminded  himself  of  the
    relevant country guidance in LP and TK, he found that he faced no  real
    risk of such treatment  in  Sri  Lanka.   In  my  view  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was perfectly entitled to deal  with  the  risk  factors
    identified in LP and TK in the summary way in which he did.

28. It is obvious on reading the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge that he gave other reasons for not finding the appellant had been
    credible.  In my view having  regard  to  the  reasons  which  he  gave
    overall, it cannot be said  that  he  made  an  error  of  law  in  his
    determination of  the  appeal.   Therefore  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed so  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.



Signed                              Dated

P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


