
                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal number: AA/00827/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Determination Promulgated   |
|On September 8, 2016                 |On September 13, 2016       |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                             MR LIBAN ALI MUMIN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia. On October 4, 2013 he entered
       the United Kingdom and claimed asylum. The  respondent  refused  his
       asylum claim on December 31, 2014 under paragraph  336  HC  395  and
       took a decision to refuse him leave to enter.

    2. The appellant appealed those decisions under section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on January 19, 2015.

    3. His appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on November 3, 2015 and in  a
       decision promulgated on November 6, 2015 he dismissed his appeal  on
       all grounds.

    4. The  appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  November  19,  2015
       submitting the Judge had erred in the way he dealt with evidence and
       article 15(c).

    5. Permission to appeal was refused by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal McCarthy on December 7, 2015. Permission to appeal was
       renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  December  21,  2015  and  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Warr granted permission finding it arguable  that  as
       the appellant came from  a  minority  clan  the  Judge  should  have
       considered his case against the country guidance decision of  MOJ  &
       Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and  in
       particular headnote (xii) of that decision.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    7. No anonymity direction has been made.


SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Greer submitted  that  whilst  the  ground  identified  by  Upper
       Tribunal Warr was the strongest nevertheless  he  would  argue  that
       other grounds identified errors in  law.  He  submitted  there  were
       errors as follows:

      a. As regards the first ground Mr Greer submitted that the Judge  gave
         inadequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim that he  was
         a journalist. He failed to have regard to the  documents  contained
         in the appellant's bundle or place the  appropriate  weight  on  Mr
         Abdi's evidence.


      b. As regards the second ground of appeal Mr Greer submitted  that  as
         the Judge accepted the appellant came from a minority clan and from
         Kismayo he was obliged to consider the appellant's ability to  live
         in Mogadishu in light of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG
         [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).


      c. The third ground of appeal related to how  the  Judge  treated  the
         appellant's ability to travel out of Mogadishu.


    9. Mr Bates adopted the Rule 24 statement dated January 26, 2016 and he
       rejected all of the grounds of appeal. As regards the  first  ground
       of appeal  he  submitted  the  Judge  considered  the  evidence  and
       rejected the appellant's account and gave adequate reasons  for  his
       decision. The documents produced were not corroborative documents as
       they merely repeated information in the public domain.  With  regard
       to the second ground of  appeal  he  submitted  that  the  appellant
       failed to give reasons why he could not support himself in Mogadishu
       and there was  no  error  in  approach  to  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
       Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  If he could live  in
       Mogadishu then there would be no reason to consider travel  back  to
       Kismayo.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10. At paragraph [29] of his decision the Judge concluded the  appellant
       was a member of the Ashraf  minority  clan  and  that  he  lived  in
       Kismayo.

   11. In assessing the risk to the appellant the Judge had to consider the
       appellant's claim to be a journalist because the respondent disputed
       his claim. Mr Greer argued that he did not give consideration to all
       the evidence but I am satisfied this ground of appeal has no  merit.
       In a detailed  examination  the  Judge  considered  the  appellant's
       account and gave reasons for rejecting the claim. These reasons were
       open to him on the evidence  especially  as  he  clearly  considered
       witness  evidence  advanced  on  his  behalf.  He  referred  to  the
       objective evidence generally in paragraph [39] but for  the  reasons
       contained therein he rejected it. The grounds advanced by  Mr  Greer
       are a disagreement with his conclusions. There is no  merit  to  the
       first ground of appeal.


   12. The second  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  his  treatment  of  the
       appellant's humanitarian protection claim.

   13. Mr Greer's submission is that the Judge failed to engage with MOJ  &
       Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) bearing
       in mind he was not from Mogadishu. His argument was that  the  Judge
       did not engage with what the Tribunal said about  people,  not  from
       Mogadishu, being returned to Mogadishu.

   14. The Tribunal considered the issue of return to Mogadishu in MOJ. The
       Tribunal stated:


         "424. The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
         who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live
         in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
         facing a real risk of destitution. Large numbers of Somali citizens
         have moved to Mogadishu where, as we have seen there is now freedom
         of movement and no clan based discrimination. Such a person seeking
         to settle in Mogadishu but who has not previously lived there would
         be able to do so provided he had either some form of social support
         network, which might be in the form of  membership  of  a  majority
         clan or having relatives living in the city, or  having  access  to
         funds such as would be required to establish  accommodation  and  a
         means of on-going support. That might be  in  terms  of  continuing
         remittances or securing a livelihood, based on employment  or  self
         employment.


         425. On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person  of  a
         minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access to funds
         and no other form of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to
         be realistic as, in the absence of means to establish  a  home  and
         some form of ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of
         having no alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within
         an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having to live  in
         conditions   that   will   fall   below   acceptable   humanitarian
         standards."

   15. The  Judge  was  therefore  required  to  consider  the  appellant's
       situation with paragraph [425] of MOJ in mind and if he did not then
       there would be an error in law.

   16. At paragraph [41] of his decision the Judge referred to the  country
       guidance decision of MOJ & Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
       [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). He noted the following:


      a. The appellant would return to Mogadishu as an ordinary citizen.
      b. He did not have profile that would place him at risk.
      c. The appellant was fit and well.
      d. It was not clear whether he had family in Somalia.
      e. He rejected his claim that he had been gratuitously provided with a
         passport and flight to leave the country.

   17. Paragraph [41] of the Judge's decision demonstrates that  the  Judge
       did have in mind what the Tribunal stated in MOJ.

   18. The Judge in examining his claim whilst accepting he came  from  the
       Ashraf tribe nevertheless made a number of  adverse  findings  about
       his claim and in paragraph [41] he  brought  the  material  findings
       together.


   19. In effect, he found the appellant was fit and well and  due  to  the
       inconsistencies in the evidence he did not rule  out  the  appellant
       having family to whom he could turn to in Somalia. He also  rejected
       his account of he was able to leave the country and in particular he
       rejected his claim that an  agent  "gratuitously"  assisted  him  to
       leave.


   20. The Tribunal in MOJ did not say minority clan members  returning  to
       Mogadishu would be at risk. The Tribunal made it clear that if  they
       were from a minority clan and it was shown he had  no  ties  to  the
       city or clan/family support or access to funds then that person  was
       likely to be at risk.

   21. I therefore find that the Judge did properly consider risk on return
       to Mogadishu and having done so he  then  found  that  as  he  could
       return there he was not required  to  consider  the  issue  of  safe
       onward travel (Ground Three).


   22. I therefore uphold the Judge's decision and dismiss this appeal.

DECISION

   23. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       Judge's decision on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Dated: September 13, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I uphold the original fee decision.


Signed                            Dated: September 13, 2016

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
