

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00706/2014
     AA/00707/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th  May 2016                             |On 3rd June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       AMNA JASSIM MOHAMMED AL-JOBOORI
                      RAFAL MONTHIR MOHMOUD AL HASHIMI
                          (Anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, counsel, instructed by Greater
                  Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants - who are mother and daughter - first arrived in the UK
      as visitors in early 2011. Between 9 September 2013 and  28  September
      2015 they were granted extended periods of leave to remain. The  first
      appellant's husband had also travelled  to  the  UK.  In  the  instant
      appeal, and in an earlier appeal, he  is  a  dependant  of  the  first
      appellant. An earlier asylum appeal in 2011 had been dismissed by  the
      First-tier Tribunal; permission to appeal  had  been  granted  by  the
      Upper Tribunal and the respondent subsequently withdrew  the  decision
      the subject of that appeal and the appellants (and the husband/father)
      were granted leave to remain. The last period  of  leave  granted  was
      discretionary leave between January 2013 and September 2015 (that  has
      now been extended until 2017). They were  refused  asylum/humanitarian
      protection in decisions dated 21st January 2014 for reasons set out in
      letters dated 15th January 2014.


   2. Although their claims are not identical their cases have  been  linked
      because of the  familial  relationship  and  Tribunal  decisions  have
      considered and reached decisions on both cases in one decision.  Their
      appeal against the decision of 21st January  2014  was  heard  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal on 25th July 2014 and, in a  decision  promulgated
      on 27th January 2015,  dismissed.  The  delay  in  promulgation  arose
      because of various procedural issues.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that it was arguable


   i) there was a contradiction in the judge's findings in saying there  had
      been no problems for the family in Kerada and yet  there  had  been  a
      kidnapping attempt there thus rendering the factual matrix upon  which
      the decision was taken unsafe;
  ii) there had been a failure by the judge to consider risk on return as  a
      mixed faith family; and
 iii) a failure to consider internal armed  conflict  despite  these  issues
      being directly addressed by Dr George in his expert opinion.


      Ground 1


   4. Although Ms Johnstone submitted there were no inconsistencies  in  the
      decision when read as a whole  and  that  the  findings  overall  were
      adequate and neither perverse nor irrational, the appellants  referred
      to [70] and [74] of the decision  which  specifically  refers  to  the
      family moving to Kerada and that there had been  no  incidents  whilst
      they were there. [69] refers to an attempted  kidnap  in  Kerada.  The
      judge does not make a finding on whether  the  attempted  kidnap  took
      place or whether it was targeted  or  criminality.  These  issues  are
      canvassed in the decision but no actual conclusion is reached. [65] of
      the decision tails off with an uncompleted  sentence  about  sectarian
      violence.


   5. I cannot be satisfied that the judge had made reasoned  findings  that
      the kidnap attempt did not occur and therefore the finding that  there
      were no adverse incidents  in  Kerada  was  sustainable.  There  is  a
      material error of law by the judge.


        Ground 2 and 3


   6. Ms Johnstone accepted there was no reference in the  decision  to  the
      issue of mixed faith marriage or the potential consequences on return.


   7. There has been no engagement by the judge with Dr George's  report  or
      the personal profiles of the appellants either in terms of  return  to
      Baghdad or in terms of humanitarian protection.


   8. The judge has erred in law in failing to address  the  appeal  grounds
      relied upon by the appellants and failed to engage with the background
      material, including the expert report of Dr George.


        Conclusion


   9. On reading the First-tier Tribunal decision it does  appear  that  the
      decision  promulgated  may  have  been  a  draft.  This  judge  is  an
      experienced judge who  would  not  usually  fail  to  consider  expert
      evidence, fail to finish paragraphs  and  omit  consideration  of  the
      appeal grounds as relied upon by appellants. I am satisfied that  none
      of the findings can be relied upon and, regrettably given the  lengthy
      process that these appellants have already endured, this appeal is  to
      be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.


  10. There are errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      such that it is to be set aside, no findings preserved.

     Consequential Directions


    To be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge  other
    than Designated Judge McClure or First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies.




[pic]


                                    Date 2nd June 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
