
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00082/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 April 2014                                |On 22 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                                     sn
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He claimed asylum  on  30  May
    2012 but his application was refused.  He appealed  that  decision  and
    the appeal was heard by a First-tier Tribunal Judge who  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant claims that the judge fell into error  in  the  following
    ways: -- Firstly, in finding that the appellant  was  not  a  committee
    member of the Jaffna University Student Union; secondly,  in  rejecting
    the appellant's claim that after he left Sri  Lanka  in  May  2012  the
    authorities came in search of him and removed papers from his  home  in
    respect of his time at Jaffna University;  thirdly,  in  rejecting  the
    appellant's evidence that he attended demonstrations  against  the  Sri
    Lanka Government during his time in the UK; fourthly, failing to engage
    with the case law referred to  during  submissions  (and  also  in  the
    skeleton argument) in finding against the appellant on the  basis  that
    he was able to leave Sri Lanka without difficulty; fifthly,  displaying
    a flawed approach to the evidence which infects her assessment  of  the
    risk on return because the appellant is likely to be seen as  a  threat
    to the unitary state of Sri Lanka or the Sri Lanka Government.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted.  The judge  granting  permission  was
    "just persuaded" that the grounds amount to more  than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's findings.  It was found arguable that  the  judge  may
    have misconstrued some of the evidence before her  and  thereby  fallen
    into  material  error.   There  may  also  be  arguable  merit  in  the
    submission concerning the grant of permission by the Court of Appeal in
    the case of MP and NT.

The Hearing

 4. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mr Jones, on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, applied for an adjournment on the basis that the outcome  of
    the decision which is awaited from the Court of Appeal in  relation  to
    MP and NT would be known before long and the result  may  well  have  a
    bearing on the current appeal.  There was  also  no  Tamil  interpreter
    booked to appear and therefore  no  evidence  could  be  given  by  the
    appellant.

 5. That application was opposed by  Mr  Nath  who  pointed  out  that  the
    directions to the parties were to the effect that they  should  prepare
    for the hearing on the basis that it would be confined to a decision on
    whether the determination should be set aside for legal error  and,  if
    so, whether the decision in the appeal could be remade  without  having
    to hear oral evidence.  It was also directed that no interpreter  would
    be booked for the hearing unless a party was unrepresented and required
    an interpreter before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. I refused the adjournment on the basis that it was not known  when  the
    Court of Appeal decision would be promulgated and even  then  what  the
    outcome would be.  There is current country guidance  and  if  I  found
    that there was no material error of law  that  would  dispose  of  this
    appeal subject, of course, to any onward appeal.

 7. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal noting that
    the grounds contend that the judge materially misconstrued  aspects  of
    the evidence, in particular that the appellant did not  move  to  avoid
    identification, rather because of fear.  However, that is irrelevant as
    the judge makes clear on this point that she does not  find  it  likely
    that the appellant would have been subsequently  involved  in  2011  as
    claimed and this applies whether he moved to  avoid  identification  or
    due to fear.  It is further argued  in  the  response  that  the  other
    grounds amount to a disagreement.  The judge was entitled  to  question
    the credibility of a person  such  as  the  appellant  choosing  to  be
    publicly involved with a student union despite it being two years since
    the ceasefire and that he would choose to meet at all publicly  despite
    it being allegedly during less busy periods, bearing in mind his  claim
    that he actually relocated in order to preserve his safety.

 8. I heard  oral  submissions  from  both  representatives.   The  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal are supported by submissions, all of which
    I have taken into account.

My Deliberations

 9. In paragraph 19 of the determination the judge found that the appellant
    was a student at Jaffna University from 2006.  She found that there  is
    no documentary evidence to corroborate the appellant's evidence that he
    was a committee member of the student union at the university and  does
    not find that he held such a position.  The  submission  is  made  that
    there is no requirement for corroboration and it is a  misdirection  to
    imply that corroboration is necessary.

10. As to that although corroboration of evidence is not required the judge
    was entitled to comment on the  fact  that  there  was  none  and  then
    proceed to give reasons why she did not accept that the appellant was a
    committee member. In light of the fact that the appellant claimed  that
    he left Jaffna for Colombo in 2009, either out of his own fear  or  his
    father's concerns for him, on the face of it the judge was entitled  to
    find that it was not credible that the appellant would return  in  2011
    to meet openly with the then current university student  union  leaders
    or committee members and participate in organising events.

11. The point is taken on behalf of the appellant that the judge failed  to
    take account of the fact that his return was some two  years  following
    the end of the civil war in Sri Lanka. However I note  that  the  judge
    cites the country guidance case  of  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and at  point  (2)  in
    the head note is quoted that the focus of the Sri  Lankan  Government's
    concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in
    Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
    incidents since the end of the civil war:-

         "(3) The  Government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka. Its focus is on preventing both (a) the  resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka."

12. It is the appellant's case that he left the university through fear  at
    the end of 2008 or early 2009, and even himself goes so far as  to  say
    at paragraph 13 of his statement that he was given conflicting accounts
    of whether the persecution of Tamils had improved with  the  ending  of
    the war, having been told this by his old friends from university. I do
    not find that there is any merit in claiming that the judge  fell  into
    error by coming to the conclusions that she did on the  matter  of  the
    appellant's return to Sri Lanka in 2011 following the  refusal  of  his
    application for further leave to remain as  a  student  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The judge was clearly  aware  of  and  applied  the  case  law
    relevant to Sri Lankan Tamil asylum claims. The judge was  entitled  to
    find not credible the appellant's claim that he  would  return  to  the
    very place from which his original fear stemmed when  there  was  every
    reason to be aware that the safety of Tamils was far from assured.

13. The other grounds and submissions I find to be mere argument  with  the
    judge's conclusions.  The judge reasoned why she did  not  accept  that
    the authorities came in search of the appellant and removed papers from
    his home.  It appears to be common ground that the appellant had  never
    had his photograph posted at the university unlike  students  who  were
    suspected of involvement with the LTTE; he has never been  detained  or
    arrested, and even if he was part of a group warned in 2008 he  clearly
    did not generate any  level  of  adverse  interest  then,  and  on  her
    findings has not generated any interest since. As to the claim that the
    appellant attended demonstrations  against  the  Sri  Lanka  government
    during his time there or here in  the  United  Kingdom  the  judge  was
    entitled to reason that even if he did this would cause him no problems
    because there is no photographic evidence and no evidence that any  may
    exist. Furthermore there is no evidence to show  that  the  authorities
    knew of his presence at any demonstrations at that time  or  that  they
    remained or are adversely interested in him for such reasons now.

14. On the evidence before her the judge reached findings  and  conclusions
    that were open to her.

Decision

15. For these reasons the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    upheld. Therefore the appeal remains dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

16. An anonymity direction has been made  previously  and  is  to  continue
    until further order.  This direction is made to avoid  the  possibility
    of difficulties for the appellant on his return to Sri Lanka.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


