

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00868/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2013                               |On 3 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     MG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms R Pickering of Counsel
For the Respondent:          Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Gordon dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

2) The appellant is a national of Iran.  According to the  account  he  gave
   as the basis for his asylum claim, he was a partner in a gym  and  coffee
   shop.  He was not involved in any opposition  activities  until  November
   2010, when a friend persuaded him to deface the picture of Khomeini on as
   many bank notes as possible and distribute them to  show  disapproval  of
   the regime.  The appellant obtained a large quantity of 1,000 Toman notes
   through his business.  These notes were defaced and distributed during an
   anti-government demonstration  in  Tehran  on  4  November  2010.   While
   attending this demonstration the appellant was struck by a baton  wielded
   by a plain clothes police officer and his wrist was broken.  He  went  to
   his sister's house but did not go to hospital because he  was  scared  he
   would be found by the authorities.  His sister  plastered  his  arm  with
   materials obtained from a local chemist.

3) The next day the appellant rejoined the demonstrators  with  his  arm  in
   plaster.  At this demonstration he was struck on the side of the head and
   in the mouth, by a blow which knocked out his front teeth.  He  was  then
   bundled into a vehicle and taken to a building where he was handcuffed to
   a bed for two days.  He was then taken to a second building where he  was
   incarcerated in a small cell.  In this building he was taken out  of  his
   cell every day and tortured.  The remainder of  the  defaced  notes  were
   found in the appellant's underwear.  He was detained for approximately  4
   months.  He was taken to court on 3 occasions but claimed each time  that
   he had been forced into making a confession.   On  his  fourth  visit  to
   court he escaped after asking to go to the toilet.  He then left Iran.

4) Following the unsuccessful appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  permission
   to appeal was sought on a number of grounds.  It was submitted  that  the
   judge was wrong to refuse an adjournment for  a  medical  report  on  the
   appellant's scarring.  The grounds also challenged the reasons  given  by
   the judge for making an adverse credibility finding and it was  contended
   that the judge had failed to engage with parts of the  evidence  for  the
   appellant.

5)  The  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  4  of  the  determination  that  an
   application for an adjournment was made in writing in  February  2012  on
   the basis that the Medical Foundation had agreed to provide a report  but
   there was a 2 month wait for an  appointment  with  the  doctor  and  the
   report would not be available for  at  least  10  weeks  thereafter.   An
   adjournment was  sought  until  July  2012  but  in  the  alternative  an
   adjournment was requested until at least 9 March 2012 so that alternative
   medical evidence could be obtained.  At this point the appeal hearing was
   adjourned until 14 March 2012.

6) When the appeal came before the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  14
   March a further adjournment was sought on behalf of  the  appellant.   It
   was said that the Medical Foundation report could be  done  by  June  and
   that this was relevant to the appellant's  credibility  as  it  addressed
   scarring on his body.  There was an alternative medical expert available,
   Dr Lord, but  the  appellant's  solicitors  were  still  waiting  for  an
   appointment with Dr Lord.  It was not certain  that  a  report  could  be
   provided more quickly by Dr Lord than by the Medical Foundation.  Contact
   had only been made with Dr Lord on the day of the hearing, 14 March 2012.
    The letter from the Medical Foundation confirming that the appellant had
   been accepted for a report was received on 16 February 2012.

7) The judge pointed out at  paragraph  6  of  her  determination  that  the
   appellant's solicitors having obtained an adjournment for the purpose  of
   obtaining a medical report from an alternative source had  not  done  so.
   The judge nevertheless said  that  she  would  consider  the  adjournment
   request "without reference to any dilatory conduct on  the  part  of  the
   appellant's representatives", for which the  appellant  himself  was  not
   responsible.

8) The judge then considered, at paragraph 7 of the  determination,  whether
   to grant a further adjournment.  The judge stated: "I bore in  mind  that
   an expert report dealing with scarring can do little  more  than  confirm
   that the scarring observed was or was not consistent or highly consistent
   with the appellant's account."  The judge went on to say that the  report
   would not say how the scarring was inflicted or in what circumstances and
   the credibility of the appellant's account would have to  be  decided  by
   her on the basis mainly of his own testimony.

9) In fact owing to lack of time the appeal was  adjourned  part-heard  from
   14 March 2012 until 30 March 2012.  At the hearing on 14 March  2012  the
   appellant was still awaiting documents from Iran but it seems that  these
   had not arrived by the time of the resumed hearing on 30 March 2012.

10) A Rule 24 notice was submitted on behalf of the respondent  on  24  July
   2012.  It stated that the respondent did not oppose the  application  for
   permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal "to  determine  the  appeal
   with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider whether the appellant
   sustained  the  injuries  relied  upon  in  the  manner  claimed".    The
   respondent then pointed out that according to the appellant  he  used  to
   wrestle.  The respondent submitted that the judge had failed to  consider
   if it was reasonably likely that the appellant suffered the loss  of  his
   tooth, damage to his wrist and numerous  scars,  in  the  course  of  his
   wrestling activities.  This was followed by a Rule 25 notice on behalf of
   the appellant relying on all the grounds in the  application  and  asking
   for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

11) Before me the parties were agreed that  the  failure  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal to adjourn for the purpose of allowing the  appellant
   to complete the process of obtaining medical  evidence  was  procedurally
   unfair and amounted to an error of  law.   It  was  likely  that  medical
   evidence would be material to the outcome of the appeal.  The appellant's
   credibility was an issue and one of the questions arising in relation  to
   this was whether the scars were consistent with the appellant's  account.



12) The judge was, of course, right to observe that  ultimately  it  is  for
   the Tribunal to make a decision in relation to  the  credibility  of  the
   evidence before it but the judge was wrong to  assume  that  the  medical
   evidence sought would not be material to that assessment.

13) Directions were issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  12  September  2012
   indicating that parties  should  be  ready  to  proceed  to  re-make  the
   decision, if necessary, including presenting  further  evidence,  at  the
   same hearing as the question of error of law was considered.  It appears,
   however, that the Upper Tribunal Judge who issued  these  directions  did
   not have the appellant's Rule 25 notice  before  him.   In  addition,  it
   seems the appellant's solicitors did not receive the directions.

14) In terms of paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statements, I am  satisfied
   that the effect of the error in this  appeal  has  been  to  deprive  the
   appellant of a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and  on  this
   basis the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
   further hearing.

                                  DECISION

15) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point
   of law such that it is set aside and will be re-made.

16) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further  hearing
   for his purpose.

Anonymity

17) The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the
   Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  While  the  appeal
   is pending I continue that order (pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

