
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00003/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2016                        |On 1 November 2016                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     a S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Yemen.  Upon receipt of a decision  made
    by the respondent on 5 December 2014 refusing him leave  to  enter  and
    proposing to remove him to Yemen, he appealed.  In a decision  sent  on
    28 April 2015, First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge  Davidge  dismissed  his
    appeal.  Whilst dismissing the appellant's account of past  persecution
    and current risk, she accepted that  the  appellant  was  (i)  a  Sunni
    Muslim; and (ii) a moderate Shafi'i Muslim.  At paras 34-36 she stated:

         "34. Rather, Counsel argued that the  Appellant's  claims  to  have
             suffered persecution were credible  when  viewed  against  the
             current evidence of the sectarian nature of the  conflict.   I
             have set  out  above  why  I  have  rejected  this  particular
             Appellant's account in that regard.  Counsel argued that  even
             if I found the Appellant had not established past  persecution
             on the facts alleged, the Appellant had  an  alternative  case
             for asylum based on his position as a Sunni  Muslim.   Counsel
             accepted that at the time of the Appellant leaving  Yemen  the
             country background evidence did not  establish  the  Appellant
             was at risk based on  the  fact  of  his  Shafi  Sunni  Muslim
             religion  alone  whether   from   other   Sunni   Muslims   or
             Houthi/Zaida Shia, however the position had  now  deteriorated
             to the point that it was now established  that  Shafi'i  Sunni
             Muslims were at risk from other  Sunni  Muslims,  specifically
             Wahabist Muslims.  Further that in  any  event  as  they  were
             Sunni Muslims they were also at risk, in common with  Wahabist
             Muslims, from Houthi Shi'a Muslims.

         35.  I was careful to ensure that Counsel took me  through  all  of
             the country background evidence upon which he relied.

         36.  I found the evidence did not establish the case to  the  lower
             standard.   Put  shortly,  whilst  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             evidence shows that the Houthi militia have taken  control  by
             violent means, and that there is opposition to the  Houthi  so
             that there is  violent  conflict,  the  notion  that  moderate
             Shafi'i Muslims are somehow stuck in the  middle,  and  so  at
             risk of persecution on account of their religious  beliefs  is
             not borne out.  Nor did I find merit in  counsel's  submission
             that the risk of persecution to the Appellant as a  result  of
             his being a Sunni Muslim from the Houthi militia was real.   I
             have already explained why I did not  find  past  persecution.
             In respect of the position now, the evidence  is  that  Houthi
             target the state and militia who support them.  The  Appellant
             is not in that category.   He  has  had  no  involvement  with
             politics and no significant religious profile so as to attract
             individual attention.  There is  little  evidence  of  Sunni's
             generally, who are not  involved  in  politics,  and  have  no
             significant political or religious profile, and are  not,  for
             example, in  a  Militia,  being  specifically  targeted.   The
             references in the skeleton at paragraph 9, to the  bombing  by
             terrorists of two mosques (B6 in the Appellant's  bundle)  and
             sectarianism and a north south divide and the presence of  Al-
             Qaida in the south (B7), read in the round with  the  rest  of
             the country  background  information  to  which  I  have  been
             referred, simply falls short  of  the  evidence  necessary  to
             establish the claim."

2.   At  para  38  she  turned  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  might
    nevertheless succeed on the basis of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
    Directive by virtue of facing a real risk of indiscriminate violence in
    a situation of internal armed conflict.  Although accepting that  Yemen
    was in a state of armed conflict, she did not consider that it had been
    shown that the threshold of indiscriminate  violence  was  sufficiently
    high to show that the appellant could qualify merely by virtue of being
    an ordinary civilian of that country.

3.   The appellant's grounds of appeal  were  twofold;  it  being  contended
    first of all that the judge failed to give any or adequate reasons  for
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Article  15(c);  and  secondly,
    that she failed to reach clear findings on the appellant's credibility.

4.   The appellant was successful in being  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    the judge who made the grant observing that whilst  Judge  Davidge  had
    given adequate reasons for her credibility  findings,  her  reasons  as
    regards Article 15(c) were arguably deficient.   The  appellant's  case
    was heard on 10 August 2015 by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  J  F  W
    Phillips.  DUTJ Phillips stated at paras 5 and 6 of his decision that:

         "5.  The history of this appeal is detailed above.  The facts,  not
             challenged, are that the Appellant is a Yemeni citizen born on
             22 May 1983.  The Appellant left Yemen on 6 October 2014.   He
             claimed that he was a Shafi'i Sunni Muslim who had lived  with
             his family in Taiz before moving to Sana'a in 2011 because  of
             the turbulent situation in that area.  He left Sana's  fearing
             that it was about to fall to the Houthi Shi'a militia and that
             they  would  expel  or  kill  him  and  that  he  also   faced
             persecution by Wahabi Sunnis because he is a moderate Shafi'i.
              The Appellant also claimed that the  circumstances  in  Yemen
             had  deteriorated  to  such  an  extent  that  the  degree  of
             indiscriminate violence was at such  a  high  level  that  the
             Appellant would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
             solely on account of his presence in Yemen.

         6.   The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
             established that he faced persecution on a return to Yemen and
             this finding is not challenged.  The Tribunal went on to  find
             that there was insufficient evidence  to  establish  that  the
             Appellant would face a real risk of being subject  to  serious
             harm solely on account of his presence in Yemen."

5.   DUTJ Phillips then addressed submissions  relating  to  Article  15(c).
    He concluded that Judge Davidge had failed to engage with or assess the
    substantial body of background material relating to conditions  in  the
    Yemen, including very recent evidence.   Noting  that  the  judge  made
    reference to the "limited evidence available", DUTJ Phillips said  that
    there was no indication of the basis on which the judge considered  the
    evidence to be limited.

6.   At the outset of the hearing before us  the  parties  agreed  that  the
    only salient facts as regards the re-making of  the  decision  on  this
    appeal were that the appellant is a national of Yemen and a Sunni Shafi
    from Taizz who lived in Sana'a  from  2011  until  his  exit  from  the
    country in 2015.

7.   Mr Richards averred  that  on  the  basis  of  these  given  facts  the
    appellant could not succeed on the basis of general risk as  the  level
    of indiscriminate violent in Yemen as a whole was not  high  enough  to
    warrant a conclusion that all civilians faced a real  risk  of  serious
    harm contrary to Article  15(c).   There  being  no  dispute  that  the
    appellant's home area was Sana'a,  the  only  two  issues  that  needed
    decision were (1) would the appellant be at risk on return to his  home
    area; and (2) if he would be at risk in his home area, would he have  a
    viable option of internal relocation in Aden.  In relation to (1),  the
    Secretary of State accepted that in line with the Home  Office  Country
    Information and Guidance, "Yemen, Security and humanitarian situation",
    April 2016, the level of general risk was sufficiently high  in  Sana'a
    and northern and central areas to cross the Article 15(c) (and  Article
    3 ECHR) threshold.  In relation to (2), the Secretary of State accepted
    that the appellant could not safely relocate to Taizz  from  where  the
    appellant originated; as a viable internal relocation  alternative  the
    Secretary of State was only suggesting Aden.   There  were  flights  to
    Aden.  Whilst the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  situation  in
    Aden has deteriorated and is fluid, volatile and unstable,  it  is  not
    sufficiently serious to place the  appellant  at  risk.    Essentially,
    Aden should be considered as an exception to the situation  of  general
    insecurity because it was  the  seat  of  the  Sunni-backed  provincial
    government.  There were elements of control and security  marking  Aden
    out as a comparatively safe city.

8.   Mr Neale highlighted the dire  humanitarian  situation  especially  the
    huge numbers of IDPs (2.5 million) in the country.  The view of the  UN
    Special Rapporteur regarding the situation in  Yemen  was  that  it  is
    catastrophic.  The humanitarian situation, as regards for example  lack
    of healthcare and food insecurity, was a direct  result  of  the  Saudi
    blockade.   It  was  not  the  result  of  a  national  disaster;   the
    predominant causes of the armed conflict were man-made.

9.   As regards Aden, the  driving  out  of  the  Houthis  had  not  brought
    security.  Al Quaeda and ISIS had a significant presence in  the  city;
    there were armed clashes and attacks  in  broad  daylight;  there  were
    examples of persons killed through  indiscriminate  violence;  in  2015
    there had been an assassination of the governor and in April  2016  the
    police chief narrowly survived an attack; there had also  been  a  high
    profile attack in March 2016 on a care home run by  nuns;  peace  talks
    had broken down; the situation was likely to get  worse.   As  compared
    with the view the Secretary of State expressed in  December  2015,  the
    view she expressed in April 2016 was that the situation had worsened.

10.  Mr Neale drew attention to various features of the background  evidence
    relating to Yemen, noting that the  rate  of  casualties  was  0.4  per
    100,000 persons which was higher than that experienced  in  Kirkuk  and
    Diyala (0.1 and 0.07 respectively) where the respondent accepted  there
    was an Article 15(c) risk.  The great majority of the casualties, up to
    93%, were reported to be civilians.  The methods used by the parties to
    the  conflict,  including  the  Saudis,  showed  that  civilians   were
    disproportionately targeted.

11.  Mr Neale emphasised that the principal issue in this case  was  one  of
    relocation  (it  having  been  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant  would  face  risk  in  his  home  area).   UNHCR  guidelines
    (Guidelines on  International  Protection  No.  4  Internal  Flight  or
    Relocation Alternative) repeatedly warned against reliance on  internal
    relocation in the context of armed conflicts  in  which  there  can  be
    shifting armed fronts.  In addition, it was not sufficient to  consider
    whether the appellant could achieve safety in Aden; it had also  to  be
    considered whether that would be reasonable for him.  The appellant  is
    from a northern part of Yemen.  He had never lived in Aden.  He has  no
    family connections in Aden.  People from the north  were  treated  with
    hostility and were suspected of being Houthi or Houthi supporters.   It
    may be that with Saudi help, civil servants in Aden are still  able  to
    draw a salary, but that would not assist  someone  in  the  appellant's
    position.

12.  In relation to the issue of internal relocation, Mr Richards said  that
    there was nothing in the evidence to indicate  that  suspicion  of  the
    appellant as a northerner would translate into a real risk  of  serious
    harm  or  even  very  significant  difficulties.   The  appellant   had
    successfully relocated within Yemen in the past, from Taizz to  Sana'a.
    He had shown himself to be resourceful.  He could earn  a  living.   Mr
    Neale responded by saying that yes the appellant had relocated in  2011
    but the situation had been less dire then.  Not only did the  appellant
    have no family links in Aden,  he  had  no  connections  with  powerful
    actors.

13.  At the end of the hearing the Tribunal directed the parties to  produce
    further background  country  materials  and  subsequently  received  an
    addendum report prepared by Mr Henry Thompson.  It suffices to say that
    Mr Thompson is an established expert on the situation in Yemen.   On  9
    June 2016 the appellant's  representatives  sent  his  addendum  report
    together with further submissions which  largely  repeated  those  sent
    previously.  No further submissions were received from  the  respondent
    nor has the respondent raised any  objection  to  the  contents  of  Mr
    Thompson's addendum report.

14.  It is not necessary to summarise Mr Thompson's addendum report in  full
    as much of it addresses questions relating to the situation in Yemen as
    a whole, whereas it has been conceded by the respondent as set  out  in
    para 2.4.5 of her Country Information Guidance, April 2016 that "in the
    north west and centre of  the  country  the  levels  of  indiscriminate
    violence are likely to be at such a level as to engage Article 15(c)".

15.  Mr  Thompson's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  likely  situation  if
    returned to  Aden  is  substantially  contained  within  the  following
    paragraphs 4.4-6:

         "4.4 What are the prospects of the Appellant  being  able  to  find
             housing and a livelihood in Aden?

             The  events  in  Aden  during  the  first  two  weeks  of  May
             demonstrate how difficult and dangerous it would  be  for  the
             Appellant to remain in Aden (See section 6 below).

             To remain in Aden the Appellant would need an Aden sponsor  of
             some standing to provide him with letters authorising leave to
             remain in Aden, and/or some kind of physical  protection.   In
             Yemeni society this kind of  allegiance  is  either  based  on
             family or  need:  the  sponsor  needs  the  individual  he  is
             sponsoring, or he linked by family obligation.  The Author  is
             unaware if the Appellant has a potential  'sponsor'  in  Aden,
             but the fact that the  Appellant's  family  escaped  Taizz  to
             Sana'a (rather than Aden) makes this seem unlikely.

             If the Appellant had a sponsor, he could find a flat  to  rent
             if he had the cash, however he would probably still not find a
             job or a livelihood.  Unlike Sana's,  Aden  does  not  have  a
             government-led economy, and because trading is  so  slow,  the
             labour market is flooded and there is only a very small chance
             that the Appellant could find a livelihood.  This  takes  into
             account his work with MALI and his  relationship  with  MALI's
             owner.  The English-language schools in Aden are open, but are
             not as busy as they have been.

         5.   To what extent, if at all is Aden  subject  to  indiscriminate
             violence?

             Aden doesn't have government - it has a local  council  backed
             by the Emirati forces and advisors, but the  Emiratis  have  a
             minimal presence on the ground.   The  local  council  is  not
             elected, and has  limited  capacity  to  implement  the  basis
             functions of governance in the areas it controls.

             Aden suffers from political/criminal violence at quite a  high
             level.  In the week of writing this report  on  23rd  May  two
             suicide bombs left over forty people dead in Aden, on the 27th
             May  three  bombs  were  found  in  mosque  shoe-racks...  the
             reaction,  two  days  later  on  the  29th  May  was  for  the
             Government forces to round up  and  forcibly  expel  yet  more
             'Northern' Yemenis (see also section 6 below).  There has been
             a steady string of assassinations of  senior  members  of  the
             security forces - the assassins tend  to  use  suicide  bombs,
             roadside  bombs,  car  bombs  or   drive-by   shootings   from
             motorcycles.  Many innocent people have lost  their  lives  or
             been wounded as a result of these attacks.

             There is a curfew  -  maintained  by  troops  nominally  under
             Emirates control - these troops man checkpoints  on  the  main
             transport  nodes  (major  intersections,  roundabouts,  etc.),
             however, 'popular committees' (armed groups)  some  of  tribal
             origin from the hinterland (Abyan, Lahj, Yafae  and  Adjourned
             Dahale)  are  present  -  and  some  of  these   have   strong
             connections with Al Quaeda.  These gangs fight each other  for
             control of territory, since territory equates to the right  to
             control specific markets: typically the qat market and  retail
             of black market fuel.

             These 'popular committees' not infrequently set  up  temporary
             checkpoints at night on urban roads  and  extract  rents  from
             passing mini-buses and taxis.  Failure to pay  the  armed  men
             can lead to violence.

             In addition to political/criminal violence, there are  growing
             areas of religious intolerance in Aden.  A few Salafi  mosques
             have set up very strong levels  of  social  control  in  their
             immediate neighbourhoods.  If a man  was  to  walk  through  a
             salafi-dominated area and not be either a known local  man  or
             obviously salafi (salafis have a full beard as sign of  piety)
             he would be subject to severe criticism and possible violence.
              There are eight districts in Aden.  While it is hard to 'map'
             the Salafi influence  at  mosque/community  level,  there  are
             significant Salafi communities in Crater, Tawahi, Bureiqa  and
             Mualla and due to the mountainous geography of peninsular Aden
             (comprising Crater, Tawahi and Mualla) these  mosques  take  a
             dominant position - it is hard to navigate around them.

         6.   To what extent, if at all, is the Appellant likely to face any
             serious harm, a threat  to  his  life  or  person,  prejudice,
             discrimination, or a risk of violence in Aden as a person from
             North Yemen with no ties to Aden?

             Throughout the  first  week  of  May  2016  the  armed  forces
             ostensibly loyal to President Hadi  forcibly  rounded  up  and
             expelled people from Taizz and other  provinces  beyond  Aden.
             According to press reports, a  few  thousand  'Northerners'  -
             mostly from Taizz - were expelled by force with no recourse to
             any protection by the state or its agents.  The  'reason'  for
             the expulsion was that the men had no ID cards - and  if  they
             could not be officially recognised, they were considered to be
             a potential threat.  The expelled were mostly  men,  but  some
             families and children were recorded (photographed)  in  social
             media.  This action was repeated in the 28th May in  the  wake
             of two suicide bombs in Aden (see section 5  on  the  previous
             page).

             The author's own informants suggest that  the  move  to  expel
             'Northerners' was popular among Adenis who  are  fearful  that
             'Northerners' may be Huthi agents.  It  should  be  understood
             that during the Huthi attempt to lay  siege  and  occupy  Aden
             from March to July/August 2015, Huthi fighters  were  smuggled
             into and infiltrated Aden's districts.  These fighters made  a
             significant impact on the civilian population of  Aden.   What
             appears  to  be  happening  on   13th   May   2016   is   that
             Northern/Taizzi men without significant roots in Aden and  who
             wish to live and work in Aden will need an Adeni guarantor - a
             system not  unlike  the  Saudi  Kafala  (Sponsorship)  system.
             However, this is de  facto  dividing  the  state  -  thus  the
             President's official denial.

             The enmity  between  Adenis  and  Northerners  has  historical
             precedence prior to 2011-2016: The siege of Aden  in  1994  by
             the Northern Army (many of them Taizzis) led to the sacking of
             Aden; between 1965 and 1968 the  bitter  pre-independence  and
             post-independence struggles  between  the  hardline  socialist
             National Liberation Front (NLF) and the more liberal Front for
             the Liberation of South Yemen (FLOSY) led to NLF taking  power
             and killing off many FLOSY  leaders.   NLF  was  dominated  by
             Adeni cadres of Taizzi origin, mostly put in  place  by  Abdul
             Fattah Ismail (himself from Taizz).  Both events are in living
             memory of elder  Adenis.   The  rhetoric  coming  from  former
             President of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY),
             Ali Salem Al Beidh, externalises Aden's woes by putting  blame
             on  malign  Northern  influences.   The  remaining  old  guard
             perpetuate a very sour political landscape.

             The Appellant's name shows clearly that he is from Taizz -  he
             is seen as a 'Northerner' by the Adeni population.  Even if he
             hides his full name and merely uses his two given names,  thus
             omitting his tribal or village name,  his  accent  is  clearly
             Taizzi.  Identified as a Taizzi and with no Adeni  sponsor  or
             protection, he will be treated with suspicion and  subject  to
             expulsion."

Our assessment

16.  As already noted, we are tasked with  re-making  the  decision  on  the
    appeal made by the appellant against the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 5 December 2014.

17.  By virtue of further directions made by the Tribunal at the end of  the
    hearing which took place on 3 May 2016, we have  received  an  addendum
    report from Mr Henry Thompson dated 3 June 2016.  Accordingly, we  must
    consider the latest issues in this case as to whether the situation  in
    Yemen or parts thereof as at early June 2016 is such as  to  place  the
    appellant at real risk of serious harm as defined by Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.  The appellant  no  longer  claims  he  is
    entitled to refugee status and there is no continuing challenge to  the
    adverse findings of fact made by Judge Davidge as regards his claim  to
    have  suffered  past  persecution  or  serious  harm.   As  stated   by
    appellant's Counsel, the only salient facts in this case are  that  the
    appellant is a national of Yemen who is a Sunni Shafi'i from Taizz  who
    lived in Sana'a from 2011 until his exit from the country in 2015.

18.   In  deciding  this  case  we  must  consider  a  substantial  body  of
    background  evidence,  including  that  set  out  in  the   appellant's
    supplementary bundle and the two reports of Mr Henry Thompson.  We have
    also to take  account  of  the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
    Guidance "Yemen: Security and humanitarian situation April 2016".

19.  It is accepted that the only issue in this  case  concerns  whether  or
    not the appellant qualifies for humanitarian (or subsidiary) protection
    within the meaning of Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    Although the grounds also refer to Article 3 ECHR, it is not  suggested
    that if the appellant fails under Article 15(c) he could succeed  under
    either Article 15(b) or Article 3 ECHR.

20.  The appellant's written submissions for the  hearing  did  advance  the
    argument that the situation in Yemen was such that  the  country  as  a
    whole posed an Article 15(c) risk.  That had also been the  appellant's
    case before DUTJ Phillips.   However,  in  light  of  the  respondent's
    conclusion as regards risk in  the  appellant's  home  area(s),  it  is
    unnecessary for us to address the  situation  as  regards  Yemen  as  a
    whole, particularly since the appellant relies inter alia on the expert
    evidence of Mr Henry Thompson according  to  whom  (see   his  addendum
    report at 1.3) "the conflict does not directly or  equally  affect  all
    people in Yemen".  It would be contrary to the  geographical  focus  of
    the appellant's case to focus on Yemen as a whole.

21.  We have concluded that the  appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive by virtue of the lack of a
    viable internal relocation alternative in Aden. We shall  set  out  our
    principal reasons in two sets.   The  first  set  of  reasons  concerns
    general factors.

22.  First  of  all,  the  respondent's  own  assessment  is  that  internal
    relocation within Yemen is in  general  difficult.   At  2.5.3  of  the
    Country Information and Guidance April 2016 it is stated:

         "Relocating to most parts of Yemen remains difficult, a  number  of
         Yemenis have relocated internally to flee combat zones  (mostly  to
         Taiz, Amran and  Hajjah  governorates).   Although  in  some  cases
         relocation to Aden and  surrounding  areas  may  be  feasible,  the
         volatile  security  environment  and   frequent   violence,   harsh
         humanitarian situation and lack of  livelihood  opportunities  mean
         that this will not be possible for many Yemeni citizens.   Decision
         makers  must  give  careful  consideration  to  the  relevance  and
         reasonableness of  internal  relocation  on  a  case-by-case  basis
         taking  full  account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of   the
         particular person, including where they originate from in Yemen and
         where they will be returning to."

    At 3.1.4 it is added  that  "[i]internal  relocation  within  Yemen  is
    unlikely to be a viable option for most people although it may  be  for
    some individuals, depending on their particular circumstances".

23.  This guidance  is  significantly  different  from  that  given  in  the
    November 2015 predecessor which stated that it "may be  reasonable  for
    persons to relocate to Aden and the more stable areas in the  south  of
    the country".

24.  Second, whilst Aden is far from being one of the  most  affected  areas
    of the country, it has suffered significant damage to its security  and
    economic infrastructure as a result of the civil war.  In  addition  to
    attacks on the city by shelling and rockets, as noted in  reports  such
    as the Humanitarian Response Plan - Yemen, January 2016, the  city  has
    been devastated by sustained  shelling  and  air  strikes  and  medical
    supplies, including essential medicine for  chronic  diseases,  are  in
    increasingly short supply.  Restriction on  life-saving  supplies  were
    imposed in Aden early in 2016.

25.  Of particular importance for the purposes of  assessing  Article  15(c)
    risk is the fact that  the  internationally  recognised  government  of
    President Hadi maintains only limited control over the security  forces
    and Aden does not have a functioning government in the  ordinary  sense
    of that term.  It has a local council backed by the Emirati forces  and
    advisers, but these  have  limited  capacity  to  implement  the  basic
    functions of governance in the areas  it  controls.   Troops  nominally
    under Emirates control man checkpoints  at  the  main  transport  nodes
    (major intersections, roundabouts etc).  However, these actors co-exist
    and compete for control with "popular committees", some  of  which  are
    based on tribal origins from the hinterland (Abyan, Lahj, Yafae and  Ad
    Dahole), some of which have strong  connections  with  external  groups
    such as Al Quaeda and other Salafist organisations and  some  of  which
    are purely criminal; and these "people's committees"  not  infrequently
    set up temporary checkpoints at night in urban areas and extract  rents
    from passing mini-buses and taxis.

26.  According to a July 2015 report by  the  Sana'a  Centre  for  Strategic
    Studies, the political structure of Aden is composed  of  a  number  of
    loosely allied groups with differing ideological motivation, not all of
    which are loyal to Hadi's government.  "Popular resistance" groups  can
    be classified  into (a) a number of Sunni  Islamist  groups  which  are
    mostly Salafist in nature and include the Al Rashad party and Al Quaeda
    in the Arabic Peninsula (AQAP) and the Islamic State (IS) group's Yemen
    branch; (b) the Hirak Movement, also known as the  Southern  Separatist
    Movement, fighting to re-establish South Yemen as a  separate  country;
    and (c) the political parties with affiliated tribal militias in  other
    governorates who reject Houthi domination and are fighting for  greater
    self-determination.  According to the UNSC 7625th meeting  17  February
    2016 report, there has been a notable upsurge of terrorist  attacks  in
    Aden.  According to the UNSC Panel of Experts in a report of  I5  April
    2016, Houthi-Saleh forces have attacked civilian and civilian  objects,
    including by shelling civilian resident areas, medical  facilities  and
    other civilian infrastructure.   Such  attacks  are  carried  out  with
    impunity and it is difficult to see that the authorities (such as  they
    are) in Aden are able to  provide  effective  protection  against  such
    attacks.

27.  Even though we have some reservations about whether the  above  factors
    suffice to establish an  exceptionally  high  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence such as to mean that conditions in Aden pose an Article  15(c)
    risk to the generality  of  civilians,  we  consider  it  clear  beyond
    peradventure that in this city there is a high level of insecurity  and
    a lack of effective protection from the authorities.

28.  The above general factors relating to  the  situation  in  Yemen  as  a
    whole and Aden in particular provide a background for our second set of
    reasons for allowing the appellant's appeal, reasons which focus on the
    appellant's particular circumstances. We agree with  Mr  Richards  that
    the appellant has shown himself a resourceful individual and he is of a
    relatively young age and has no known health problems.  He  managed  to
    relocate successfully from Taizz to Sana'a in 2011.   He  has  valuable
    work experience in the hotel trade.

29.  However, we do not think these factors  would  be  sufficient  to  make
    relocation for  him  to  Aden  either  safe  or  reasonable.   This  is
    essentially for two reasons.

30.  First, the appellant has  no  family  in  Aden  (Mr  Richards  did  not
    dispute that we were entitled to consider his case on this basis).  The
    importance of family connections and roots in Aden at the present  time
    is something that has been particularly emphasised by Mr Thompson.   In
    his addendum report the latter stated:

         "To remain in Aden the appellant would need an Aden sponsor of some
         standing to provide him with letters authorising leave to remain in
         Aden and/or some kind of physical protection.   In  Yemeni  society
         this indefinite leave to remain of allegiance is  either  based  on
         family or need: the sponsor needs the individual he  is  sponsoring
         or be linked by family obligation".

31.  Second, the appellant is a northerner from Taizz.   We  are  unable  to
    accept Mr Richard's submission that these  facts  would  not  translate
    into either serious harm  or  very  significant  difficulties  for  the
    appellant.  There is a considerable body of evidence indicating to  the
    contrary.  Emblematic of this evidence, the International Crisis  Group
    report of February 2016 states that:

         "[F]or many southerners, the war, especially the brutal  five-month
         battle for Aden, has unlocked a torrent of long-festering anger and
         hatred against the north, feeding their desire for separation.  'Us
         versus them'  narratives  appear  to  be  solidifying,  encouraging
         blatant discrimination and attacks against  northerners  and  their
         property....   Locals    say    robberies    and    looting    have
         disproportionately targeted property of persons originally from the
         north.  Crisis Group interviews, Aden resident,  Adeni  journalist,
         September 2015.  Even political moderates in Aden routinely express
         blanket scepticism  about  the  motivations  of  Yemenis  from  the
         north...   A  general  state  of  lawlessness  in  Aden  feeds  and
         underscores divisions among the Southern Resistance and  highlights
         the anti-Huthi/Saleh  bloc's  governance  challenges...   Residents
         also report that some of the Southern Resistance fighters associate
         with AQAP or IS because these groups can pay, and the government is
         not meeting their financial needs.  Others in the  Resistance  have
         turned to criminal activity,  controlling  parts  of  the  city  or
         government for profit."

32.  It also appears that persons from  Taizz  feature  prominently  in  the
    account of attacks against northerners.  Mr Thompson in para 6  of  his
    addendum report observes that in the  first  week  of  May  2016  armed
    forces ostensibly loyal to  President  Hadi  forcibly  rounded  up  and
    expelled people from Taizz and other provinces beyond Aden.   According
    to press reports a few thousand northerners - mostly from Taizz -  were
    expelled by force with no recourse to any protection by  the  state  or
    its agents.  Actions against the same profile of persons were  repeated
    on 28 May in the wake of  two  suicide  bombs  in  Aden.   Although  it
    appears from an investigative report dated 10 May 2016 by  Middle  East
    Eye that the campaign of expulsion is against the wishes  of  President
    Hadi, he has not been able to prevent them.   We  observe  that  whilst
    between 2011-2015 the appellant lived in Sana'a, the  question  of  his
    identity would be perceived by potential actors of serious harm in Aden
    as turning on his family and tribal origins in Taizz.

33.  For the above reasons we conclude that the appellant would not  have  a
    viable internal relocation alternative in Aden as it would  neither  be
    safe nor  reasonable  for  him  to  relocate  there.   Accordingly,  we
    conclude that he has established that there are substantial grounds for
    believing that to remove him to Aden would expose him to a real risk of
    serious harm contrary to Article 15(c).

    To conclude:

    The  decision  we  re-make  is  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date
     [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
