
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00333/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 28 July 2014              |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 sahel khan

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr G Saunders, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Khan): Ms H Short, Counsel, instructed by
Hammersmith and
                   Fulham Community Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal  against  a  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough which is dated 22  April  2014  and
    was promulgated shortly thereafter following a hearing at Hatton  Cross
    on 7 April 2014.  For ease of reference throughout this determination I
    shall refer to Mr Khan who was the original appellant as "the claimant"
    and to the Secretary of State who was the original respondent  as  "the
    Secretary of State".  The claimant's appeal was against the decision of
    the Secretary of State refusing him further leave to remain and  giving
    directions for his removal to  Afghanistan  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  claimant  submitted
    that he was entitled to asylum and that  was  the  major  part  of  his
    claim.  For the reasons which  follow  it  is  not  necessary  for  the
    purposes of this determination for his asylum claim to be  examined  in
    any detail at all.  It is sufficient that I record that Judge Hembrough
    dismissed his appeal on asylum grounds and there has been no  challenge
    against this part of his decision.  However, I should record,  as  will
    be apparent below, the judge made positive findings with regard to  the
    truthfulness of  the  claimant  and  also  of  his  witnesses,  and  in
    particular his girlfriend Raubika Ali  who  is  a  British  citizen  of
    Iranian descent.  Although the judge did not accept that  the  claimant
    was entitled to asylum he allowed the appeal under Article 8 and it  is
    this aspect of  his  determination  which  is  now  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State, permission to appeal having been granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cheales on 13 May 2014.

 2. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge  should  have  but  did  not
    follow the guidance given in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 regarding  which
    it is said (at  paragraph  3  of  the  grounds)  "that  the  Article  8
    assessment  shall  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by [the] Rules".  It is said that "in this
    case the Tribunal did not identify such  compelling  circumstances  and
    its findings are therefore  unsustainable".   At  paragraph  2  of  the
    grounds it had been argued that any Article 8 assessment should only be
    made after consideration under the Rules which, as found by  the  Court
    of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 are a complete code.  At
    paragraph 4 of the grounds it is submitted that it is  clear  from  the
    decision of this Tribunal in Gulshan that "an  appeal  should  only  be
    allowed where there are exceptional circumstances".  It is said that in
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 the Administrative Court (Sales J) had  "endorsed
    the Secretary  of  State's  guidance  on  the  meaning  of  exceptional
    circumstances, namely ones where refusal would lead to an unjustifiably
    harsh outcome".  It is said that "in this case  the  Tribunal  has  not
    followed this approach and thereby has erred".

 3. Then at paragraph 5 of the grounds it is submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    had  "failed  to  provide  adequate   reasons   why   the   appellant's
    circumstances are either compelling or  exceptional".   The  respondent
    then  sets  out  her  submissions  with  regard   to   the   claimant's
    circumstances as follows:

         "It is submitted that the [claimant] has spent the majority of  his
         life in Afghanistan including his youth  and  formative  years  and
         could fully re-adapt to life there.  It is submitted  that  he  has
         family in Afghanistan and it would not be unduly harsh for  him  to
         trace them and resume contact with them  once  more.   Despite  his
         residence of five years, it is submitted that there is no  evidence
         he has become estranged from his country of origin where  he  spent
         the first twelve years of his  life.   Any  qualifications  he  has
         obtained  in  the  UK  could  be  used  to  obtain  employment   in
         Afghanistan.  Any friendships and connections he has made in the UK
         could be continued via modern methods of communication and visits."



 4. Then at paragraph 6 of the  grounds  it  is  submitted  that  "had  the
    Tribunal taken these issues into consideration they would [my emphasis]
    have found that the decision to remove is proportionate".   A  Rule  24
    response was settled by Counsel (Ms King, not  Ms  Short  who  appeared
    before the Tribunal today) in which answer  is  made  to  the  grounds.
    There is no need to set out the contents of this response  in  full  at
    this stage.

The Hearing

 5. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties, and  I  am  grateful  to
    both Mr Saunders and Ms Short for the succinct manner  in  which  their
    respective arguments were put before me.  I  recorded  the  submissions
    contemporaneously and as these submissions are set out in my Record  of
    Proceedings it will not be necessary for me to repeat everything  which
    was said during the course of the hearing.  I have however  had  regard
    to everything which was said as well as to all the documents  contained
    within the file whether or not the same  is  specifically  referred  to
    below.

 6. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Saunders relied on  the  grounds
    and submitted that following the decision of this Tribunal  in  Gulshan
    before considering Article 8 outside the provisions of  the  Rules  one
    first had to find that circumstances exist  which  had  been  variously
    formulated  as  "compelling  circumstances"  or  something  leading  to
    "unjustifiably harsh" consequence.  Although it was  accepted  that  as
    submitted in the Rule  24  response  exceptionality  was  not  a  test,
    nonetheless  the  Gulshan  test  had  to  be  formulated  in  terms  of
    compelling circumstances.  What was said on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State in this case was that the judge  had  proceeded  straight  to  an
    assessment of Article 8 proportionality without first going through the
    necessary intervening step  of  deciding  whether  or  not  there  were
    circumstances which took the case outside Article 8 as  formulated  now
    within paragraph 276ADE of the Rules or elsewhere within the Rules.

 7. On behalf of the claimant Ms Short submitted  first  of  all  that  the
    argument that the claimant had  spent  the  majority  of  his  life  in
    Afghanistan was misleading.  It was of course correct and a  matter  of
    fact that the claimant had been in this country six years  and  he  was
    now 18 but these were the most formative years of his life.   Ms  Short
    reminded the Tribunal that no complaints had been made by or on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State with regard to the judge's fact-finding.   In
    this case the judge had found that the claimant was a truthful  witness
    who had been in this country  for  six  years,  he  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship, he was training as an electrician and had made  the  most
    of his education.  He has regular contact with his foster carers.  At a
    later stage in her argument Ms Short also reminded  the  Tribunal  that
    the judge had accepted that he had no current contact with  his  family
    in Afghanistan and it was not clear whether or not he would be able  to
    get back into contact with that family were he to return.

 8. With regard to the argument set out at paragraph 2 of the grounds  that
    the judge had not considered when making his Article 8  assessment  the
    provisions of the Rules ("that was not done in  this  case")  this  was
    clearly  wrong  because  it  is  plain  from  paragraph   41   of   the
    determination that the judge was fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  the
    claimant could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  I  set
    out the relevant paragraph in which the judge stated as follows:

         "41. As regards Article 8 the appellant has no family in the UK and
             the provisions of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  are
             therefore inapplicable.  It was accepted in  submissions  that
             [he] could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE...".

 9. The judge then stated that he was then going on to consider the Article
    8  position  with  regard  to  "the  existing  domestic  and   European
    jurisprudence" in light of the guidance given in MF (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (this is a reference to  the  Tribunal
    decision and not to the Court of Appeal decision, but nothing turns  on
    this in my judgment because the principle is the  same  which  is  that
    this is a two-stage process) and Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 45.  Ms Short then submitted that  one  could  not  sensibly  find
    either   "compelling   circumstances"    or    "unjustifiably    harsh"
    circumstances without  carrying  out  of  an  assessment  of  what  was
    important under Article 8.  This exercise could not be carried out in a
    vacuum.  If the Secretary of State's arguments had any  merit  a  court
    would have to do a three-stage test.  First a Tribunal or  court  would
    have to consider whether or not a claim  could  succeed  under  276ADE.
    Then the Tribunal would have to consider whether there were exceptional
    circumstances which entitled the Tribunal to consider  whether  or  not
    the claimant might nonetheless succeed but then, thirdly,  there  would
    have to be  an  Article  8  proportionality  assessment.   It  was  the
    claimant's submission that if it were apparent  there  was  nothing  of
    substance in the Article 8 claim then in those  circumstances  one  did
    not need to carry out a second-stage assessment, but if there might  be
    something in that claim it would be otiose to carry out the  same  test
    twice because the same circumstances would be applicable.  In this case
    the factors which needed to be considered were  precisely  the  factors
    which were considered by the judge.  These were that the  claimant  had
    been in this country for six years which were the  formative  years  of
    his life; he had had no contact with his family; he  was  in  a  strong
    relationship with his girlfriend; he had weakened societal and cultural
    ties with his country of origin; and he had no experience as  an  adult
    in that country.  These were the same  circumstances  which  found  his
    positive Article 8 claim and  the  compelling  or  unjustifiably  harsh
    circumstances on which he relies.

10. Ms Short submitted that it was very important  that  the  Secretary  of
    State is not saying that no rational decision-maker could have come  to
    this conclusion and on this point Mr Saunders accepted  that  he  could
    not  properly  mount  a   perversity   challenge   to   the   decision,
    notwithstanding the way in which the Secretary of  State's  submissions
    had been drafted at paragraph 6.  Mr Saunders accepted that "that would
    be too high a hurdle".

11. Ms Short reminded the Tribunal of the factors which had been identified
    on behalf of the Secretary of State as being relevant at paragraph 5 of
    the grounds but explained why these factors were not arguable.  It  was
    said at paragraph 5 that there was "no evidence that [the claimant] has
    become estranged from his country of origin where he  spent  the  first
    twelve years of his life".  In fact the judge had found at paragraph 46
    of his determination that "his social and cultural ties to his  country
    of origin have significantly weakened during the time he  has  been  in
    the UK" (and I note in this regard that there had  been  no  challenges
    made to this fact-finding).

12. Also, although it was said on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that
    there was no evidence that the claimant had become estranged  from  his
    country of origin, the judge  had  found  that  the  claimant  "had  no
    experience of living independently in Afghanistan and  had  never  even
    visited Kabul as a child".

13. It is also said in paragraph 5 of the grounds  that  the  claimant  had
    "spent the first  twelve  years  of  his  life  in  Afghanistan"  which
    (earlier) was said to include "his youth and  formative  years".   That
    was not consistent with the judge's finding at paragraph  49  that  the
    claimant had "spent the majority of his youth  here".   In  effect  the
    argument at paragraph 5 was simply trying  to  go  behind  the  judge's
    findings and so the assertion at paragraph 6 of the grounds  could  not
    stand either.

Discussion

14. Although a different judge might have come to a different conclusion it
    is clear in my judgment that the judge did approach his task  properly.
    He first of all considered whether or not the  claimant  could  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE but as it was not suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant before him that he could, he did not need to do more than  say
    as he did at paragraph 41 that the provisions of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Rules were "inapplicable" and that it was also accepted that  he  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  Thereafter  he  had  to
    consider whether or not  there  was  anything  sufficiently  compelling
    about  the  Article  8  claim  and  he  did  this  by  considering  the
    established jurisprudence.  As I observed to  Mr  Saunders  during  the
    course of the hearing and I emphasise this now,  at  paragraph  50  the
    judge found as follows:

         "50. Looking at the evidence before me in the round I find that  it
             would  now  be  unduly  harsh  to  remove  the  appellant   to
             Afghanistan and that his removal is not proportionate  to  the
             legitimate aim identified above."

15. Given that the judge found that the claimant's removal would be "unduly
    harsh" he could not have come to any other finding than that there were
    compelling reasons why  he  should  consider  the  claimant's  position
    outside paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The judge identified within his
    determination those factors which led him to the  conclusion  that  the
    removal of this claimant would be unduly  harsh.   These  have  already
    been set out above and were that he spent his formative  years  of  his
    youth here (in my judgment the judge was entitled to place great weight
    on the fact that the six years the claimant had spent in  this  country
    were from the ages of 12 to 18) that he had no current contact with his
    family, that he had a strong relationship with his girlfriend, that  he
    had no experience as an adult in Afghanistan and that his societal  and
    cultural ties with that country had been significantly weakened.  As Mr
    Saunders has accepted that a perversity challenge  cannot  properly  be
    mounted, in my judgment there is no other basis upon which this judge's
    findings can be challenged.  He asked himself the right  questions  and
    he has given adequate reasons for answering those questions in the  way
    in which he did.  His finding that the  removal  of  this  claimant  to
    Afghanistan in the circumstances as  he  found  them  to  be  from  the
    evidence which he heard was open to him and there is no error of law in
    his approach.  It follows that this appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    must be dismissed and I so find.

Decision

There being no error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
the appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant under Article  8  is
affirmed.



Signed:                                 Dated:  21 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


