
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/00320/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 January 2018                        | On 08 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     az
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
London
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 3 December 1984 who appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 11 February 2016  to  refuse
    his asylum claim.  The appellant had  been  successful  in  an  earlier
    appeal but the decision was overturned  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    decision dated 25 January  2017  on  the  basis  that  there  had  been
    insufficient engagement with country guidance.

 2. The case again came before the First-tier Tribunal and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 July 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodman dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

 3. The appellant appealed with permission on the following grounds:

    In summary, the judge accepted  that  the  appellant's  conversion  was
    genuine and that if he returned to Iran he was likely to seek out other
    Christians and participate in a house church.  However  it  was  argued
    that the findings, that the appellant would be discrete were materially
    wrong in fact and law, and that the Tribunal erred in finding that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of persecution on return as a  Christian
    convert in Tehran, were contrary  to  case  law  and  the  respondent's
    country information reports.

Rule 24 Response

 4. It was submitted by the respondent that the findings of the judge  were
    open to her and she properly took into account HJ  Iran  and  that  the
    appellant had been discreet in his faith in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent further relied  on  EG  and  NG  (Upper  Tribunal  Rule  17:
    withdrawal rule 24 scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 143  (IAC)  and  it  was
    contended that the judge had failed to  properly  balance  the  adverse
    findings regarding the appellant's poor immigration history and  failed
    asylum claims and did not properly  explain  the  conclusion  that  she
    reached.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. It was argued, in the Rule 24 response, that this was a case  where  EG
    and NG was authority for the proposition [paragraph 46 relied on]  that
    the respondent could rely on a further ground on which  an  application
    should have been dismissed upon.  The  example given, at paragraph  46,
    was where entry clearance had been dismissed:

    'The Entry Clearance Officer in reply may well want to argue  not  only
    that the decision  that  the  husband  did  not  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements was right but that the  decision  that  he  did  meet  the
    accommodation requirements was wrong.  In  short,  without  wanting  to
    appeal the decision, the Entry Clearance Officer may want to rely on  a
    ground that failed before the First-tier Tribunal'

    However, the grounds the respondent purports to raise before the  Upper
    Tribunal in this appeal are not analogous to the example  given  in  EG
    and  NG.   The  respondent's  purported  challenge   to   the   judge's
    credibility findings go to the heart of the decision  and,  in  effect,
    the respondent is seeking to create a right of appeal  without  seeking
    permission to appeal.  EG and NG is clear that Rule 24 does not  create
    a right of appeal to a party who has not asked for permission to appeal
    and it is not an alternative to seeking permission where permission  is
    needed.  It seems to me that the respondent in the Rule 24 response was
    attempting to circumvent the requirement to seek permission to  appeal.
    I am  not  satisfied  therefore  that  the  challenge  to  the  judge's
    credibility findings was before me.

 6. In any event, even if it were, Mr Tufan accepted that such a  challenge
    was on shaky  ground.   The  challenge  was  predicated  on  the  judge
    purportedly failing  to  give  adequate  reasons.   However,  Mr  Tufan
    conceded that the  judge  at  paragraphs  [51]  onwards  discussed  the
    appellant's history, which the judge had set out in  some  considerable
    detail, and went on to consider  the  negative  history  including  his
    asylum claims on false grounds, but gave adequate reasons  for  finding
    that he was a  genuine  convert,  including  that  he  seemed  to  have
    attended steadily, that his  views  and  comments  in  the  immigration
    interview, as to the nature of the Christian religion, were  persuasive
    of conviction, that he sounded genuine and although he had  exaggerated
    the level of his attendance he had attended and that his  evidence  was
    supported by a number of different church members and an  elder  and  a
    church Deacon.  It therefore cannot be properly  said  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for the decision she reached.  Although
    it may well be a differently constituted Tribunal may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion, the judge's reasons are  sustainable.   Mr  Tufan
    conceded that this was not a rationality challenge.  Any  challenge  to
    the  judge's  credibility  findings  of  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
    Christian convert is not made out.

 7. However, I am satisfied that the Tribunal fell into error, having  made
    that positive finding that the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert,  in
    applying those findings of fact to the relevant  material  and  country
    guidance.  The evidence that the judge accepted was that the  appellant
    is a genuine convert and attends the Iranian Christian  Fellowship  two
    to three times a month.   HJ Iran and  HT  (Cameroon)  [2010]  UKSC  31
    provides as follows:

 8. "The approach to be followed by Tribunals.

    82.  When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the Tribunal must  first
    ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is  gay,  or
    that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in his country
    of nationality.

    If so, the Tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on the
    available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable  to
    persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

    If so, the  Tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the  individual
    applicant would do if returned to that country.

    If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to  a
    real risk of persecution then he has a well-founded fear of persecution-
    even if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly".

    If, on the other hand, the Tribunal concludes that the applicant  would
    in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution it must go on  to  ask
    itself why he would do so.

    If the Tribunal concludes that  the  applicant  would  choose  to  live
    discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish  to  live,
    or because of social  pressures,  e.g.  not  wanting  to  distress  his
    parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his  application  should  be
    rejected.  Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to  persecution
    and the Convention does not offer  protection  against  them.   Such  a
    person has no well-founded fear of persecution because, for the reasons
    that have nothing to do  with  any  fear  of  persecution,  he  himself
    chooses to adopt a way of life which means  that  he  is  not  in  fact
    liable to be persecuted because he is gay.  If, on the other hand,  the
    Tribunal concludes that a material  reason  for  the  applicant  living
    discreetly on his return would be in  fear  of  the  persecution  which
    would follow if he were to live openly as a gay man, other things being
    equal, his application should be accepted.  Such a person has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.  To reject his application on the  grounds
    he could avoid the persecution by living discreetly would be to  defeat
    the very right which the Convention exists to right-his right  to  live
    freely and openly as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of  persecution.   By
    admitting him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a
    gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state  gives  effect
    to that right by affording the applicant a surrogate for the protection
    from persecution which his country of nationality should have  afforded
    him."

 9. Although the Tribunal sought, at [59] to draw a distinction,  which  is
    not sustainable in my view, between someone who is gay and someone  who
    is a Christian, in terms of  the  applicability  of  HJ  Iran,  it  was
    incumbent on the Tribunal,  having  found  that  the  appellant  was  a
    genuine convert, to consider whether Christians who practice openly  in
    Iran would be at risk of persecution.  Having made that assessment,  if
    satisfied that those who practice openly would be at  risk,  the  judge
    ought to have gone on to consider whether, as a  matter  of  fact,  the
    appellant would practice discreetly or openly and if so for what reason
    he would practice discreetly.

10. I also take into account that the jurisprudence  (SSC,  SSH  and  HR  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (illegal  exit  -  failed
    asylum seekers) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308; BA (Demonstrators in Britain -
    risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 and the reported case of AB  and
    Others (internet activity - state of evidence Iran)  [2015]  UKUT  257)
    indicates that failed asylum seekers are likely to be questioned  about
    their activities in the UK and will be questioned on arrival regardless
    of whether they have a passport.   It is settled law that an  appellant
    should not be expected to lie or conceal a  matter  and  there  was  no
    consideration by the judge as  to  what  the  risk  might  be  for  the
    appellant if he were asked about his activities in  the  UK  and  would
    have to truthfully confirm that he was  a  practising  Christian.   The
    evidence would indicate that he would be subject to further questioning
    and the accompanying risk of serious harm during that questioning.

11. Having accepted that the appellant is a genuine convert the judge  went
    on to find, that the evidence of the appellant's evangelism  is  'thin'
    and that 'except for evangelism the fear of  persecution  is  not  well
    founded'.   However the judge failed  to  apply  the  country  guidance
    before her in  particular  the  respondent's  own  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note in relation to Christians and Christian Converts  Iran
    February 2017.

12. In the country guidance case of SZ and JM (Christians -  FS  confirmed)
    Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082 the Upper Tribunal found that conditions for
    Christian have not deteriorated sufficiently to necessitate a change to
    the guidance in FS (Iran) CG [2004]  UKIAT  00303.  However,  for  some
    converts to sacrament based churches, the conditions may be  such  that
    they could not reasonably be expected to return to Iran.   In  addition
    it was the respondent's view  that  those  who  have  converted  whilst
    abroad but do not actively seek to proselytise may be able to  continue
    practising Christianity discreetly.  Although Mr Tufan initially sought
    to rely on AS (Iran) v SSHD [2017] EWCA 1539,  he  accepted  that  this
    case was not on all fours with the appellant's case and did not  assist
    the respondent.

13. It was the respondent's own guidance, at 3.1.4 of  the  Country  Policy
    and Information Note on Christians, that "members  of  Evangelical  and
    house churches, and those who actively seek to evangelise and engage in
    proselytising activities, are at real risk of persecution in Iran and a
    grant of asylum is likely to be appropriate".  In light of the  judge's
    own findings that the appellant would return and join  a  house  church
    the subsequent finding that he would not be at risk is not rational  or
    sustainable including in the context of the respondent's own  guidance.
    In addition the judge found that the appellant as a member of  a  house
    church the appellant may be subject to detention if  he  speaks  'about
    his faith with any enthusiasm'.   However  he  failed  to  provide  any
    adequate reasoning as to why the appellant would not act in the way  he
    has in the UK which has evidently included  speaking  about  his  faith
    with enthusiasm.

14. Given the finding that the appellant is a genuine  convert,  there  was
    insufficient reasoning therefore as to why the appellant  would  choose
    to practice discretely, when the evidence indicates  that  he  has  not
    done so in the UK, and if so why that would be the case.  Although  the
    judge found that the appellant had engaged in little or no evangelising
    activity  in  the  UK,  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the  appellant
    participates in the UK in an open weekly youth  group  of  the  church,
    which includes publicising those activities  on  Facebook.   The  judge
    also accepted  that  the  appellant  worships  openly  at  the  Iranian
    Christian Fellowship in the UK.    Although the judge went on to  state
    at [59] that 'there is no reason to think that  he  will  manifest  his
    Christian belief in Iran any differently to  the  way  he  manifest  it
    here, that is, by occasional participation within a  limited  group  of
    like-minded people' such a finding is not sustainable  given  that  the
    judge had accepted the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  open  Christian
    practice in the UK.  The fact that he has on occasions  chosen  not  to
    attend worship but instead pray privately  and  has  not  undertaken  a
    leadership role does not negate his continuing  open  practice  of  his
    religion at least 2 or 3 times a month.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    preserve the findings of fact including that the appellant is a genuine
    Christian who is likely to continue to practice his faith on return  to
    Iran.

Remaking the Decision - Risk on Return

16. As considered at paragraph 10 above, the evidence indicates that failed
    asylum seekers are likely to be questioned about what  they  have  been
    doing in the UK on arrival, whether or not they have a passport and the
    appellant should not  be  expected  to  lie  or  to  conceal  a  matter
    fundamental to his identity, in order to avoid harm.   I  am  satisfied
    that if the appellant were to truthfully  explain  his  conversion  and
    ongoing regular worship at a Christian church over the past  number  of
    years, he would be subject to further questioning which carries with it
    a risk of serious harm (see SSH and HR, including paragraph 23).

17. Further and in the alternative, as a genuine Christian  convert,  since
    2013, who practices his faith openly and who has participated  in  what
    would be considered proselytising activities in the UK, including  with
    the youth group, I accept that the appellant if  he  were  to  continue
    such activities in the same manner in Iran, he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution.  The appellant has maintained  that  he  'could  never  be
    discreet in the practice of my faith' including on return.  If he  were
    to continue in the manner that he has  done  in  the  UK,  which  I  am
    satisfied contains elements of proselytising,  the  background  country
    information and country guidance confirms that the appellant  would  be
    at risk of persecution.

18. If on the other hand the  appellant  were  to  exercise  a  measure  of
    discretion, I am satisfied to the lower standard, this would be  in  an
    effort to afford persecution and therefore applying the  principles  of
    HJ Iran the appellant is a refugee.  The appellant is equally  at  real
    risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR for the same reason.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it cannot stand.  I remake the decision allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  2 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.



Signed                                  Date:  2 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
