
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00797/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 26th July 2013                               |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                     Manatalla Omer Hussein Omer MOHAMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, counsel, instructed by Seraphus
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan, born on 20th  January  1989.   Her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent,  made  on  11th  January
    2013, to remove her from the United Kingdom  to  Sudan,  following  the
    refusal of her asylum and human rights claims was dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds,  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on  human  rights
    grounds, after a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton,  in
    a determination promulgated on 11th day of April 2013.

 2. Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure, but on 3rd May 2013 Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission for the following reasons:

         "1.  Approach to the expert evidence.  The judge accepted  at  [22]
             the expertise of Mr Verney and Dr Arnold.  He considered  the
             report of Mr Verney at [23] to [41], by far the  longest  part
             of his analysis of the claim.  He then considered  the  report
             of Dr Arnold at [42] to [48] concluding that the  shortcomings
             in the medical evidence undermined Mr Verney's findings.   The
             treatment  of  the  appellant's  own  evidence  is,   however,
             confined to a relatively short passage: [50] to [56] in  which
             he dismisses the appellant's claim as incredible.

         2.   I am unable to determine whether the Judge's detailed comments
             on the expert evidence are justified until I have had a proper
             opportunity to consider the report  itself  much  more  fully.
             Similarly, without reading Dr Arnold's report, it is difficult
             to assess whether the medical evidence was a  proper  tool  by
             which to undermine  Mr  Verney's  evidence.   Given  that  the
             judge's ultimate conclusion was to reach a conclusion that was
             so different from that of Mr Verney (and whilst it  cannot  be
             doubted  that  a  Judge  is  permitted  to  differ  from   the
             conclusion of an  expert)  it  remains  arguable  whether  the
             Judge's reasoning is adequate for that purpose.  That requires
             a more detailed analysis of the material than  I  am  able  to
             give."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.  It became apparent in  the  course  of
    argument that Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan was  mistaken  in  expressing
    the view that the shortcomings in the medical  evidence  undermined  Mr
    Verney's  findings.   What  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said   in
    paragraph 41 was that Mr Verney did not have the report of  Dr  Arnold.
    That too disclosed some striking  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account.  In paragraph 49 of his determination he said the concerns  he
    had about the medical evidence meant that like Mr  Verney's  report  it
    could not possibly be regarded as conclusive and had to  be  considered
    in the context of the evidence as a whole.

 4. The first ground of appeal asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    failed to give due weight to the expert evidence of Mr Verney that  the
    appellant's mother was in all probability a member of the Berti  tribe.
    This showed that the appellant herself was  part  Berti.   Ms  McCarthy
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  was  disparaging  of  Mr
    Verney by referring to the report of Mr Verney in paragraph  6  of  his
    determination, in inverted  commas,  as  "a  report  prepared  on  19th
    February 2013 by Peter Verney, a "Country Expert  on  Sudan"."   In  my
    view the way in which Mr Verney was described was not  intended  to  be
    disparaging.  In paragraph  22  of  his  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge explicitly stated that the  respondent's  representative
    did not challenge the expertise of Mr Verney or Dr Arnold.

 5. Ms McCarthy criticised the First-tier Tribunal judge for having  failed
    to refer to the substantial experience that Mr Verney had.  He had  had
    over 30 years experience of Sudan and had  given  evidence  in  several
    Sudan country guidance cases and had contributed to the asylum research
    consultancy  commentary  on  the  latest  COI  report  on  Sudan.   The
    difficulty with this submission, however, repeated by  Ms  McCarthy  in
    her oral submissions, is that, as  already  mentioned,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge explicitly stated that the  respondent's  representative
    did not challenge the expertise of Mr Verney or Dr Arnold.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal judge was also  criticised  for  suggesting  in
    paragraph 26 of his determination that the expert had strayed from  his
    role to advise on plausibility  by  making  assessments  based  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  The ground asserted that Mr  Verney's  report
    only spoke of the plausibility of the appellant's account and  not  her
    overall credibility.   What  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said  in
    paragraph 26 of his determination, however, was that he agreed that the
    issue of plausibility and credibility needed to be assessed by  looking
    at the evidence as a whole.  Yet it seemed Mr Verney  based  his  final
    opinion on what he considered to be the  overall  plausibility  of  her
    account. The First-tier Tribunal judge  said  plausibility  encompassed
    concepts of probability, likeliness, credibility and being  reasonable.
    In the context of the appeal hearing,  credibility  was  a  key  issue.
    Assessing credibility was not Mr Verney's field of  expertise  and  he
    could not blindly adopt his views on  that  issue.   He  had  read  his
    report carefully and he did have a number  of  concerns  about  how  he
    seemed  to  have  reached  his  conclusions   about   the   appellant's
    credibility.

 7. The first ground of appeal went on to criticise the First-tier Tribunal
    judge for failing to weigh in the balance  in  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence his finding that the  questioning  of  the  appellant  on  her
    ethnicity during her asylum interview was of poor quality.  It was said
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge did not weigh  in  the  balance  the
    expert evidence stating strongly that questions on  customary  law  and
    tribal customs in rural areas were wholly inappropriate and bound to be
    incomprehensible for someone of the appellant's urban and international
    background.

 8. It is apparent,  however,  that  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    actually said shows that he did regard the questioning of the appellant
    on  these  matters  as  inappropriate.   In   paragraph   23   of   his
    determination he said Mr Verney  rejected  the  respondent's  assertion
    that the appellant's lack of knowledge about Berti traditions  and  law
    fatally undermined her claim to be a member of that tribe.  He said  Mr
    Verney concluded that it was unreasonable to expect  the  appellant  to
    know anything about the tribes in Darfur or Berti customary law,  given
    that she was brought up abroad and had only been to Darfur  twice.   Mr
    Verney pointed out that she would have had little or no  experience  of
    such matters and  would  have  no  reason  to  know  such  things.   In
    paragraph 24 of his determination the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said
    that in his submissions Mr Benn, the appellant's representative at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  judge,  argued  that  imprecise
    questioning on the issue of ethnicity during the asylum interview meant
    that  the  criticisms  about  the  appellant's  replies  had  no   real
    foundation.  The First-tier Tribunal judge  said  he  did  not  analyse
    every issue he raised, but he found that there was some force  in  this
    argument.  The questioning on this issue was  sloppy  and  no  adequate
    effort was made to clarify or follow up the appellant's responses.   In
    my view this shows that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  accepted  the
    submissions made on the appellant's behalf.

 9. In paragraph 25 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that when considering the issue of the appellant's ethnicity, Mr Verney
    made the point that "there is no simple reliable  way  of  establishing
    Berti ethnic identity to non-Sudanese outsiders, and this case  has  to
    be addressed in the round, in  terms  of  overall  plausibility."   The
    First-tier Tribunal judge said that Mr Verney acknowledged  that  there
    was a disproportionate number of people claiming to be from  the  Berti
    tribe (for) the purposes of claiming asylum in the United  Kingdom  but
    said  he  was  concerned  to  filter  out  applications  that  appeared
    dishonest or fraudulent, particularly because of the danger  that  such
    applications may be made by  government  agents  hoping  to  infiltrate
    Sudanese communities abroad.  The First-tier Tribunal judge  said  that
    in paragraph 259 of his report Mr Verney concluded that "I was left  in
    no doubt  whatsoever  that  Ms  Mohamed  was  part-Dafuri  and  in  all
    reasonable probability Berti, ethnic origin.  This was the most  likely
    conclusion from taking her account  in  the  round  and  assessing  her
    overall plausibility."

10. In paragraph 26 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that Mr Verney appeared to agree that the appellant did not know  much
    about the Berti but did not consider this to be  particularly  relevant
    to the issue of her ethnicity.  He said he agreed with that  conclusion
    and accepted that the poor quality of the questioning about this  issue
    reinforced that conclusion.  He said he also agreed that the  issue  of
    plausibility and credibility needed to be assessed by  looking  at  the
    evidence as a whole.  He went on to mention that it seemed Mr  Verney's
    final opinion  depended  on  what  he  considered  to  be  the  overall
    plausibility of her account mentioned above.  In my view it is apparent
    from what the First-tier Tribunal judge  said  that  he  did  not  hold
    against the appellant any of the criticisms advanced on behalf  of  the
    respondent  relating  to  her  lack  of  knowledge  of  Berti   customs
    demonstrated by what she said in the course of  her  asylum  interview.
    The only proper way of weighing the poor quality of the questioning was
    to exclude the appellant's answers  on  the  assessment  of  her  Berti
    ethnicity which is precisely what the First-tier Tribunal judge did.

11. The first ground of appeal also suggested that the detailed evidence of
    the expert as to what was reasonable for a  questioner  to  expect  the
    appellant to know about her Berti heritage was not considered at all in
    the determination.  It was considered,  however,  because,  as  I  have
    indicated, the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  left  out  of  account  the
    criticism of the appellant based on her  lack  of  knowledge  of  Berti
    heritage.

12. It was then said that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to  give
    due weight to the expert's emphatic conclusion that the  appellant  was
    in all probability of Berti ethnicity.  It is apparent that  Mr  Verney
    dealt  with  the  question  of  the  appellant's  Berti  background  in
    paragraphs 79 to 85 of his determination.  Paragraphs 79 to 81  related
    to the  appellant.   I  agree  with  Mr  Saunders  who  submitted  that
    paragraphs 82 to 85 related to general matters.  Mr  Verney  said  that
    the appellant named the  Berti  "malik"  or  king  correctly  as  Yasir
    Hussein Ahmedai Adam Tamim as the current Berti king.  He said that  as
    well as correctly naming Mellit as the centre of the Berti  traditional
    homeland, she was quite right to say that  the  Berti  were  now  found
    right across Sudan.  He then went on to say the Berti had spread across
    Sudan in recent generations.   The  British  had  brought  people  from
    Darfur to work on the construction of the railways across Sudan in  the
    mid-20th century and to work in agricultural and Dafuri people had been
    settling in the capital ever since, that  the  appellant's  account  of
    racial prejudice in Sudan and its effects  on  her  life  at  different
    times was consistent with his own observations, and that in  the  1980s
    he worked in the Sudan Ministry of Culture Information and knew a range
    of Sudanese people from minorities who were working in the media.   The
    situation for these people worsened considerably after  the  1989  coup
    brought the current government to power.

13. It is apparent from reading the determination that the reason  why  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge refused to accept the appellant's claim to be
    a member of the Berti tribe was because he found her account  generally
    not to be credible.  Given the acknowledgement by Mr Verney that  there
    was a disproportionate number of people claiming to be from  the  Berti
    tribe for the purposes of claiming asylum in the  United  Kingdom,  the
    correct answer about the Berti king, the correct naming  of  Mellit  as
    the centre of  the  Berti  traditional  homeland  and  the  appellant's
    knowledge that the Berti had spread across Sudan in recent generations,
    were all something that  one  would  expect  someone  who  was  falsely
    claiming to be Berti to be aware of.  The fact that Mr Verney  regarded
    the appellant's claim to be Berti was  plausible  did  not  oblige  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge to accept that her  claim  to  be  Berti  was
    credible.

14. One of the factors relied upon in the first ground of appeal  was  that
    Mr Verney's comment that the appellant would not have exchanged a  good
    job and a prosperous lifestyle in Sudan for the uncertain prospects  as
    an asylum seeker on meagre state handouts in the United Kingdom  unless
    she were in fear of persecution was within the scope of his  expertise.
    Ms McCarthy had to agree, however, that although Mr Verney  might  have
    been an expert in relation to salary levels in Sudan, his  belief  that
    the  appellant  would  not  have  claimed  asylum  unless  in  fear  of
    persecution was not  a  comment  which  depended  upon  any  particular
    expertise.  I agree with Mr Saunders'  submission  that  the  assertion
    that the appellant would not have claimed asylum unless she were  being
    persecuted is a  point  of  advocacy  and  does  not  depend  upon  any
    particular expert knowledge of conditions in Sudan.  In paragraph 27 of
    his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said that  Mr  Verney's
    comment presupposed that her account of her  employment  and  lifestyle
    were reliable.  Although she  claimed  to  have  been  sent  abroad  on
    courses by her employer, in her asylum interview she said "the  work  I
    was doing as a office manager was secretary and the secretary  work  in
    Sudan was not making big income."  He said no independent evidence  was
    provided about the appellant's education, employment or  to  show  that
    the travel she undertook in the  United  Kingdom  and  Dubai  prior  to
    claiming asylum was work related.  Accordingly  her  claims  about  her
    lifestyle needed to be assessed in the  light  of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  In my view that was a perfectly proper approach to adopt.

15. The second ground of appeal asserted that the First-tier Tribunal judge
    failed to give due weight to Mr Verney's expert evidence supporting the
    appellant's account of having  worked  for  the  Justice  and  Equality
    Movement.  The ground relied upon Mr Verney's expression of opinion, in
    paragraph 622 of his report, that "as stated activities for  JEM  under
    the banner of a charity are wholly  consistent  with  the  known  modus
    operandi of this  organisation"  and  his  expression  of  opinion,  in
    paragraph 266 of his report, that "she gives details well beyond  those
    that are available on the  internet  or  in  the  public  domain".   In
    paragraph 29 of his determination the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said
    that Mr Verney confirmed that the JEM had a civilian wing, which  dealt
    inter alia with humanitarian assistance to people in  Darfur.   He  did
    not set out the source of this information.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge said that he therefore had no way of  knowing  whether  that  was
    something he was aware from his own firsthand knowledge or research  or
    from a less  reliable  source.   He  said  the  existence  of  such  an
    organisation would be consistent with the appellant's  account  but  it
    could also be consistent with a concocted account.  In paragraph 31  of
    his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said in relation to the
    details that the appellant had given Mr Verney had not made clear which
    parts of the appellant's account he was  referring  to.   He  was  also
    unclear whether Mr Verney was referring to the  public  domain  in  the
    United Kingdom or the public domain in Sudan.

16. I agree with the criticism of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  this
    regard.  In my view an expert on Sudan law could be  expected  to  know
    whether  or  not  the  JEM  had  a  civilian  wing  which  dealt   with
    humanitarian assistance to  people  in  Darfur.   This  error  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal, however, for reasons which  will
    become apparent.

17. As Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan pointed  out,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge considered the report of Mr Verney in by far the longest part  of
    his analysis of the appellant's claim.  In my view it  cannot  be  said
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    contents of the report of Mr Verney.  The crucial question  is  whether
    in the light of Mr Verney's report it can be said that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was perverse in rejecting the appellant's credibility.

18. In paragraph 28 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that Mr Verney  believed  that  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to know the date upon which the former leader of the JEM  was
    killed  and  although  he  did  not  specifically  address  the   other
    criticisms made of the appellant's knowledge of the JEM, he appeared to
    discount her apparent lack of knowledge about the JEM on the  basis  of
    her claim that during the asylum interview she became confused  because
    of her anxiety and perceived hostility or aggression on the part of the
    interviewer.  The First-tier Tribunal judge said that for reasons given
    in paragraph 52 of his determination,  he  found  there  were  concerns
    about the reliability of this allegation against the  interviewer  that
    Mr Verney was clearly oblivious to.  Furthermore,  Mr  Verney  did  not
    comment on how plausible it was for a member of the JEM to  be  unaware
    of the identity of the leader of the JEM.   On  the  face  of  it  that
    seemed extremely unlikely.  Whatever branch  of  the  organisation  the
    appellant worked for it seemed reasonable to expect her to know who her
    leader was.  In  paragraph  52  of  his  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge said the appellant claimed that one of the  reasons  she
    gave less than full answers in her asylum  interview  was  because  the
    interviewer was "not very friendly" and she became stressed.  Mr Verney
    believed the appellant found the interviewer hostile.  No examples were
    given of this hostility.  The First-tier Tribunal judge said  that  the
    interview was audio recorded and it was reasonable to  expect  examples
    to be identified in order to support what  was  a  serious  allegation.
    Furthermore, he noted no reference was made to  the  interviewer  being
    hostile in the asylum interview submissions letter.  This was  when  it
    would be reasonable to expect such an allegation to have been made.  In
    that letter it was poor interpreting that  was  being  blamed  for  any
    confusion.  Again, notwithstanding the  fact  that  the  interview  was
    recorded, no specific examples of poor  interpreting  were  identified.
    No explanation was provided for the failure to mention the  allegations
    against the interviewer in the asylum interview submissions letter.  He
    said, looking at the evidence as a whole, he did not feel able to  give
    this late allegation a great deal of weight.  In my  view  this  was  a
    perfectly reasonable approach to take.

19. In paragraph 30 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    the appellant appeared to have told Mr Verney that the reason she chose
    not to assist women in Darfur by joining a recognised NGO  was  because
    these organisations were subjected to obstruction  and  restriction  by
    the government.  He said that Mr Verney found this to  be  a  plausible
    explanation.  The First-tier Tribunal judge agreed.  He said,  however,
    it was not an explanation she gave in her asylum interview.  He said he
    had taken into account the fact that  the  questioning  in  the  asylum
    interview on this topic was very poor.  He said the appellant  was  not
    asked about NGOs in general as was suggested in the refusal letter, she
    was specifically asked about why she did not get involved in the  ICRC.
    He said that given the extent of the ICRC's involvement  in  the  Sudan
    and the length of time they had been there trying to  assist  those  in
    western Sudan, the appellant's claim not to  know  anything  about  the
    ICRC at all seemed implausible.  He acknowledged that Mr Verney's  view
    was that "there was no reason why Ms Mohamed  should  know  about  [the
    ICRC] in any detail" but that appeared  to  miss  the  point  that  she
    claimed not to know whether there was an ICRC active in Sudan  at  all.
    Notwithstanding the poor  standard  of  questioning  in  his  view  the
    appellant must have understood that in the  asylum  interview  she  was
    being asked why she chose to join an illegal organisation rather than a
    legal NGO.  He said no explanation had been provided as to why  in  the
    asylum interview she failed to give the  answer  that  she  now  relied
    upon.

20. In paragraph 32 the First-tier Tribunal judge said there were a  number
    of apparent discrepant inconsistencies  in  the  account  given  to  Mr
    Verney by the appellant and her account during  the  asylum  interview.
    It was unclear from Mr Verney's report whether the appellant  mentioned
    suffering any discrimination at  university  beyond  name-calling.   It
    would appear likely that he would have recorded it,  if  she  had.   He
    said  in  her  statement  she  set  out  a  catalogue   of   systematic
    discrimination but gave no reason for not mentioning it before.   Again
    there was no plausible explanation given as to why these  details  were
    not given at the asylum interview.

21. In paragraph 3 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge  said
    that in her interview with Mr Verney the appellant told  him  that  her
    uncle had told her that she would be under surveillance.  She  had  not
    mentioned this before and in her asylum interview appeared to claim  it
    was solely her own belief that she was under surveillance.  He said  Mr
    Verney had not appeared to explore why the appellant believed that  she
    was no longer under surveillance and it would be safe for her to resume
    her JEM activities or give an opinion as to whether her claim  to  hold
    such a belief was plausible given the paranoid and  vicious  nature  of
    the government regime  in  Sudan.   This  related  to  the  appellant's
    account  that  after  having  been  arrested  and  ill-treated  by  the
    authorities she resumed her JEM activities by attending a meeting.

22. In paragraph 35 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that Mr Verney's opinion about  the  manner  in  which  the  appellant
    claimed to have left Sudan was set out at paragraph 69  of  his  report
    where he said "I note that this procedure has been reported  to  me  on
    several occasions and appears to be genuinely possible with  the  right
    'agent' or 'fixer'."  He said without minimising Mr Verney's expertise,
    his use of the word "appears" and the fact  that  his  knowledge  about
    this aspect of the appellant's account seemed (at  that  point)  to  be
    derived from the very limited number of reports suggested this was  not
    something he was clear about.  However, in paragraph 166 of his  report
    he stated "I have  met  numerous  interviewees  who  have  described  a
    similar method of departure through Khartoum airport, and regard it  as
    plausible."  The First-tier Tribunal judge noted  that  whilst  he  had
    direct experience of the activities of agents and their ability to  pay
    off government officials, he had no personal experience of this  method
    of leaving Khartoum  and  was  reliant  upon  the  reports  of  others.
    Overall, he felt able to give only limited weight to his endorsement of
    this part of the appellant's account and if this account was  plausible
    because the appellant was describing a  well-known  method  of  escape,
    this did not exclude the possibility of concoction.

23. In paragraph 36 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    in respect of the appellant being able to obtain an exit stamp from the
    Sudan, Mr Verney said that he had personal  experience  of  agents  who
    obtained official stamps on documents by paying  government  officials.
    In paragraph 164 of his report he said that  there  was  no  reason  to
    doubt the appellant's account in this regard.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    judge then went on to make what in my view was a  very  telling  point.
    He said Mr Verney, however, did not give any reason why the exit  stamp
    on her passport would be dated a day before she claimed to have decided
    to leave the country.  It would  appear  he  had  not  considered  this
    apparent inconsistency in her account.

24. In paragraph 37 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that Mr Verney did not specifically comment on whether the appellant's
    claim that one of the reasons she failed to  claim  asylum  immediately
    was because "there were hopes of the imminent downfall of the  regime",
    was consistent with what was happening in Sudan at that time.  That was
    also something that the appellant had not mentioned before.  Nothing in
    the  objective  material  he  was  provided  with  suggested  that  the
    government was in danger of collapsing  or  being  overthrown  at  this
    time.

25. In paragraph 38 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that, on her own account, the appellant was wanted by  the  authorities
    to the extent that they had  kept  her  under  surveillance,  raided  a
    property that she attended and issued a warrant  for  her  arrest.   It
    appeared highly implausible that either she or her uncle could  believe
    that while the current regime was in power, the situation  for  her  in
    Sudan would have "cooled off" so  that  she  could  return.   Again  Mr
    Verney did not comment on the plausibility or otherwise of this belief,
    which appeared totally at  odds  with  the  reports  in  the  objective
    material about the government's attitude to those it believed were  its
    enemies.

26. In paragraph 39 the First-tier Tribunal judge said that in  respect  of
    the trigger event that caused the appellant to flee  Sudan,  Mr  Verney
    recorded that the appellant's uncle actually  told  her  that  security
    agents had already infiltrated the  wedding  party  and  were  actively
    looking for her and her friends.  Again this did not appear to be  what
    she said in her asylum  interview,  when  she  claimed  her  uncle  had
    telephoned her to tell her that she or her friend were  being  watched.
    In paragraph 40 the First-tier Tribunal judge said that Mr  Verney  did
    not comment on  the  appellant's  claim  that  an  arrest  warrant  was
    delivered to her mother or on the fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    unable to produce this warrant and had given no explanation for it.

27. The First-tier Tribunal judge went on, having dealt with  the  evidence
    of Dr Arnold, to deal with other  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    appellant was not credible.  In paragraph 51 he said in  her  statement
    she claimed she was unable to get a place at  a  public  university  in
    Sudan because of racial discrimination and her father had  to  pay  for
    her to attend a private university.   She  also  said  that  whilst  at
    university it was clear to her that she was unfairly given  low  grades
    because of her ethnicity.  At work it was clear to  her  that  she  was
    being ostracised because of her ethnicity.  She also believed that  two
    prospective suitors for marriage broke off any intention to marry  when
    they discovered her mother's ethnicity.  The First-tier Tribunal  judge
    said it was reasonable to expect her to have mentioned these details in
    her asylum interview when asked what discrimination she  suffered.   In
    her statement she claimed that the reason she had  not  mentioned  this
    was because she was not specifically asked about discrimination she had
    suffered.  The First-tier Tribunal judge said that that was simply  not
    true; she was specifically asked about this in question 88.  I  observe
    that in question 88 the question was "You mentioned that you  and  your
    family felt racial discrimination in Sudan, can you  explain  what  you
    mean by this?" which gave the appellant the opportunity  of  describing
    the discrimination she had suffered.   It  is  apparent  that  she  was
    capable of giving  long  answers  to  questions  since  her  answer  to
    question 90 filled almost a whole page of the typed interview record.

28. In paragraph 53 the First-tier Tribunal judge said  the  appellant  was
    clearly intelligent.  This was apparent from the manner  in  which  she
    answered (and asked) questions during the hearing.  He noted Mr  Verney
    also considered her to be educated.  She was  fortunate  to  have  been
    assisted by a solicitor who was self-evidently able and  diligent.   If
    she had met JEM members in the  United  Kingdom  he  did  not  find  it
    credible that she would not have made some effort  to  obtain  evidence
    from them.  He found her claim that it never crossed  her  mind  to  do
    this to be incredible.

29. In paragraph 54 he said  the  appellant's  explanation  about  why  her
    parents were unaware she was missing for nine days in the aftermath  of
    her detention was implausible.  He took account of the fact  that  some
    of the questions she was asked about this were confused  but  the  fact
    remained that when the confusion has  been  cleared  up  she  said  she
    always kept in regular contact with her  parents  while  she  was  away
    whether in the United Kingdom or Dubai.  Even if her account of  having
    been able to tell them exactly when she was  coming  back  because  her
    flight was cancelled was true, it seemed strange  she  did  not  notify
    them when she knew she would be returning and even stranger  that  they
    were not concerned when she was out  of  contact  for  nine  days.   An
    explanation was given as to how she got home after being  abandoned  by
    her captors on the airport road after nine days of serious physical and
    psychological mistreatment, during which time she was unable  to  wash,
    was not fed properly and was doused with  water  while  fully  clothed.
    She did not say the captors kept or returned her luggage  to  her.   It
    seemed highly implausible she would be able to get home in that  state,
    possibly without her luggage, without having to explain  in  detail  to
    her parents what had happened.  Her claim that she was able not to tell
    her mother the details of what had happened to  her  and  was  able  to
    conceal it from her father completely seemed implausible to  him.   But
    although his view about  the  implausibility  of  this  aspect  of  her
    account would not lead him to dismiss her entire story, it  did  fit  a
    pattern of  what  he  considered  to  be  unreliable  and  inconsistent
    evidence.  He took into account that by the time she made her statement
    she had provided an explanation that satisfied  Mr  Verney.   He  noted
    that he appeared to accept  her  claim  that  her  father  lived  in  a
    separate part of the family home to her mother although  it  was  never
    properly explained why this would be so.

30. I take the view, having  considered  the  entirety  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge's determination, that he gave adequate reasons  for  his
    view that the expert evidence of Mr Verney did not satisfy  him  as  to
    the credibility of the appellant's account.

31. The third ground of appeal asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    had made an error in rejecting the conclusions of Dr Arnold.  The first
    assertion in that ground, that the First-tier Tribunal judge was  wrong
    to find that Dr Arnold had not  expressly  considered  the  possibility
    that the appellant deliberately caused the marks on her body  with  the
    assistance of someone else, as Ms McCarthy frankly  conceded,  depended
    upon evidence of Dr Arnold produced after the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal judge and therefore I  cannot  take  that  evidence  into
    account in assessing whether on the evidence before him the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge made an error of law.

32. It was said that the First-tier Tribunal judge had commented  that  the
    appellant did not mention  many  of  her  scars  or  the  mechanism  of
    causation.  It was  said  that  if  she  had  caused  them  herself  or
    conspired with another to cause them to support her claim it would make
    no sense to fail to mention them at the earliest opportunity.  That  in
    my view is no more than a point of advocacy.

33. It was also said that the First-tier Tribunal judge incorrectly  stated
    that Dr Arnold was not competent to recognise  PTSD  when  he  had  had
    relevant experience of training at a number  of  institutions.   In  my
    view there is force in this submission but this error was not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal, for reasons which will be apparent when I
    deal with the way in which the First-tier Tribunal  judge  treated  the
    evidence of PTSD.

34. The real issue in my view is whether the First-tier Tribunal judge  was
    entitled to refuse to accept the credibility of the appellant's account
    in the light of  the  medical  evidence  provided  by  Dr  Arnold.   In
    paragraph 41 of his determination the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said
    that  the  report  of   Dr   Arnold   too   disclosed   some   striking
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account.  In  her  asylum  interview
    the appellant described how she was mistreated when she  was  detained.
    She said:

         "I was subjected to verbal  insults  and  physical  abuse.   I  was
         beaten  up.   With  metal  on  my  legs  on  my  left  leg.    They
         extinguished  cigarettes  on  my  left  arm.    [She   showed   the
         interviewer two marks on her left arm].  There is a scar on my left
         knee which resulted from hitting me with bar.   I  was  subject  to
         many harassment.  The  verbal  mistreatment  was  daily.   But  the
         cigarettes was the first day and four  days  later  from  the  same
         person.  The sexually [sic] harassment happened three times.  I was
         beaten once with metal bars."

    The First-tier Tribunal judge said the appellant  went  on  to  clarify
    that sexual harassment consisted of "it was just touches and  sometimes
    it was painful".  When it was put to her that she was claiming to  have
    suffered extensive mistreatment but that in her screening interview she
    was said to have told the interviewer that she was "tortured  a  little
    bit" she explained that "[I meant by a] little bit that  I  was  beaten
    once.  Even when I tried to elaborate on that the officer said  I  need
    brief answers."  The First-tier Tribunal judge said that she also  made
    clear that she was only questioned twice.  When she saw  Dr  Arnold  he
    recorded her as claiming that: "On several occasions she was taken  for
    further questioning and abuse.  During at least one of  these  episodes
    her feet were tied.  The latter included: a) Pulling  her  hair,  which
    has continued to fall out since these events. b) Whipping to her  back.
    c)   Burns with cigarettes and heated metal objects. d)    Beating.  e)
    Sexual molestation (but she denies  actual  rape)."  He  said  that  in
    paragraph M4 of his report Dr Arnold also noted that she reported  that
    she was "transiently rendered unconscious by a blow to the head."

35.  In paragraph 42 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    said that between her asylum interview and the assessment by Dr Arnold,
    the mistreatment the appellant claimed to  have  suffered  became  more
    extensive.  In her asylum interview she had not  mentioned  being  tied
    up, whipped, rendered unconscious or being burnt by a  metal  bar.   He
    said these were things that she seemed to have mentioned for the  first
    time to Dr Arnold and then repeated in her statement  dated  6th  March
    2013.  He said no explanation had been provided as to why she failed to
    mention these highly significant details in her asylum  interview.   If
    she had suffered this serious mistreatment there was no obvious  reason
    he could see, why she would have been reluctant to mention it  or  that
    she would not have  mentioned  it  during  her  asylum  interview.   In
    paragraph 44 he said the appellant's failure to mention these important
    details in her asylum interview raised concern that she  had  concocted
    that part of her account and  had  the  injuries  noted  by  Dr Arnold
    inflicted on her in order to assist her claim.   Experience  had  shown
    that "self-harm" of this nature did take place.  He noted  Dr  Arnold's
    views about the possibility of "self-harm" but it was clear to him that
    he  was  referring  to  an  individual  harming  himself  without   the
    assistance of others.  It was not even clear whether he had  considered
    self-harm in the context of a deliberate  attempt  to  manufacture  and
    create injuries consistent with torture as opposed to the sort of self-
    harm that those with psychological or psychiatric disorders inflict  on
    themselves.  In paragraph 45 he said Dr Arnold's comments about the age
    of the appellant's scars/injuries did  not  assist  in  resolving  that
    issue.  They were really quite  vague.   In  paragraph  07,  Dr  Arnold
    stated "Where the appearances of the lesions of scars are  cited  above
    lend  themselves  to  an  estimation  of  their  ages,   the   maturing
    characteristics accord with the timing she attributed  to  them."   The
    First-tier Tribunal judge said that he  had  not,  however,  given  any
    indication as to which of the lesions and scars he cited actually  lent
    themselves to an estimation of their age.  The only scar the  appellant
    had that Dr Arnold appeared to have been able to age was a scar on her
    knee.  He described that injury as maturing although he was not precise
    as to whether he considered the injury was "early maturing" (i.e. 21 to
    42 days old), "intermediate maturing" (i.e. 42 to 180  days  old).   He
    said in any event this injury was considered by Dr Arnold  to  be  non-
    specific with many possible causes.

36.  The First-tier Tribunal judge could  have  made  the  observation  that
    whereas Dr Arnold described the scars at E6a, which were scars on  the
    appellant's left arm, as having the appearance to be expected  after  a
    lit cigarette was rubbed, rather than pressed, against  the  skin,  the
    appellant herself in answer to question 101  in  her  asylum  interview
    said  they  extinguished  cigarettes  on  her  left  arm,   which   was
    inconsistent with  Dr  Arnold's  evidence.   In  paragraph  43  of  his
    determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said that, apart  from  the
    cigarette burns, it was the whipping injury and the burns, said to have
    been caused by a hot metal rod, that Dr Arnold graded as "typical"  and
    therefore most consistent with the appellant's story.  He  went  on  to
    comment on the appellant's failure to mention these  important  details
    in her asylum interview which raised concern  that  she  had  concocted
    that part of her account.

37.  Ms McCarthy had to concede  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was
    correct in stating that Dr Arnold's comments  about  the  ages  of  the
    appellant's injuries not resolving the issue  of  precisely  when  they
    were caused were valid.  Had the appellant received her injuries  after
    her claim had been refused by the Secretary of State  then  they  would
    have fallen into the immediate maturing classification  in  respect  of
    which Dr Arnold gave a period of 42 to 180 days as they would also have
    done if they had been inflicted at the time  that  the  appellant  said
    they had been.

38.  As I have indicated I  agree  that  the  criticism  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge for stating that Dr Arnold was not qualified to make  an
    assessment that the appellant was suffering from PTSD  was  wrong.   In
    paragraph 47 of his determination, however, he said that the  diagnosis
    of PTSD was dependent on a patient self-reporting rather than objective
    observation  and  physical  symptoms.   He  said  the  reliability   of
    information provided by the  patient  was  self-evidently  key  to  the
    diagnosis being correct.  Obviously  a  patient  who  was  prepared  to
    endure self-harm in  order  to  give  the  appearance  of  having  been
    tortured was likely to be capable of pretending to  be  suffering  from
    PTSD.  In paragraph 48 of his determination he said the disturbing  and
    significant symptoms the appellant  reported  were  clearly  consistent
    with PTSD.  She claimed to have been suffering the symptoms  since  she
    came to the United Kingdom but she had not sought medical help and  had
    not even registered with  a  GP.   He  said  no  explanation  had  been
    provided as to why  she  had  not  done  this.   Her  failure  to  seek
    treatment had been highly inconsistent with her claimed  symptoms.   As
    far as he could see the first time she had mentioned these symptoms was
    when she was interviewed by Dr Arnold.

39.  In my view looking at the matter overall it cannot  be  said  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge made an error of law in his treatment of  the
    expert evidence of Dr Arnold.

40.  The fourth ground of appeal criticised the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    for having failed to have regard  to  relevant  evidence  and  relevant
    explanations for apparent discrepancies.  Some of these have been dealt
    with already.  The first criticism was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge did not have regard to the appellant's explanation that  she  was
    only unsure of the new leader of the JEM in the period after Dr  Khalid
    was assassinated.  In paragraph 9 of his  determination,  however,  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge recorded the appellant's oral  evidence  that
    she had been unaware of who had replaced Ibrahim as the leader  of  the
    JEM because he had been in charge of military action and her  role  was
    confined to the civilian side.  The appellant did  not  deal  with  her
    lack of knowledge of the leader after Dr Khalid Ibrahim in paragraph 10
    of her witness statement, which dealt with paragraphs 29 to 31  of  the
    letter of refusal, in which the question of  the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of the leader of the JEM was raised.   In  any  event  it  is
    clear from paragraphs 6 and 8 of his determination that the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge took into account the oral evidence of the appellant and
    all of the documentary evidence before him.

41.  The  second  matter  raised  was  that  the  irrelevance  of  the  many
    questions that the appellant was asked in her asylum interview was  not
    given any weight in assessing the appellant's overall credibility.   As
    has been pointed out,  the  alleged  unsatisfactory  answers  that  the
    appellant gave were disregarded by the First-tier Tribunal judge.   The
    third point related to the appellant's lack of knowledge  of  the  ICRC
    which has already been dealt with.

42.  The fourth point was a criticism  of  the  finding  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  in  paragraph  34  of  his  determination   that   the
    appellant's explanation to Mr Verney and at the appeal of  being  given
    her passport back "on  board  the  plane"  was  inconsistent  with  her
    evidence in the asylum interview record where she said  it  was  before
    she boarded the plane.  The suggestion that the appellant had explained
    that both statements were right as she gave her passport  back  as  she
    was boarding  the  plane,  relied  upon  evidence  that  the  appellant
    provided to her  representatives  subsequent  to  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal.  In any  event,  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said  in
    paragraph 34 of his determination, this inconsistency was a  minor  one
    to which he attached little weight.

43.  The fifth point  made  under  this  heading  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge failed to have regard to the fact  that  the  period  in
    which the appellant failed to claim asylum was the period of  the  Arab
    Spring, when political change was rapid and regimes  fell  even  though
    not considered likely.  Although Mr Saunders pointed to  a  passage  in
    the report of Mr Verney which indicated that the  regime  had  an  iron
    grip on the situation in Sudan, in my view the criticism of the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge is no more than a point of advocacy.

44.  The sixth point was that the First-tier Tribunal judge found  that  the
    appellant had been inconsistent as to the trigger event causing her  to
    claim asylum.  Again the appellant confirmed that  both  versions  were
    true.  This criticism of the First-tier Tribunal judge  is  also  based
    upon evidence that the appellant has provided since  the  date  of  the
    hearing and is inadmissible to show that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    made an error of law.

45.  The seventh criticism was that the  appellant  was  not  asked  in  her
    asylum interview for details of her torture, whereas the questions  put
    to her by Dr Arnold were specific.  It was suggested the appellant  was
    told in the asylum interview only to answer the questions and  to  give
    brief answers.  Ms McCarthy conceded that that would  have  applied  to
    the screening interview and not the asylum interview.  Moreover  it  is
    apparent from question 101 in the asylum interview that  the  appellant
    was asked an open-ended question, namely  "How  were  you  mistreated?"
    thereby giving her the opportunity to say whatever she  wished  to  say
    about the way in which she was allegedly mistreated.

46.  The eighth point, made in relation to the  inconsistency  between  what
    she said about discrimination in her asylum interview and in her  later
    account, is based on the same premise.   The  appellant  was  asked  at
    question 142 "Have you suffered any discrimination in  Sudan?"  and  at
    question 143 she was asked what discrimination she had suffered,  which
    was an open-ended question which again enabled  her  to  give  whatever
    reply she thought was appropriate.

47.  The ninth point, namely that the explanation that  the  appellant  told
    her mother that she had been detained but did not tell her  father  was
    not properly examined in the determination, is not borne  out  by  what
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said   in   paragraph   54   of   his
    determination. He mentioned her claim that she was able not to tell her
    mother the details of what had happened to her and was able to  conceal
    it from her father completely.  That seemed implausible to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge.  This passage in his determination shows that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge did consider the appellant's explanation, but
    nonetheless did not find it plausible.  In my view it  cannot  be  said
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge's conclusions  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's credibility failed to have regard to the  totality  of  the
    evidence or were perverse.

48.  In paragraph 55 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    said that the appeal hinged on the appellant's  credibility.   He  said
    that having considered the evidence very  carefully  and  applying  the
    lower standard of proof he did not find her to be a  credible  witness.
    He said the inconsistencies which he had set out were, in his view, too
    numerous and too significant for him to accept her account.   Following
    her asylum interview, the extra information and detail provided in  the
    asylum interview submissions letter, in her statement and given to  the
    experts, all bore the hallmarks of an attempt to shore up and repair an
    account that was, in the words of the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,
    so full of holes that it crossed the line between being implausible  to
    being incredible.  In my view that conclusion was open  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge on the evidence  before  him,  notwithstanding  the
    expert reports from Mr Verney and Dr Arnold.

49.  In these circumstances the First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  make  an
    error of law in his determination of the appeal.   The  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed so that the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.




Signed                              Dated


P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
