

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA008282015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 23 May 2016                         |On: 26 May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     D D
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, instructed by Tuckers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Albania born on [ ] 1972. She arrived in  the
United Kingdom on 10  February  2014,  together  with  her  three  children,
hidden in the back of a lorry. She contacted the Asylum  Screening  Unit  in
Croydon the following day and claimed asylum. Her claim was  refused  on  25
November 2014. She appealed against that decision and her appeal  was  heard
before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
promulgated on 22 June 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was
granted on 16 July 2015.

The appellant's claim is based upon a blood feud which  exists  between  her
husband's family and a neighbouring family, the R family.  She  claims  that
the feud began after an incident in October 2008 in which her husband  fired
a gun at Q R, following a disagreement which took  place  at  her  husband's
family's place of business,  and  seriously  injured  him.  The  appellant's
husband was arrested and convicted  and  spent  two  years  in  prison.  Her
children were attacked by children of the R family  when  at  school.  After
her husband's  release,  attempts  were  made  at  reconciliation  but  were
unsuccessful. The family moved to Tirana but were pursued  there  by  the  R
family and attempts were made to kill her husband.  Her  husband  then  left
Albania, in September 2012. The appellant left later, fearing  problems  for
her son when he turned 16 years of age.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did  not  accept  that  a
blood feud existed and did not accept that the appellant  and  her  children
would be at risk on return to Albania.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  her
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna on 8  June  2015.
The judge considered  the  appellant's  account  to  be  a  fabrication  and
dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had failed to give proper consideration to the expert report  and  the
documentary evidence and  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
adverse credibility findings.

Permission to appeal was granted on 16 July 2015.

At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties on  the  error  of  law
and have reached the following conclusion.

Consideration and findings.

Whilst it is the case that the weight to be  given  to  the  evidence  is  a
matter for the judge, it is also for the  judge  to  give  full  and  proper
reasons for according the relevant weight to the  evidence.  In  this  case,
Judge Mulvenna's  reasoning  for  rejecting  the  expert  evidence  and  the
documentary evidence appears simply to  be  that  he  did  not  believe  the
appellant's account. There appears to be little in  the  way  of  a  rounded
consideration of  all  the  evidence.  It  is  relevant  to  note  that  the
documents were rejected by the judge on the basis of the  findings  at  [33]
and [34], yet those paragraphs do not  provide  reasons  in  themselves  for
rejecting documentary evidence purporting to come from the police (see  page
146 of the appeal bundle). I find myself, furthermore, in agreement with  Ms
Fisher's  assertion  that,  whilst  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant's
evidence as being confused and contradictory, there  is  no  elaboration  on
that and it is not entirely clear which parts of the evidence, if any,  were
accepted, and which rejected.

It may well be that on a full and rounded assessment of  all  the  evidence,
properly considered and weighed up, the same adverse conclusion  is  reached
on the appellant's claim. However that is not necessarily the  case  and  it
seems to me that such an assessment has yet to be made.

Accordingly, I find that the judge's findings cannot be sustained  and  that
the decision has to be set aside in  its  entirety  for  full  and  properly
reasoned findings to be made on the evidence. The appropriate course is  for
the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  de  novo,
with none of the credibility findings made by the judge being preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Mulvenna.

     Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I uphold  that  order,
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269).








                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
