
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 30 July 2013                               |on 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 MEI MEI LIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  China,  born  on  2  July  1988.   The
   respondent refused her asylum claim for reasons  explained  in  a  letter
   dated 19 December 2012.



2) First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  for
   reasons explained in her determination dated 7 February 2013.

3) On 6 March 2013 a Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused
   permission to appeal.

4) An application was then made to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
   appeal, on the following grounds:

       ...  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter  referred  to  as   "the
   Tribunal") erred ... :


    by failing to  exercise  anxious  scrutiny.   The  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the impact  of  questioning  on  return  at  the  airport  the
    appellant will face in terms of Country Guidance  cases  and  also  the
    impact of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2011] IAC 596.  The failure to have  regard  to  a  Country
    Guidance case whether put before the Tribunal or not will constitute an
    error of law (see R (Iran) and others v Secretary  of  State   for  the
    Home Department [2005] Imm AR 535  at  paras  28-34  per  Lord  Justice
    Brooke).  The appellant will  be  questioned  on  return  as  she  left
    illegally.  She will be questioned about her time abroad and her asylum
    claim (see WC (Illegal Departure  -  Failed  Asylum  Seeker)  China  CG
    [2002] UKIAT 03295 at paragraphs 6-9; XH (Illegal Departure  -  Risk  -
    Return) China CG [2002] UKIA 01478 at paragraph 16; ZC and others (Risk
    - Illegal Exit - loan  sharks)  China  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00028).   The
    appellant is not expected to lie (see HJ (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] IAC 596 at paragraphs
    35 and 82; RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2012] 3 WLR 345 at paragraphs 26, 51, 58; R  (on  the  application  of
    Yameen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWHC  2250
    (Admin) at paragraph 83.  At that point the appellant will be  at  real
    risk having regard to the authorities' attitude to those opposed to the
    regime, whether or not  the  appellant  has  been  disbelieved  by  the
    Tribunal.  Even if the appellant  has  been  found  to  be  subject  to
    adverse credibility findings,  the  Tribunal  has  not  considered  the
    imputation  of  political  belief  to  the  appellant  by  the  Chinese
    authorities.  Where the reasons for the persecution is or  may  be  the
    imputation by the persecutors of a particular belief or opinion one  is
    concerned not with the correctness of the matter imputed or  attributed
    but with the  belief  of  the  persecutor:  the  real  reason  for  the
    persecution of a victim may be the persecutor's belief that she adheres
    to a particular faith even if in truth the victim does not  hold  those
    opinions it has to be borne in mind that the reason is that in the mind
    of the persecutor for inflicting the persecutory treatment  (see  Sepel
    and Bulbul v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  1  WLR
    856 at paragraph 22).  The Chinese authorities will be aware  that  the
    appellant has expressed an interest in opposing the regime.   In  light
    of the country information that is sufficient for the appellant  to  be
    at real risk that the Chinese  authorities  will  impute  that  she  is
    against the regime.  The Tribunal has not assessed, notwithstanding the
    adverse credibility findings, whether the appellant would  be  at  real
    risk on return.  Had the Tribunal exercised anxious  scrutiny  in  this
    regard it would not have reached the decision it did.  Further even  if
    the appellant gets through the airport, the question still  has  to  be
    answered whether the appellant would be at real risk by virtue  of  not
    being able to live openly and expressing her political opinion (see  HJ
    (Iran), supra and RT, supra).

5) The grounds do not take issue with the adverse credibility  finding,  and
   do not insist on any case based on  Chinese  family  planning  policy  or
   under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6) On 10 April 2013 I granted permission to  appeal,  giving  the  following
   reasons:

    The application is now in full form, which was not before the FtT judge
    who refused permission.  It relies upon a number of propositions  which
    appear rather tenuous, such as  that  the  FtT  by  exercising  anxious
    scrutiny should have perceived a case not argued to the FtT, where  the
    appellant had the same solicitors; that  country  guidance  establishes
    that she is likely to  be  questioned  by  the  authorities;  that  the
    authorities may impute any opinion to her; and that she is entitled  to
    protection against inability to express  any  opinions  she  may  have.
    However, the present question is not how the grounds may ultimately  be
    resolved, but whether they are sufficient for debate and answer.   That
    threshold is crossed.


7)  Mr  Forrest  (who  is  not  the  author  of  the  grounds)  pointed  out
   immediately that they contain a factual inaccuracy.  They  are  drawn  on
   the basis that the appellant left China illegally, whereas it has  always
   been clear that the appellant came to the UK legitimately as a student.

8) Mr Forrest sought to develop the grounds  on  the  basis  of  failure  to
   exercise anxious scrutiny (1) by failing to evaluate the actual  risk  on
   return (2) by misunderstanding  the  nature  of  the  appellant's  actual
   political opinion and (3) by failing to take account of political opinion
   which might be imputed to the appellant by the Chinese authorities.

9) On the first point Mr Forrest referred  to  XH  at  paragraph  16,  which
   states:

    In any event [the alleged risk] has to be seen in the  context  of  the
    objective evidence as a whole.  A telephone interview with  [a  country
    expert] said that migrants who return to China are  normally  taken  to
    the border patrol education camp in  Fujian  Province  where  they  are
    interrogated by Chinese authorities to find out how they were  smuggled
    out of the country and then given a  fine  between  the  equivalent  of
    $1,800 to $3,600 (Canadian).  Those  who  pay  the  fine  are  released
    immediately and those who cannot pay are sent to "re-education  through
    labour" custody for up to a year.


10) Mr Forrest submitted that the situation of the appellant as  a  returned
   failed asylum seeker could be equated to the  above,  and  there  was  no
   reason to think that the risk of being sent to a  camp  and  interrogated
   would not apply to her.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to take that into
   account.

11) On point two, Mr Forrest suggested  that  the  judge  doubted  that  the
   appellant's activities on the internet came to light as she claimed,  but
   did not doubt that she held a political  opinion  as  she  claimed.   The
   determination failed to make a positive finding on whether the  appellant
   was active on the internet, a matter which the judge had  been  under  an
   obligation to decide.

12)  On his third point, Mr Forrest said that although  the  judge  had  not
   explicitly been invited to decide the issue there was background evidence
   which suggested that the Chinese authorities might attribute a  political
   opinion to a returnee.  On the authority  of  Sepet  and  Bulbul  it  was
   irrelevant whether the appellant actually held any opinion at all.

13) These 3 points together, it was said, amounted to  failure  to  exercise
   anxious scrutiny.  The decision should be set aside and the case sent for
   rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.




14) Mrs O'Brien said that the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
   the arguments now put forward  were  not  reflected  in  the  grounds  of
   appeal, the skeleton  argument  or  the  submissions  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The appellant's representatives approached  the  case  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal as turning crucially on credibility.   The  appellant
   had not shown that novel grounds should now be taken  into  account,  and
   the points raised were not "Robinson obvious".  The grounds did not raise
   any real issue of not following country guidance, because  that  part  of
   grounds was now conceded to  be  based  on  a  factual  inaccuracy.   The
   somewhat historic country guidance cases arose from instances of  illegal
   departure and people smuggling, not from return of failed asylum seekers.
    The appellant had not sought to produce any background evidence, even at
   this stage, to demonstrate such a risk as she claimed.  The judge  (on  a
   full and fair reading of her determination) had not disbelieved only that
   the appellant was identified as an opposition cyber  activist,  but  that
   she engaged in such activity.  At paragraph 22 the judge found  that  the
   appellant knew nothing about the party with which  she  claimed  to  have
   been involved.  The judge did not have  to  consider  any  case  of  risk
   arising from imputed political opinion, which was not  put  to  her,  and
   which did not obviously arise.  Even if the judge had looked  at  such  a
   case, it was not made out by any authority or background  evidence.   The
   determination should stand.

15) I reserved my determination.

16) The appellant was not smuggled out of China.  She left  in  the  regular
   way on her own passport.  She can return the same way.  Even if  she  did
   not remove of her own initiative (as she is obliged to do,  if  and  when
   her appeals are exhausted), ZC and others held that individuals returning
   to China after unsuccessful asylum claims were not reasonably  likely  to
   be imprisoned or subjected to administrative detention  for  having  left
   China unlawfully.

17) The proposition that the appellant might be forced into disclosing  that
   she made a false claim of political activity against the  authorities  is
   as far-fetched as it appears at first sight.  The country guidance  cases
   cited in the grounds do not vouch the proposition that the appellant will
   be questioned about her time abroad or her asylum claim.   Nor  is  there
   background evidence that the Chinese authorities will  be  interested  in
   exploring the nature of her asylum claim.

18) The credibility finding in the  determination,  read  fairly  and  as  a
   whole, is not only against the appellant having  been  identified  as  an
   opposition cyber  activist,  but  against  her  having  engaged  in  such
   activity at all.

19) The final proposition in the grounds that  the  appellant  might  be  at
   risk by virtue of not being able  to  live  openly  and  to  express  her
   political opinion cannot sit with the adverse credibility findings.



20) The  grounds  somewhat  ingeniously  attempt  to  construct  a  line  of
   argument by which anyone from China might simply by the fact  of  seeking
   asylum become entitled to protection.  They are not well grounded in  the
   individual facts of the case,  in  country  guidance,  or  in  background
   evidence.

21) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                30 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
