


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
AA/00815/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |  Determination Promulgated   |
|On 17 January 2018                    |On 13 March 2018              |
|                                      |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                                  Mr M N S
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Foster, Counsel (instructed by Hoole & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      Introduction


        1. This is the rehearing of the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
           protection and human rights appeal, following the error  of  law
           finding and decision made by the tribunal and promulgated  on  2
           November 2017.


        2. A direction was made on 2 November 2017, which has been complied
           with, belatedly, by the Home Office's letter dated  22  December
           2017.  It had been contended that the Appellant was entitled  to
           benefit from the Home Office's discretionary leave policy as  he
           had accrued 6 years leave as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
           child.  The Home Office's position was that he had not qualified
           for leave on the same  basis  as  the  original  grant,  as  his
           circumstances had changed in that he had turned 18.  He faced no
           very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  on  return   to
           Afghanistan.  The  tribunal  has  resolved  that  point  in  the
           Appellant's favour, as is explained below.  Nevertheless, it has
           been necessary to deal with all contested issues and that is the
           only basis, in the tribunal's judgment, on which  the  Appellant
           succeeds.



      Background


      3.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born as was accepted
           by the Respondent for protection purposes on 1 January 1996.  He
           is currently 22 years  of  age  and  an  adult.   The  Appellant
           claimed asylum on 29 April 2008, having arrived  in  the  United
           Kingdom illegally the same day.    He  was  accepted  to  be  12
           years of age.  His asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
           rights claims were refused under Paragraphs 336 and 339F  of  HC
           395 (as amended) by the Respondent's  letter  dated  28  October
           2008.  He was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  until  27
           October  2011,  in  accordance  with  Home  Office  policy.   He
           applied, in time, for further leave  to  remain  on  25  October
           2011, again raising protection grounds.  His claim  was  refused
           on 5 January 2015, leading to the present appeal.


      4.    Through his solicitors, the Appellant served  Notice  of  Appeal
           under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act
           2002, to which the One Stop Procedure applied.  Directions  were
           thereafter made by the tribunal, and were complied with by  both
           parties.




      The Law

      5.    The 1951 UN Geneva  Convention  (as  amended  by  the  New  York
           Protocol in 1967: "the Refugee Convention")  provides  that  the
           term "refugee" should apply to any person who, inter alia, owing
           to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of  race,
           religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social  group
           or political opinion is outside the country of  his  nationality
           and is unable, or owing to such  fear,  is  unwilling  to  avail
           himself of the protection of that country.


      6.    The  Refugee  Convention  has  been  incorporated  into  the  EU
           Qualification Directive, which in turn has been  implemented  by
           appropriate  changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
           amended), which came into force on 9 October 2006.   This  makes
           provision for Humanitarian Protection in qualifying  cases:  The
           Refugee  or  Person  in   Need   of   International   Protection
           (Qualification) Regulations 2006 SI No. 2525.


      7.    Since 2 October 2000, the commencement date of the Human  Rights
           Act 1998, public authorities (including the  tribunal)  may  not
           act in a way which is incompatible with the European  Convention
           on Human Rights and the tribunal must by  Section  2  take  into
           account the body of material commonly known  by  the  convenient
           term of "Strasbourg jurisprudence".


      8.    The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  In determining  this
           appeal the tribunal has applied the lower standard of  proof  (a
           reasonable degree of likelihood) to all issues, save to the  "in
           country" Article 8 ECHR claim  to  which  the  standard  is  the
           balance of probabilities unless there are health  matters.   The
           relevant date is the date of the hearing.


      The evidence

      9.    The Appellant gave his evidence  in  English,  in  which  he  is
           fluent.  The Appellant confirmed as  true  and  adopted  as  his
           evidence in chief his witness statement dated 27 April 2015,  to
           which the tribunal refers.


      10.   In summary, the Appellant said in his written evidence  that  he
           was from Qemchi, Wata Pur. His father was a prominent member  of
           the Taliban and had been a  commander  in  Hezb-i-Islami  before
           that.   His father spent most of the  time  away  fighting.   He
           visited the family home no more than once or  twice  per  month,
           armed and accompanied.  The Appellant's father never  talked  to
           the Appellant about the fighting.  He spoke about resisting  the
           foreigners.  The Appellant's mother disapproved of his  father's
           activities.   The  Appellant's  two  older  brothers  had   died
           fighting with their father.  The Appellant's father  wanted  the
           Appellant to take their place.  The Appellant's mother told  him
           to leave home.


      11.   The Appellant went to the home of a friend in the same area  but
           some distance from the family home.   The  Appellant's  maternal
           grandfather arranged the Appellant's journey with an agent,  via
           Pakistan by air to London.  He claimed  asylum  at  the  airport
           after his  arrival,  and  was  placed  in  the  care  of  social
           services.


      12.   After the Appellant arrived he contacted a relative in Pakistan,
           using a telephone number the Appellant's grandfather  had  given
           him, to pass a message that he was safe and well.  The Appellant
           had no means of contacting his family.  There was  no  telephone
           and no post.  He had relatives in Kabul but  he  had  never  met
           them and they would not help him because of his father's Taliban
           connections.  He knew that his grandfather  had  died  in  2011.
           The authorities would not be able to protect  the  Appellant  in
           Afghanistan.   The  witness  statement  prepared  by  his  first
           representatives was inadequate.


      13.   The Appellant said that he was  suffering  from  post  traumatic
           stress disorder and depression.  He  had  received  counselling.
           He wanted to settle in the United Kingdom and had  been  advised
           he was entitled to leave to remain on the basis that he had been
           in the United Kingdom for 6 years with  discretionary  leave  to
           remain.  He had been involved in  community  activities  in  the
           United Kingdom, which were of  public  benefit.   He  wanted  to
           work.  He saw himself as integrated with ties and friendships in
           the United Kingdom.


      14.   The Appellant produced documents said to be from Afghanistan, as
           well  as  certificates  of  his  educational   attainments   and
           activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   country   background
           material.  He also produced a report  prepared  by  Dr  Robin  E
           Lawrence dated 14 August 2016.  Further reference will  be  made
           to those documents as necessary later in this determination.


      15.   The Appellant was cross-examined.  In summary he said  that  the
           Hezb-i-Islami documents had been sent by his aunt  in  Pakistan.
           His mother remained uncontactable.  His  aunt's  husband  was  a
           doctor and his patients had sent letters.  He had tried to  find
           his mother through  Red  Cross.  His  cousin  had  received  the
           documents.  He was  not  at  court  because  he  was  ill.   The
           Appellant still lived with his cousin.  The  Appellant  did  not
           know why his cousin had not mentioned the documents in his  2016
           letter.


      16.   The Appellant said that his father was in a high position in the
           Taliban.  People feared him.  The Appellant had no  recollection
           of what his father had done.  He was young at the time.  He knew
           nothing of his father now.  He was absorbed in his life  in  the
           United Kingdom.  Pressed why the Appellant had made no enquiries
           given that he claimed to fear his father, the Appellant conceded
           that he had asked his aunt when he spoke to her.  He  had  asked
           about his mother and two younger brothers.  They were in fear of
           him.  He did not know whether his father was still alive.


      17.   The Appellant said that when he fled he had gone to  a  friend's
           house which was about 10 minutes' walk away.  He had  stayed  14
           to 16 days, or three weeks according  to  his  asylum  interview
           record.  He did not know how his father did not find  him.   His
           father had known that he had left.  His parents had  had  a  big
           fight about the Appellant joining the Taliban, as his two  older
           brothers had died.  The Appellant had not seen his father before
           the Appellant left.  His mother had informed his cousin and  his
           grandfather.  His grandfather lived in another province and  had
           helped the Appellant to escape.  He had no means  of  contacting
           his grandfather after he left. When the Appellant had said  that
           his mother was still alive (in his  screening  interview),  that
           had been a guess.  He has  been  very  stressed,  depressed  and
           young when he was interviewed.  Living  in  Pakistan  would  not
           have helped him.  He had not known that he  was  coming  to  the
           United Kingdom.   He  had  not  gone  to  Pakistan  because  his
           cousin's father had been kidnapped by the  Taliban  and  it  was
           thought that his father was behind it.  That  was  what  he  had
           been told.  He had not tried to find out.


      18.   The Appellant did not know why his cousin's letter said  nothing
           about it.  He did not know why his relations in Pakistan had not
           sent something  about  it.   They  had  sent  the  Hezb-i-Islami
           letter, which had been hard to get.


      19.   The Appellant said that he was not receiving  any  treatment  in
           the United Kingdom.  Everything had stopped when he was 18.   He
           was not seeing a counsellor because he did not  think  it  would
           help him.  He was not taking any medicine because he  could  not
           afford it.


      20.   The Appellant  agreed  that  he  had  relatives  in  Kabul,  his
           grandfather's brother, but he had never met them.  They  were  a
           large family.  There were no other relatives in his home area.


      21.   The Appellant had studied and  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom,
           including voluntary work,  but  was  doing  nothing  at  present
           pending the outcome of his  appeal.   He  thought  none  of  his
           relatives would want to help him in Afghanistan.


      22.   The tribunal asked the Appellant why he thought that none of his
           relatives in Afghanistan would want to  help  him.   He  replied
           because of what his father had done.


      23.   The Respondent produced the standard Home Office bundle as  well
           as recent country information and guidance.




      Submissions


      24.   Mr Clarke relied  upon  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
           letters dated 2008 and 18  August  2015,  which  challenged  the
           Appellant's account  of  events  as  lacking  credibility.   The
           Appellant had been unable to give  a  consistent,  plausible  or
           credible account of events.  The Appellant  had  no  entitlement
           under  the  Home  Office's  discretionary   leave   policy   for
           unaccompanied asylum seeking children.  He  had  turned  18  and
           ceased  to  be  a  child  before  he  had  accrued  6  years  of
           discretionary leave to remain.  The policy had  thus  ceased  to
           apply and the argument that it did was erroneous.   AG  (Kosovo)
           [2007] UKAIT 00082  showed  that  any  such  policy  had  to  be
           applicable in clear terms.  There was in any event  no  risk  on
           return.  The documents produced  deserved  no  weight.   Nothing
           more had  been  produced  from  Pakistan  despite  the  familial
           connection.  Moreover Hezb-i-Islami were not  the  Taliban.   It
           was inconceivable that the Appellant's  father  could  not  have
           found him on the Appellant's version of events.  The Appellant's
           claim that he was  not  in  contact  with  his  family  was  not
           credible.  The Appellant had family in Kabul and there  were  no
           very significant obstacles to his return.   The Appellant  spoke
           Pashtu.   His  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  diagnosis  was
           explicable by other obvious causes such  as  family  separation.
           There was a low risk  of  suicide  and  help  was  available  in
           Afghanistan. The Appellant had not spent half his  life  in  the
           United Kingdom and  could  not  benefit  under  the  Immigration
           Rules.  Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  was  not
           applicable as there  were  no  strong  grounds  to  depart  from
           existing country guidance. The appeal should be dismissed.


      25.   Ms Foster for the Appellant relied  on  her  skeleton  argument.
           The Appellant had been granted discretionary leave to remain  on
           9 July 2012, for three years.  He had then applied  for  further
           leave to remain,  in  time,  which  gave  him  leave  to  remain
           pursuant to the provisions of section 3C of the Immigration  Act
           1971.  His  further  leave  was  extended  on  the  same  basis.
           Settlement  and  further  leave  to   remain   were   separately
           considered.  Age was not a "change  of  circumstances"  for  the
           purposes of the Home Office policy.  The meaning of  the  policy
           was a matter of law and was not a question of the rationality of
           individual decisions.  There were very significant obstacles  to
           the Appellant's return, as he had resided in the United  Kingdom
           for 10 years.  He spoke Pashto but was not fully  literate.   He
           had no contact with his family and had never met  his  relatives
           in Kabul.  He would stand out as Westernised. The report  of  Dr
           Lawrence was not a fundamental element of the Appellant's  case.
           There were, however, exceptional circumstances  because  of  the
           Appellant's  long  presence  in   the   United   Kingdom.    The
           credibility points taken against the Appellant were ill  founded
           as he had given a substantially consistent account.   There  was
           no reason why the Appellant would want to know  more  about  his
           father.  The Appellant had to rely on information drip fed  from
           Pakistan.  The Hezb-i-Islami documents had  been  sent  via  his
           mother 10 years ago.  The Appellant was at risk  on  return  and
           his appeal should be allowed.




      Findings and Decision

      26.   The preliminary point in this appeal is  whether  the  Appellant
           has  any  entitlement  under  the  Asylum   Policy   Instruction
           Discretionary Leave,  Version  7.0  published  18  August  2015.
           This is the version of the policy made available to the tribunal
           in the present appeal.   That policy states at 1.2 Background:


            "DL was  introduced  alongside  HP  in  April  2003  to  replace
           exceptional leave to remain (ELR)  and  was  initially  used  to
           grant leave for Article  8  reasons...  However,  following  the
           implementation of the family and private life rules  on  9  July
           2012, DL should no longer be granted where the  requirements  of
           those rules in Appendix FM or paragraphs 276ADE(1) to 276CE  are
           met or where LOTR should  be  granted  for  Article  8  reasons.
           Transitional arrangements apply to those granted DL for  Article
           8 reasons before 9 July 2012.  From 6 April 2013, the policy  of
           granting DL to  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children  ended.
           Leave for this group must now be considered in  accordance  with
           paragraph 352ZC to 352ZF of the Immigration Rules and not  under
           the DL policy.


            At Section 10 the  Transitional  Arrangements  appear  (selected
           extracts):


            "Those granted leave under the DL policy in force before 9  July
           2012 will normally continue to be dealt with under  that  policy
           through to settlement if they continue to  qualify  for  further
           leave on the  same  basis  as  their  original  DL  was  granted
           (normally they will be eligible to apply  for  settlement  after
           accruing  6  years'  continuous  DL  (or  where  appropriate   a
           combination of DL and LOTR, see section 8 above) unless  at  the
           date of decision they fall within the restricted leave policy.


            "If the circumstances remain the same... a further period  of  3
           years' DL should normally be granted.


            "If there have been significant  changes  that  means  that  the
           applicant no longer qualifies for leave under the  DL  policy...
           the further leave application should be refused."


      27.   The Respondent's position was first set out in a letter  to  the
           Appellant's solicitors dated 8 September 2015:


            "Your  client  does  not  qualify  for  further  leave  and  his
           circumstances have changed... Applying  the  policy  as  it  was
           before 9 July 2012, your client is no longer a child and  cannot
           continue to qualify for leave under this policy."




      28.   This was reiterated in the Respondent's letter dated 22 December
           2017, in response to the tribunal's direction seeking to clarify
           the issue:


            "In the Appellant's case he was granted DL on 27  October  2011,
           when he was 12 years old  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
           child.   Therefore  when  he  had  accrued  6  years  leave  his
           circumstances were no longer the same as he had  already  turned
           18 and therefore  no  longer  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
           child.  As such he does not meet the terms of the policy."


      29.   On its face, the Respondent's interpretation  is  correct.   The
           Appellant ceased to be a child on 1 January 2014.  The Appellant
           had no need of protection under  the  policy.   The  Appellant's
           counter argument is that the Appellant's original  DL  continues
           by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  until  his
           application  is  finally  determined,  i.e.,  until  the  appeal
           process is complete.  That stage has not been reached.


      30.   Section 3C, Continuation of leave pending variation decision, so
           far as it applies in the present appeal, is as follows:


           1) This section applies if-


           a) a person who has limited leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
              United  Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State   for
              variation of the leave,


           b) the application  for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
              expires, and


           c) the leave  expires  without  the  application  for  variation
              having been decided.


           2) The leave is extended by virtue of this  section  during  any
              period when-


           a)  the  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided   nor
              withdrawn,


           b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum  and
              Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought  [F2,  while   the
              appellant is in the United Kingdom] against the  decision  on
              the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of an
              appeal out of time with permission), ...


           c) an appeal under  that  section  against  that  decision  [F4,
              brought while the appellant is in  the  United  Kingdom,]  is
              pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act)...


           3) Leave extended by virtue of this section shall lapse  if  the
              applicant leaves the United Kingdom.


           [(3A) Leave extended by virtue of this section may be  cancelled
           if the applicant-


           a) has failed to comply with a condition attached to the  leave,
              or


           b) has used  or  uses  deception  in  seeking  leave  to  remain
              (whether successfully or not).]


           4) A person may not make an application  for  variation  of  his
              leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  while  that
              leave is extended by virtue of this section.


           5) But subsection (4) does not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
              application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).


           [(6) The Secretary of State  may  make  regulations  determining
           when an application is decided for the purposes of this section;
           and the regulations-


           a) may make provision by reference to receipt of a notice,


           b) may provide for  a  notice  to  be  treated  as  having  been
              received in specified circumstances,


           c) may  make  different  provision  for  different  purposes  or
              circumstances,


           d) shall be made by statutory instrument, and


           e) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of
              either House of Parliament.]


      31.   Section 8: Settlement applications of the relevant  Home  Office
           policy states:


           "Any leave accrued whist waiting for  a  valid  application  for
           further leave to be considered, may count towards  the  required
           period of leave for settlement  providing  the  application  was
           made in time and leave was automatically extended in  accordance
           with section 3C(2) of the Immigration Act 1971..."


           Thus the express terms of the Home Office's  own  policy  accept
           that section 3C  extended  the  Appellant's  DL.   His  DL  thus
           continues in force today, because he applied in time  to  extend
           his existing leave to remain and his application  has  not  been
           finally determined. He has, as counsel on his behalf  submitted,
           now accrued over 6  years  DL  from  27  October  2011.   He  is
           entitled to benefit from  the  policy  and  to  receive  settled
           status.

      32.   That conclusion in some ways makes  little  sense,  because  (as
           noted above) the Appellant has no need at all of the  protection
           conferred by the policy.  But it may also be said  that  section
           3C was introduced by way of amendment  to  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 to guard against  delays  in  the  Home  Office's  decision
           making process.  The Appellant thus receives the benefit of Home
           Office delay in decision making, and the  delay  caused  by  the
           litigation process, for neither of which he is responsible.   As
           the Home Office policy indicates where proportionality lies  for
           Article 8 ECHR purposes, his appeal  succeeds  under  Article  8
           ECHR.


      33.   Now if the tribunal were mistaken for any reason to  reach  that
           conclusion, it is necessary to go on to consider  the  substance
           of the Appellant's protection  claim.   The  tribunal  considers
           that no part of that claim is  reasonably  likely  to  be  true.
           The Appellant's story is inconsistent and implausible  at  every
           significant stage.


      34.   In reaching that conclusion the tribunal takes into account  the
           Appellant's young age when he was interviewed, the likely impact
           of separation from his family, cultural dislocation,  the  lapse
           of time caused by the delays in his case  when  being  asked  to
           recall past events, and the report of Dr Lawrence.  Dr  Lawrence
           found that the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  post  traumatic
           stress disorder and depression, and described the symptoms which
           led to that diagnosis.  Dr Lawrence observed that the  Appellant
           was not disoriented and  "was  generally  clear  concerning  the
           dates of what happened  in  his  answers."   The  Appellant  had
           limited insight and had little appreciation of the impact of the
           trauma of his childhood and the dislocation he experienced  when
           he came to the United Kingdom.  Dr Lawrence considered that  the
           Appellant's post traumatic stress disorder was  likely  to  have
           been caused by the way he was treated  before  he  came  to  the
           United Kingdom.  The recommendations made by  Dr  Lawrence  have
           not been put into effect.  There was happily  no  evidence  that
           the Appellant was  currently  having  any  further  thoughts  of
           suicide and there was no evidence of any attempt.  The method he
           imagined was not likely to be available in the United Kingdom.


      35.   Some weight is due  to  Dr  Lawrence's  report  because  of  the
           symptoms observed by  him,  but  the  tribunal  notes  that  the
           narrative carefully recorded by him as given by the Appellant in
           2016 differs significantly from  other  earlier  versions.   One
           notable example is that the Appellant is recorded  as  informing
           Dr Lawrence in some detail  that  his  mother  and  two  younger
           brothers had died: see page 10, "Family  History".   Before  the
           tribunal the Appellant simply said that he did  not  where  they
           were.   In  the  tribunal's  view  that  is  just  one   serious
           inconsistency.   Dr  Lawrence  made  no  suggestion   that   the
           Appellant's  depression  and  post  traumatic  stress   disorder
           affected  his  ability  to  recall  past  events,  or  that  the
           Appellant was of subnormal intelligence.  The tribunal considers
           that Dr Lawrence's report provides insufficient explanation  for
           the deficiencies in the Appellant's evidence.


      36.   The Appellant's date of birth as accepted by the  Respondent  is
           obviously merely nominal.  Were the tribunal not  bound  by  the
           Respondent's acceptance of the Appellant's age and  nationality,
           the tribunal would have found otherwise.  Plainly  the  decision
           to send the Appellant to the United  Kingdom  was  made  by  his
           family, who were of the substantial wealth necessary to pay  for
           his journey to the United Kingdom,  as  was  also  seen  by  his
           claimed education in Afghanistan. The Appellant's claim that  he
           did not know where he was going makes no sense at all, since  he
           needed to be prepared for a long journey to a foreign land.   As
           the Appellant said in his main witness statement (see [18]) that
           he had studied "some English" at school, there was all the  more
           reason to  have  told  him  his  destination.   That  claim  was
           supported in at least one of the school reports he produced,  if
           any of his documents are reliable.


      37.   The whole  of  the  story  of  the  Appellant's  departure  from
           Afghanistan is implausible.  The Appellant was only 12 years  of
           age.  According to him his father was a  dominant  and  fearsome
           figure, with armed supporters.  If the  Appellant's  mother  had
           sent the Appellant away to avoid his forced recruitment into the
           Taliban, sending the Appellant only a short distance to the home
           of a friend was almost certain to have led to discovery, by  the
           information being beaten out of her, by a  villager  wishing  to
           curry favour or gain a financial reward or by means of a  search
           for which on the Appellant's account there was adequate time and
           resources.   There was also time to trace the Appellant  to  his
           grandfather.  The Appellant's father would surely have  left  no
           stone unturned, and would have not hesitated  to  punish  anyone
           involved.  Nothing of the kind was said to have  occurred.   Yet
           the Appellant maintained that even now his  relatives  in  Kabul
           would not help from fear of his father.


      38.   Even before that point is reached, the question must be asked as
           to why the Appellant's father would have wanted to force his  12
           year old son to join the Taliban.  On the Appellant's account  a
           huge  family  sacrifice  had  already  been   made,   ample   to
           demonstrate commitment to the Taliban cause.  The  Appellant  is
           of compact build and it reasonable to infer that at the  age  of
           12 he would have still been a little boy.  He could have been of
           no  conceivable  military  use  and  indeed  would  have  almost
           certainly been a hindrance, burden and liability.  There was  no
           suggestion that the Appellant was to be sacrificed as a  suicide
           bomber.  Forced recruitment is not a favoured Taliban method  as
           ideological commitment is so obviously preferable  in  terms  of
           military discipline and loyalty.


      39.   To enable the Appellant to travel to the United Kingdom,  it  is
           obvious that a false identity must have been created for him and
           travel documents prepared and airline tickets  purchased.   Such
           processes are time consuming and costly.   That  was  a  further
           opportunity for his father to prevent the Appellant's departure.


      40.   The Appellant's claim that he was not in contact with his family
           made no sense.  A large sum of money had been  invested  in  his
           future and it was hardly likely that his family would  not  want
           to know that  he  was  safe,  well  and  happy.   The  Appellant
           conceded that he had a means of contacting his grandfather,  but
           his explanation of the lack of success in making contact through
           other relatives in Pakistan were less  than  reasonably  likely.
           These, after all, were the supposed conduit by which he obtained
           documents.


      41.   Those documents raised more questions than  they  answered.   In
           the first place, the Appellant's father was  supposedly  a  well
           known and influential Taliban commander, yet the documents  were
           from a different organisation, Hezb-i-Islami.   They  proved  no
           Taliban connection.  Even if the  Appellant's  father  had  once
           been in Hezb-i-Islami, he might have laid down his arms.   There
           was no obvious reason for such documents (dating from  1989  and
           1991) to exist or to have been retained. The tribunal  concludes
           that they  were  created  for  the  purpose  of  bolstering  the
           Appellant's claim.  They can be given no weight.


      42.   The Appellant's claim that he  had  taken  no  interest  in  his
           father because of his new life in the United Kingdom made little
           sense if any.  The Appellant would have to be a  most  incurious
           person indeed not have delved into the information available  on
           the world wide web.  Yet having claimed he had  no  information,
           he told  Dr  Lawrence  that  he  thought  that  his  father  was
           responsible  for  the  death  of  his  mother  and  two  younger
           brothers.  He further claimed under  cross-examination  that  he
           had heard that his father had been responsible for the death  of
           a relative in Pakistan.  At best this  was  speculation  on  his
           part and was characteristic of  the  improvised  nature  of  his
           evidence.


      43.   There was evidence that the Appellant's  cousin  in  the  United
           Kingdom with whom he is currently living is unwell but there was
           nothing to have prevented the cousin  from  providing  a  proper
           witness statement in support of the Appellant's  claims.     His
           letter provided little support for the  Appellant's  case.   The
           Appellant's assertion that his  relatives  in  Kabul  would  not
           assist him  made  no  sense.   Family  bonds  are  at  least  as
           important in Afghanistan as elsewhere.  The Afghan tradition  is
           one of  hospitality.   It  is  in  the  tribunal's  view  highly
           unlikely that the  Appellant's  relatives  in  Kabul  would  not
           provide whatever help to him that they could.  They could hardly
           blame the Appellant for the actions of his  father,  even  there
           had been such actions which the tribunal cannot accept.


      44.   The tribunal thus  regrets  to  say  that  on  the  totality  of
           evidence it considers that the Appellant failed  to  provide  an
           account  of  events  which  reached  the  required  standard  of
           reasonable  likelihood.   The  tribunal   considers   that   the
           Appellant's claims viewed as  a  whole  and  in  the  round  are
           improbable and implausible.  It follows that the  Appellant  has
           failed to prove  any  part  of  his  tale  beyond  his  age  and
           nationality, which were conceded.   He has failed to  show  that
           he cannot return to Afghanistan without real risk. The  tribunal
           dismisses the asylum appeal.


      45.   For very much the same reasons as have already been  given,  and
           because the tribunal saw no evidence  sufficient  to  justify  a
           departure from existing country  guidance,  the  tribunal  finds
           that the Appellant faces no serious risk of individual threat of
           harm in Afghanistan and so has no need  of  nor  entitlement  to
           humanitarian protection.


      46.   As to the Appellant's human rights, on the  tribunal's  findings
           of fact, the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  there  are
           substantial grounds for believing that the consequences  of  the
           Respondent's decision to remove him would lead to a real risk of
           the breach of any  of  his  protected  human  rights  under  the
           European Convention on Human Rights.  While  the  Appellant  has
           been absent from Afghanistan for a lengthy period,  he  has  not
           been absent from Afghani culture.  He lives with a  cousin  from
           Afghanistan.  The Appellant speaks Pashtu  and  belongs  to  the
           dominant Pashtun ethnic group.  It is obvious that many  Afghans
           who live in other parts of the world return  to  their  homeland
           frequently.  The Appellant is an intelligent young man who has a
           greater experience of life than most young men of his  age.   He
           is able to work and has marketable skills.  There is  no  reason
           to  believe  that  he  cannot  adapt  to  life  in  Afghanistan.
           Importantly,  he  will  have  the  opportunity  to  re-establish
           contact with his family.  There are no very serious obstacles to
           his reintegration.


      47.   The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for a  substantial
           period.  It has to be said that his entry to the United  Kingdom
           was based on a false  claim  and  he  has  received  substantial
           benefits in consequence.  While his Article 8  ECHR  claim  must
           succeed because of the terms of the Home Office policy, for  the
           reasons given above, if proportionality were otherwise  an  open
           question, the tribunal would  dismiss  his  appeal  because  the
           public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control   is   a
           legitimate objective.  For the reasons given  earlier,  however,
           the Article 8 ECHR appeal must succeed because the  Home  Office
           has indicated  by  its  own  policy  where  the  proportionality
           balance lies.  It follows that he is  now  entitled  to  settled
           status.




      DECISION


      The tribunal dismisses the asylum appeal


      The tribunal dismisses the humanitarian protection appeal


      The tribunal allows the human rights appeal (Article 8 ECHR)


      Signed                                  Dated 9 March 2018




      Designated Judge Manuell
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      There can be no fee award




      Designated Judge Manuell                Dated 9 March 2018
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






