
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00785/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26 June 2013                                 |On 2 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                   mr m s
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kash Behbahani, with Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, an Iranian citizen, appeals with permission against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver, who on  26  February
    2013 dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain on asylum  or  other  international  protection
    grounds.  The appellant was born in September 1993 and is 19 years old.



The appellant's account

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in March 2011 as a student and
    claimed asylum in April 2012, claiming that his position  in  Iran  had
    been compromised and the  Iranian  authorities  were  looking  for  him
    because his English language teacher,  X,  who  was  a  friend  of  his
    father, had been arrested  with  a  copy  of  the  appellant's  Iranian
    identity card and  a  caricature  depicting  the  Supreme  Leader,  the
    President, and the Speaker of  the  Majlis  Parliament  in  Iran.   The
    appellant's father was said to have told him  about  this  on  7  April
    2012, when he was arrested to discover the appellant's whereabouts.

 3. The appellant's  English  language  teacher  was  also  the  editor  of
    [newspaper]:  the appellant at his request  had  given  X  a  USB  disk
    containing  caricatures  which  he  had  collected,  as  well  as   the
    appellant's birth certificate and identity card, so  that  the  teacher
    could send them to Highlight Global Agency who were  dealing  with  his
    student visa.

 4. The appellant now said that his father had telephoned him on 21 January
    2012, two days after X's arrest, to say that the police had raided  the
    family home, seizing  the  family's  satellite  dish,  the  appellant's
    computer, and posters  of  the  opposition  leader,  Mr  Mousavi.   The
    appellant and two or  three  friends  had  exchanged  among  themselves
    caricatures they found on the internet, about 300-400 of them, most  of
    which were political.  The same  caricatures  had  been  found  on  his
    computer and in X's office. The appellant did not know  whether  X  had
    been detained or charged after his arrest.

 5.  The  core  of  the  judge's  reasoning  is  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    determination.  It is challenged by the appellant  on  the  grounds  of
    material mistake of facts and failure to consider material evidence.

First-tier Tribunal determination

 6. The Secretary of State accepted that X had indeed been arrested, as was
    evidenced by country evidence produced by the appellant, showing that X
    was bailed for $220,000 after approximately one week in detention.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge disbelieved  the  appellant's  core  account,
    partly for want of corroboration and partly for implausibility.

Grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant argued that the evidence about X's arrest in  the  public
    domain  was  corroborative  of  his  account;  that   in   any   event,
    corroboration is not required in asylum appeals; and that  the   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed properly to consider  the  relevant  country
    guidance decisions (SZ and JM  (Christians  -  FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00082, SB (risk on return-illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00053 and BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC)) and  some  evidence  from  Amnesty  International
    dated February 2012, which post-dated that guidance.   He  argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination lacked  anxious  scrutiny
    and was unsound.

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on 15 April 2013, noting that the grounds on which the appellant sought
    permission  did  not  suggest  that  the  appellant  could  succeed  by
    reference to Article 8 ECHR, but that there might be some substance  in
    the remainder of the grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

 9. The Secretary of State filed a Rule 24  Reply,  the  material  part  of
    which reads as follows:

         "4.  There is  no  independent  corroboration  of  the  appellant's
             narrative.  It was previously accepted that  X  was  detained,
             however this is not relevant  to  evidencing  the  appellant's
             claim.
         5.   The judge was entitled  to  find  that  on  the  evidence  the
             appellant appeared to accept that X  had  not  been  arrested.
             There was no background evidence to suggest otherwise.
         6.   Equally  the  judge  was  neither  expected  nor  required  to
             speculate on  the  appellant's  treatment  on  return  as  the
             appellant's account was rejected.  The country  guidance  does
             not demonstrate real  risk  to  a  discredited  failed  asylum
             seeker with no political  profile.   The  background  evidence
             referenced does not assist the  appellant  given  the  adverse
             findings."

10. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

11. The reasoning in this determination was plainly inadequate.    Although
    the burden and standard of proof is set out at paragraph 12, in a  long
    excerpt from MA Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059, and at paragraph  14,  a
    statement reflecting the decision in Chiver is  accurately  summarised,
    without being named, the judge's reasoning at  paragraph  17  conflates
    the findings of fact and the assessment of credibility and  indeed  may
    assess credibility at too high a standard.

12. Applying R (Iran), paragraph 90, I am unable to understand the  judge's
    approach to credibility nor indeed what he did or  did  not  take  into
    account amongst the documents which the appellant  has  raised  in  his
    grounds.

13. Having discussed the matter with the parties  it  is  agreed  that  the
    level of reasoning is such as to constitute a material error of law and
    that this appeal will have to be re-heard in the First-tier.

Date:                      Signed
                                                              Judith Gleeson
                                                        Upper Tribunal Judge
