
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00079/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 22 May  2013                               |On 4 June 2013               |
|Prepared 22 May   2013                        |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                                   Between

                          Mrs Sumathy Thanisagaraj
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, of Counsel instructed by K Ravi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. At the hearing of the appeal before me the representatives  of  both
       parties     agreed that there were material errors  of  law  in  the
       determination of the Judge of the First-tier tribunal in that he had
       reached his conclusions that the appellant  was not credible  before
        considering the medical evidence and  that  ,  in  any   event  his
       conclusions were overly brief and  did  not  clearly   set  out  his
       conclusions regarding the scars which were detailed in the report of
       Dr Lingham.
         5. I am satisfied that this is an appeal in which the  requirements
       of the Senior President's Practice Statement  paragraph 7.2(a)   are
       met.
         6.  I therefore allow the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  to  the
       limited extent that it is remitted to the First -tier Tribunal to be
       heard afresh on all issues.


Directions.
        a. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  It  will  be
           heard at Hatton Cross House on  9  July  2013:  3  hours,  Tamil
           Interpreter.
        b. The appellant's  representatives  shall  prepare  and  serve  an
           indexed and paginated bundle of all documents including  medical
           reports, statements and background documentation on  which  they
           wish to rely.





Signed                                  Date: 22 May 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
