
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00490/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 30 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     vym
                      (anonymity direction maintained)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Mavazu, Walters, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, VYM, is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  I shall hereafter refer
    to the respondent  as  the  appellant  and  to  the  appellant  as  the
    respondent (as they were respectively before the First-tier  Tribunal).
    The appellant entered the United Kingdom in December 2003  and  applied
    for asylum in April 2013.  Her application for asylum  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 10 January 2014 and  a  decision  was  also  made  to
    remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8-10 of  Schedule  2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shimmin) which, in  a  determination  dated  20  February  2014,
    allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  and  under  the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 276ADE).  The respondent now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman in the following
    terms:

         The permission judge [First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird] did not  deal
         with the Home Office's point about the  hearing  judge  not  having
         considered CM (EM country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  [2013]
         UKUT (IAC) 59.

    In a detailed refusal of permission, Judge Bird had  rejected  each  of
    the grounds advanced to her by the Secretary of State.  It is not clear
    from Judge Freeman's grant of permission whether he intended to revisit
    those other grounds for which permission had been refused in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In any event, the sole focus of the submissions in  the
    Upper Tribunal was on the ground as summarised by Judge Freeman.

 3. The respondent submits that the judge erred in law by failing  to  take
    account of country guidance.  It is true that the judge did  not  refer
    to any item of country guidance and jurisprudence in his determination.
     This does not, however,  mean  that  he  did  not  apply  the  country
    guidance.  The submission made in the grounds of  appeal  is  that  the
    judge's finding at [39] did not follow the country guidance of CM.   At
    [39], the judge wrote:

         I find that the appellant has established  there  is  a  reasonable
         likelihood that she would be subjected to detailed interrogation by
         the CIO on arrival at Harare Airport and so be at real risk of harm
         such as to infringe either Convention.

 4. Citing head note 4(d) of CM, the respondent submitted that the  judge's
    finding was not sustainable:

    d) The fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return
    does not indicate any increase in risk since the Country  Guidance  was
    given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094.
    On the contrary, the available evidence as to the  treatment  of  those
    who have been returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence  of
    any  reliable  evidence  of  risk  there  means  that   there   is   no
    justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded  by  the
    CIO as an MDC activist.

 5. The judge had found that the appellant had told  the  truth  about  her
    role as an anti-ZANU-PF activist.  Indeed, he records at [30] that  the
    Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  the  appellant's  account  of  her
    activities was true and accurate.  There appears  to  be  some  dispute
    whether the Presenting Officer also accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    been  sexually  abused  as  claimed  (Mr  Diwnycz  indicated  that  the
    Presenting Officer's  note  of  the  hearing  did  not  record  such  a
    concession) but this appeal does not turn on that issue.   Although  it
    is asserted in the grounds that the judge should  not  have  found  the
    appellant's account to have been credible, I find  that  he  has  given
    sufficient reasons in the determination for accepting her evidence.  As
    regards his finding at [39],  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  is
    contrary to the passage from  the  head  note  of  CM  upon  which  the
    respondent now seeks to rely.  CM did not reverse the previous  country
    guidance of HS (returning asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00094 in that it did not  extend  the  scope  of  those  who  might  be
    regarded by the CIO as MDC activists or actively opposed to the ZANU-PF
    regime.  The fact that the scope of those  possibly  at  risk  was  not
    extended does not, of course, mean that those who  were  previously  at
    risk no longer faced any danger at Harare Airport.  The Tribunal in  HS
    had identified a risk to "those seen to be active in  association  with
    human rights and civil society  organisations  when  evidence  suggests
    that a particular organisation has been identified by  the  authorities
    as a critic or opponent of  the  Zimbabwean  regime."   HS  found  that
    returning passengers would be subject to screening by the CIO "who will
    generally have identified from the passenger manifest in advance, based
    upon such intelligence, those passengers in whom there is any  possible
    interest."  In the present case, the judge  found  that  "although  the
    appellant's  profile  in  respect  of  her  activities   in   attending
    demonstrations in support of the MDC in the UK  is  not  high  ...  her
    profile is substantially elevated by the anti-Mugabe articles  she  has
    written on the internet." [37].  Whilst it would have been  helpful  if
    Judge Shimmin had made an  express  finding  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant would be identified by the Zimbabwean authorities in  advance
    of her arrival as a potential threat to the regime, such  a  conclusion
    is clearly implicit in his findings.  In the light of the evidence (and
    also the Secretary of  State's  concession  regarding  the  appellant's
    account), I find that it was open to the judge  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant fell within the category of returnee identified in  HS.   His
    conclusion that the appellant would be consequently at risk was not  at
    odds with CM.

 6. More problematic is the judge's finding at [40] that one of the factors
    which might expose the appellant to risk would  be  her  "inability  to
    demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF".  EM (affirmed by CM)  makes  it  clear
    that challenges to individuals to show that they are supporters of ZANU-
    PF no longer pose a general threat to those returning from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Having said that, it was clearly in the judge's mind that the
    appellant's activism in the UK and her anti-Zimbabwean postings on  the
    internet were most likely to lead her to face a threat on return and  I
    find that his comments regarding her inability to  demonstrate  loyalty
    should be read in the context of the  likely  interrogation  which  she
    would undergo at Harare Airport.  Whilst general and random  challenges
    to individuals to show support  may  no  longer  occur  to  the  extent
    detailed in previous country guidance,  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    might be identified in advance of her arrival as  an  opponent  of  the
    Zimbabwean regime and would then, under  interrogation,  be  unable  to
    demonstrate support for that regime are  factors  which  would  clearly
    expose her to a real risk of harm.

 7. In conclusion, whilst it would have been helpful for the judge to  have
    referred to current country guidance in his determination, his  failure
    to do so does not constitute an error of law whilst his findings, based
    upon the evidence and supported  by  good  and  clear  reasoning,  were
    clearly open to him and support his conclusion that the appellant faces
    the reasonable likelihood of harm upon return to Zimbabwe.

 8. As regards the remaining grounds, I refer to Judge Bird's refusal which
    was not revisited by Judge Freeman in the Upper Tribunal.  I agree with
    the reasons she has given for rejecting those grounds of appeal.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
