
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00363/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 26 January 2015                   |On 26 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS sitting as an UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MAERWAISE AHMADZAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    with leave against the  decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie promulgated on 26 November 2014 allowing the asylum appeal of
    Maerwaise Ahmadzai ('the respondent',) pursuant to section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to grant asylum under rule 336 of  HC395  or  to  grant
    other protection, and  to  give  directions  for  the  removal  of  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appeal raises two issues.  First,  the  failure  by  the  Judge  to
    consider whether the respondent should be excluded from protection from
    the Refugee Convention under Article 1F.  Second, the  alleged  logical
    flaw in the Judge's reasoning in rejecting the objective evidence of an
    amnesty  being  in  place  for  former  insurgents  in  Afghanistan,  a
    reluctance to seek amnesty because of continued support for a terrorist
    organisation not being able to found a legitimate asylum claim.

 3. The respondent is a national of Afghanistan with a given date of  birth
    of 1st January 1976.  He entered the United Kingdom, clandestinely,  on
    4th December 2009.  His  entry  was  detected  and  he  claimed  asylum
    immediately upon entry.  He was not interviewed in connection with  his
    claim until 18th July 2012 and the decision on his claim was  not  made
    until 8th January 2014.  In paragraphs 4-9 inclusive of  his  Decision,
    the Judge set  out  the  respondent's  allegations  of  fact.   Briefly
    summarised, the respondent's family lived in the  Laghman  Province  in
    Afghanistan.  The respondent, when he  had  turned  18  in  about  1994
    joined his father and brother as a member of Hizb  e-Islami.   In  1997
    that organisation  became  allied  with  the  Taliban.   From  2002  he
    remained under arms as part  of  Hizb  e-Islami  or  Taliban  defending
    themselves from the government.  In 2007, his father and elder  brother
    together  with  a  Commander  Pushtoon  were  killed  in   a   military
    bombardment.   In  2009,  the  respondent  and  his  group  came  under
    bombardment.  He fled  with  others  and  made  arrangements  to  leave
    Afghanistan, which he did, using false documentation.  His family  have
    migrated to Peshawar as undisplaced persons to avoid one  of  his  sons
    being forcibly recruited into anti-government forces.   He  fears  that
    were he returned to Afghanistan he would be at real risk of persecution
    on account of his history as a combatant insurgent and be  obliged,  in
    order to avoid the authorities and, in response to  pressure  form  his
    fellow combatants, to re-engage in insurgency against the authorities.

 4. The appellant, in her refusal letter of 8th January 2014, accepted  the
    respondent was a member of both  Hizb  e-Islami  and  the  Taliban  but
    asserted he would not be at risk on return and would have a  reasonable
    opportunity of internal relocation in Afghanistan.  It  was  considered
    his claim had  no  credibility.   The  Judge  went  on  to  assess  the
    appellant's credibility and made  findings  that  there  was  no  cause
    arising from his immigration history to treat any part of his  evidence
    as suspect and that he was credible indicating that "he  is  likely  to
    have attempted if anything to underplay his  experience  as  an  active
    insurgent under arms" [para. 22].  The Judge also accepted the evidence
    of the expert and found that the respondent would be at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.

 5. In relation to the first ground of appeal, at an earlier hearing it was
    directed that the appellant should, if she  intended  to  take  such  a
    point, state her position in respect of whether or not  the  respondent
    is, by reason of his past history, to be excluded from protection as  a
    refugee (under Article 1F).  This was not raised at the hearing  before
    Judge Gillespie; Ms Isherwood, at the hearing of the appeal,  she  said
    there was no copy of the earlier order in the  file.   Accordingly,  no
    such point was taken by the appellant.  The Judge went on to state that
    no evidence was given by which the respondent could  be  excluded  from
    protection.  It is unclear as to whether the issue was addressed at all
    either in the evidence  or  by  way  of  submission.   What  is  clear,
    however, is that at no stage did the Judge directly address  the  issue
    in his decision following his findings of active insurgency as a member
    of a proscribed group, as Hizb e-Islami is and was, as  to  whether  he
    was excluded from protection under Article 1F.

 6. In the Summary of Conclusions  in  Gurung  (Refugee  Exclusion  Clauses
    especially  1F(b)  Nepal  CG  [2002]  04870  at  paragraph  151.4   the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal stated: -

         "It would be wrong for adjudicators to adopt an "exclusion culture"
         and go searching in every case for exclusion issues under  Art  1F.
         Pragmatism is called for.  However, the Exclusion  Clauses  are  in
         mandatory terms and where obvious issues  arise  under  them  these
         must be addressed by an adjudicator, even if the Secretary of State
         has not raised them expressly or by implication in the Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter.  That may happen  prior  to  the  hearing,  at  the
         outset of the hearing or during it.  This approach is subject  only
         to the need to ensure procedural fairness."

    This followed from an earlier passage in  the  Tribunal's  Judgment  at
    paragraph 38 referring to the mandatory terms of Article 1F:

         "... The mandatory wording admits of no discretion.   The  question
         of whether or not a person falls under the Exclusion Clauses is not
         an  optional  one:  it  is  an  integral  part   of   the   refugee
         determination assessment."

 7. Although aspects of the approach to be taken in  resolving  whether  an
    asylum claimant should be excluded from protection under Article 1F  or
    not formulated in Gurung (ante) were criticised by the Supreme Court in
    R. (on the application of JS) (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC and it was laid down how that issue  should
    be resolved in individual cases, it was  not  suggested  the  principle
    that the issue of exclusion must be addressed in all such cases or  the
    way that it was suggested this may be done was incorrect.   Indeed,  it
    had earlier been formally approved of  and  adopted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in A (Iraq) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
    EWCA Civ 1438.

 8. Accordingly, it was incumbent upon the Judge to address this issue.  It
    was submitted on the respondent's  behalf  that  the  matter  had  been
    raised earlier and considered and that, inferentially, the  determining
    Judge did so.  We do not agree.  The matter was raised  at  an  earlier
    hearing by a different Judge at an earlier hearing who  made  an  order
    which seems to have been ignored, in all probability because  it  never
    came to the appellant's attention.  The decision itself  is,  at  best,
    opaque on the issue and it is of significance that, having accepted the
    respondent's evidence as to active participation with Hizb e-Islami and
    the Taliban and considered  he  was  more  actively  involved  than  he
    asserted and, thereby, rejected the appellant's case, the Judge did not
    go on to refer to, let alone address Article 1F.

 9. By failing so to do, the Judge erred in law and we allow the appeal  on
    this ground.  In these circumstances we do not  need  to  consider  the
    second ground of appeal.  We set the decision aside and order that  the
    matter be remitted  for  the  respondent's  asylum  application  to  be
    determined by a different Judge.

10. The findings of fact made by the Judge have not been challenged by  the
    appellant and shall, therefore, stand at the next hearing.



Signed
                                                        Date 29 January 2015

......................................
Mr Justice Goss

