

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: AA/00042/2014
                                                               AA/00048/2014
                                                               AA/00051/2014
                                                               AA/00052/2014
                                                               AA/00053/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 25th June 2014                                  |On 10th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:

                             BS, NR, RS, MR, AMS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms P Yong, instructed by Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.    The Appellants are citizens of Georgia. They  are  husband,  wife  and
      three children. Their appeals are dependant on the First Appellant and
      therefore I shall refer to him as the Appellant in this appeal against
      the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  dated  12th  February  2014
      dismissing his appeal,  against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  12th
      December 2013 to remove him, on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
      human rights grounds.



2.    Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  on
      20th February 2014 on the  grounds  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
      Appellant should have been able to have an interpreter  of  choice  as
      far as language was concerned.  Further,  it  was  arguable  that,  in
      finding that the Appellant could internally relocate,  the  Judge  did
      not have regard to the fact that he had been able  to  live  elsewhere
      because he was in hiding. The Judge failed to deal with the difficulty
      for the family as a whole, particularity the children,  if  they  were
      required to spend their lives in hiding in order to remain safe.

3.    At the hearing before me, Ms Yong relied on the grounds of appeal  and
      submitted that the Judge's finding that there was no interest  in  the
      Appellant, after he relocated to Rustavi, was wrong in law because  it
      would be unduly harsh for the whole  family  to  relocate.  The  Judge
      found that the Appellant had been persecuted in the past and there was
      no reason to think that he would not be targeted on return. The police
      had failed to protect him and he could not seek the protection of  the
      authorities because of his  ethnicity.  Internal  relocation  was  not
      viable as the Appellant could not deny his  ethnicity  and  remain  in
      hiding (SA (political activist - internal relocation)  Pakistan  [2011
      UKUT 30).

4.    In addition, the Judge failed to consider whether the Appellant  could
      work in Georgia given his mental condition  and  suicidal  tendencies.
      The Judge failed to consider  the  medical  evidence  before  him,  in
      particular his daughter's asthma, and failed to make a  clear  finding
      on whether the Appellant and his family could relocate.

5.    Mr Jack submitted that the Judge had taken  into  account  the  expert
      report which included all relevant sources. At paragraphs  45  to  50,
      the Judge found that the background material did not show a consistent
      pattern of persecution. The Appellant would not be targeted because of
      his ethnicity and discrimination was faced by many  different  groups.
      The Judge's failure to mention a  specific  report  was  not  material
      since the evidence did  not  show  widespread  persecution  on  ethnic
      grounds in any event. The Judge made findings  on  the  expert  report
      which was sufficient.

6.    The Judge was aware that the Appellant was in hiding in  Rustavi,  but
      there was no suggestion that anyone  came  looking  for  him.  If  the
      police had any interest in the Appellant they would have gone to  look
      for him whether he was in hiding or not. He had failed  to  show  that
      the police had an ongoing interest in him. He was persecuted by  three
      rogue police officers in the local market in  which  he  was  trading.
      There was no evidence before the  Judge  to  show  that  these  police
      officers had tried to track him down when he was no longer running his
      market stall. The Judge's findings at paragraph 53 were well  reasoned
      and not perverse.






7.    Mr Jack submitted that the Judge accepted that the Appellant had  been
      in hiding prior to coming to the UK,  but  found  that  there  was  no
      evidence that anyone had come looking for him. There was no  need  for
      the Appellant to live in hiding and he could internally  relocate  and
      re-establish his business elsewhere.

8.    This case could be distinguished from SA:  The  Appellant  was  not  a
      political activist and would not  be  required  to  change  an  innate
      characteristic. There was no suggestion he  would  have  to  hide  his
      ethnicity. The Appellant could safely relocate as a Yezidi.  He  could
      avoid persecution from the three rogue individuals by relocation.  The
      conduct of the police officers did not form part of a wider systematic
      attack according to the addendum to the expert report.  The  Appellant
      had not shown that the three  police  officers  were  still  operating
      policemen who were capable of tracing him. There  was  sufficiency  of
      protection and the Judge's findings were open to him.

9.    Mr Jack submitted that  the  Judge  had  considered  section  55;  the
      children were young and their nuclear  ties  were  within  the  family
      unit. Disruption to their education would only be temporary and  there
      was little adverse effect on them; asthma was not a fundamental issue.
      There was no reference to the Appellant's suicidal tendencies  in  any
      of the documents and he had failed to show that he or his  wife  could
      not re-establish themselves because of his PTSD. The  Judge's  overall
      conclusion was not perverse and there was no material error of law  in
      the determination.

10.   Ms Yong submitted that the Judge should have considered  the  most  up
      to date background evidence dated  2014  in  addition  to  the  expert
      report. The police officers had the power to locate the Appellant  and
      he could not seek protection from the police if they did so.  Ms  Yong
      accepted that there was no evidence before  the  Judge  to  show  that
      anyone was looking for the Appellant outside Tbilisi or since he  came
      to the UK. However, the police officers had the capability to find him
      and the Judge had failed to make  a  finding  on  this  issue  and  on
      whether he would  have  to  live  in  hiding.  Police  corruption  was
      widespread and the Appellant would not be safe anywhere in Georgia.


Discussion and conclusions

11.   Ms Yong did not rely on Ground 1 and stated that she was  not  relying
      on interpreter difficulties as the Judge found  the  Appellant  to  be
      credible and accepted his account. There was no  indication  that  the
      Judge got any of the facts wrong.





12.   The Judge found that the Appellant  ran  a  market  stall  in  Tbilisi
      selling clothes and shoes and that he was targeted  for  extortion  by
      three police officers, at least in part on grounds of his ethnicity as
      a Yezidi. The Appellant was abducted,  beaten  and  stabbed  by  these
      police officers. He would be at risk of further persecution  by  these
      three officers if returned to Tbilisi.

13.   The Judge was not satisfied on the evidence  before  him  (the  expert
      report and background  material)  that  Yezidis  suffered  persecution
      because of their ethnicity throughout Georgia. Ms Yong submitted  that
      the Judge had failed to take into  account  the  latest  ECOI  network
      report and the Human  Rights  Watch  [HRW]  report  on  Georgia  2014.
      However, the  Judge  specifically  quoted  from  the  ECOI  report  at
      paragraph 47 of his determination and there was nothing in the ECOI or
      HRW report to contradict his findings. The extracts relied on  in  the
      grounds of appeal did not establish that Yezidi's were  persecuted  by
      the police as a whole and there was systematic abuse, so as to  render
      the contrary finding perverse.

14.   The Judge found  that  the  Appellant  had  lived  with  relatives  in
      Rustavi for 6 to 7 months, during which time he came to no harm. There
      was no suggestion that anyone came looking for him.  It  was  accepted
      that there was no evidence before the Judge to  show  that  the  three
      police officers had tried  to  locate  the  Appellant  after  he  left
      Tbilisi or since he left Georgia in 2007. The Appellant may well  have
      been in hiding in Rustavi, but that did not alter the  fact  that  the
      authorities had no interest in the Appellant after he left Tbilisi.

15.   The Appellant's wife remained in Georgia living with  relatives  until
      2010. She did not have any problems with the authorities.  She  stated
      in oral evidence that she had not left the house and  her  mother  did
      the shopping. There was no evidence that the police had  come  looking
      for the Appellant. The oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  wife  was
      consistent with the Judge's finding that the police  officers  had  no
      interest in the Appellant after he left Tbilisi.

16.   The Judge found that the Appellant was  not  a  political  figure  who
      might be sought  out  by  the  government  or  security  forces  as  a
      potential 'enemy of the state.'  SA was distinguishable on its  facts.
      I find that the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant would not be  at
      real risk of persecution or other ill treatment if he  returned  to  a
      different part of Georgia was open to him on the evidence before him.

17.   The Judge took into account section 55  of  the  Borders,  Immigration
      and Citizenship Act 2009 and considered  the  best  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration. They came to the  UK  with  their
      mother in 2010. The Judge acknowledged the disruption to the education
      of the older children and found that there was nothing  to  show  that
      they could not re-adjust to life in Georgia. The daughter's asthma was
      treatable and there was no evidence before the Judge to show that  she
      could not obtain treatment in Georgia.



18.   The Judge also  acknowledged  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the
      Appellant to re-establish himself in business or employment,  but  the
      evidence did not indicate that it was  unreasonable.  The  Judge  took
      into account  the  medical  evidence  at  paragraph  61.  His  overall
      conclusion that the Appellant and his family could safely relocate  in
      Georgia and their removal would not breach Article 8 was open  to  him
      on the evidence.

19.         The Judge made no error on any point of law which might  require
      the determination to be set aside. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  12th
      February 2014 shall stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
4th July 2014
