
[pic]
ar

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00830/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 22 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                             GULULIKAYISE NCUBE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Caskie, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a South African national, appeals the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Burns who dismissed her appeal against the decision
    dated 28 January 2014 to remove her as an illegal  entrant.   This  was
    for reasons given by the respondent in an accompanying  letter  of  the
    same date.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  Dumisani  Ndlovu,  her
    husband.

 3. It is the appellant's case that she is not South African but a national
    of Zimbabwe.  She had been in the United Kingdom  previously  in  2002.
    She returned to South Africa with her daughter later that year but came
    back to the UK in May 2003  on  a  South  African  passport.   She  was
    refused entry.  In June 2003 she applied for a visa in  Pretoria  which
    was refused in July. It is the appellant's case that  she  nevertheless
    returned that month. She was encountered in August 2004 when trying  to
    open a bank account using a passport with a forged stamp. In  September
    2004 the appellant claimed asylum but then  withdrew  her  claim  after
    appealing on the basis that she would be reapplying as  a  national  of
    Zimbabwe.

 4. Between 2008 and 2011 a number of representations were made to the SSHD
    which were considered and rejected resulting in removal  directions  as
    an illegal entrant on 28 January 2014.

 5. The appellant and her husband separated in 2009.  He  is  currently  in
    the United Kingdom but has no lawful immigration  status.   The  couple
    had met in Zimbabwe in 1993 where they had married  in  December  2000.
    The couple had a daughter who accompanied the appellant on her visit to
    the United Kingdom in 2002.  She has since died.  The couple also  have
    a son who was born on 24 October 2007 in the United Kingdom.

 6. In her reasons letter the Secretary of State explained why she did  not
    consider the appellant would be at risk in  Zimbabwe.  It  was  unclear
    what had happened to the appellant's daughter who had returned with her
    to South Africa in 2003.  Furthermore, the appellant would  not  be  at
    risk in South Africa.

 7. The respondent accepted the appellant had established  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom with her son Khaya and she considered the case under
    the Rules for  leave  to  remain  as  a  parent.   She  considered  the
    appellant failed under S-LTR.1.6 on  the  basis  that  the  applicant's
    presence was not conducive to the public  good  in  the  light  of  her
    dishonest and deceptive behaviour.  It was also refused under S-LTR.1.7
    on the basis of a failure  to  provide  the  Secretary  of  State  with
    accurate  information.   Paragraph  276ADE  was  also  considered   but
    rejected because the appellant could  not  meet  the  criterion  as  to
    length of time in this country.

 8. Returning to EX.1(a), this was found not to apply  as  the  appellant's
    son and daughter  had lived in the United Kingdom for three  years  and
    four months and one year and six months respectively. It was considered
    that the appellant's son, Khaya, was young enough to adapt to  life  in
    either South Africa or Zimbabwe.

 9. The judge  found  the  appellant  and  her  husband  to  be  unreliable
    witnesses and not credible.  Furthermore, he  considered  the  evidence
    from an expert,  Susan  Baird,  inconsistent  and  poorly  argued.   He
    concluded the evidence did not establish  a  good  arguable  case  with
    reference to MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 or Gulshan  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT
    00640.

10. Although not reaching a definitive conclusion on nationality, the judge
    expressed a view that a better case was  made  out  for  the  appellant
    being South African or having some form of status there.

11. The challenge to this decision accepts that the negative findings  were
    open to the judge but it is argued that he had failed to  carry  out  a
    full and proper assessment of what was in the best interests of  Khaya.
    The fact that parents have a precarious immigration history must not be
    used against the children.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  did  not
    appear adequately to engage with the relevant issues  relating  to  the
    son's interests nor give an indication as to what  was  in  those  best
    interests.

13. It was clarified by Mr Caskie that the appellant had not reapplied  for
    asylum but this aspect was addressed  in  the  further  representations
    made between 2008 and 2011.  He argued that the effect of the grant  of
    permission to appeal was to widen the grounds of application to include
    a challenge to the adequacy of reasons by the judge.

14. After hearing submissions on the point, I  explained  that  I  did  not
    accept this argument.  The grounds of  challenge  in  the  application,
    after an introduction to the history of the matter, is in these terms:

         "The  Immigration  Judge  made  significant  negative   credibility
         findings at paragraph 26 of his determination.  It is accepted that
         these findings were open to him. It is, however, that as  a  result
         of the negative credibility of the appellant, the Immigration Judge
         has failed to carry out a full and proper assessment of what is  in
         the best interests of the appellant's son, Khaya Oliver Ndlovu, who
         was a dependent on the appeal.

         It is submitted that in line with ZH (Tanzania)  (SC)  SSHD  [2011]
         UKSC 4 at paragraph 44, the fact that the parents have a precarious
         immigration history must not be used against the  children  and  it
         would be wrong in principle  to  devaluate  what  is  in  the  best
         interests of the child by something for which the child could in no
         way be held responsible. It is submitted that the Immigration Judge
         has found the appellant to be an incredible and unreliable  witness
         and as a result of this has failed to carry out  an  assessment  of
         the child's best interests.  It is submitted that this  amounts  to
         an error of law.

         Permission to appeal is respectively sought in respect of the above
         grounds."

15. Even if I were persuaded that when granting permission it  is  open  to
    the decision maker to extend the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  additional
    basis of challenge sought by Mr Caskie is simply not available  on  the
    text of the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson.

16. By way of substantive submissions Mr Caskie made the following points:

    (i) The judge had taken his "eye off the ball"  in  taking  a  negative
    view as to the report of Miss Burnes. It was  clear  from  that  report
    that the child regarded his home as a place of safety;

    (ii) The judge had failed to carry out any assessment as to what was in
    the child's best interests. The decision in EV (Philippines)  &  Ors  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 makes it clear in its assessment in [36]  that
    once it is established that it is in the interests to stay it does  not
    operate as a light switch. The judge needed to  consider  how  emphatic
    the assessment of  best  interests  were.   Mr  Caskie  contrasted  the
    position to where it was marginally in the best interests of the  child
    to stay with those when it was clearly in such interests that he should
    do so.  The judge in the case before the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    explained the outcome of the first question and therefore had failed to
    emphasise the second point which was how emphatic those interests  were
    stated;

    (iii) In reaching his conclusion that there was no  evidence  that  the
    father could not follow the appellant and child to their  own  country,
    the judge had asked the wrong question. It was not whether  the  father
    could go but whether he would go.

17. By way of response Mr Jack observed that the grounds of application did
    not challenge the findings in the report by Susan Baird.  He considered
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for findings and referred  me
    to specific passages from the determination which I  consider  in  more
    detail below. The judge was clearly aware of all the facts and  issues.
    It was not necessary for the judge to  make  a  decision  on  the  best
    interests outside the Rules as those interests were catered for in  the
    Rules.  Even if it could  be argued that the  best  interests  had  not
    been taken into account the error was not material if the determination
    was read as a whole.

18. Before hearing Mr Caskie's reply, and  particularly  in  light  of  his
    correct submission that the decisions of the Court of Appeal in England
    and Wales were not binding in Scotland, I drew  his  attention  to  the
    decision in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 in particular the judgment of
    Lord Hodge at [12].

19. Mr Caskie argued that Lord Hodge had "pulled back" from what Lord  Kerr
    has said in ZH (Tanzania).  He concluded his submissions in terms  that
    if the determination were allowed to stand it would be without adequate
    consideration of the point on which there was  error  in  that  it  was
    appropriate to have regard to the immigration history of the  appellant
    when deciding the child's best interests.

20.  I  reach  the  following  conclusions.   This  is  a  case  where  the
    circumstances of the appellant when considered in isolation or combined
    with those of her son do not enable them to benefit from the  provision
    in FM including EX.1.  Whilst the negative credibility findings are not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal it is argued  that  the  impact  of
    those findings resulted in a failure to carry out  a  full  and  proper
    assessment of the best  interests  of  Khaya.   I  cannot  accept  this
    argument.

21. Although it is correct that the judge did not specifically refer to the
    "best interests", I am sastified that in substance  this  is  precisely
    what he did.  It is clear that the best interests were uppermost in his
    mind having regard to his record of the evidence from the appellant  at
    [12] to [14] and the evidence from her husband at [15]  to  [17].   The
    judge also set out relevant extracts from Susan Baird's report at  [19]
    to [21].  Likewise the judge also recorded in detail the submissions on
    the appellant's behalf including a number of specific references to the
    child's circumstances at [24].

22. The judge turned to his assessment of Susan Baird's report at [27].  It
    is significant that the grounds of challenge do  not  seek  to  disturb
    those conclusions which to my mind were unlawfully open  to  the  judge
    having regard to the report.

23. The extract from the judgment of Lord Hodge in Zoumbas to which I  drew
    the parties' attention is at [24] in these terms:

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated  that
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their partners stayed in the United  Kingdom
         so they could obtain such benefits as  health  care  and  education
         which the decision maker recognised mighty be of a higher  standard
         than would be available in Congo. But other things were not  equal.
         They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to  future
         education and health care in this country.  They were parent  of  a
         close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an  age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit. Such integration as had  occurred  into  the
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision  maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care  of  their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to  tier
         wellbeing.  We agree with Lady Dorian's  succinct  summary  of  the
         position in paragraph 18 of the Inner House's opinion."

24. I readily accept that in embarking on a comparison with skilled workers
    moving between EU countries the judge turned his focus from  the  facts
    before him but any  concerns  about  that  are  corrected  in  [28]  as
    follows:

         "Insofar as the facts of the case were concerned, it is commonplace
         that Article 8 us a qualified right, and that countries  and  [sic]
         entitle to select which immigrants they wish to have,  as  proposed
         to  having that choice thrust upon them.  All that can be said here
         is that the young child in question is happy, well  adjusted,  and,
         like all children of his age, is reluctant to move from his present
         settled circumstances.   He has  some  form  of  contact  with  his
         father, but it is haphazard and  uncertain.    The  future  of  the
         parents'  relationship  is  speculative.  There  was  no   evidence
         advanced before me that the father could not follow the mother  and
         child to their own country, although obviously he does to want  to.
         All that in my view did not constitute "a good  arguable  case"  in
         terms of MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 or Gulshan v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2013] UKUT  00640.   The  case  admittedly
         fails under the Rules which  otherwise  are  determinative  of  the
         parties' Article 8 rights."

25. I am satisfied that the judge took proper account of the  child's  best
    interests and reached a permissible conclusion  on  article  8  grounds
    based on factual findings open to him on the evidence after  a  correct
    direction as to the law. His reasoning is succinct but clear and  I  am
    not persuaded that he erred in law.

26. This appeal is dimissed.


Signed                                        Date 20 August 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


