
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00018/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2016                 |On 9 November 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     M B
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass (counsel) instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant preserving the anonymity order made in  the
First-tier Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cameron promulgated on 14  July  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 1 April 1999 and is a national of Albania.

4.    On 11 December 2015 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cameron  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged, and on 27  September  2016  Judge  Ford
gave permission to appeal stating

      "1.   The appellant seeks permission to appeal,  in  time,  against  a
      decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cameron) promulgated on 14 July
      2016 whereby it dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision to
      refuse his asylum claim.

      2.    The appellant  argues  that  the  tribunal  failed  to  exercise
      anxious  scrutiny  and,  in  particular,  having  accepted  that   the
      appellant suffered domestic violence at the hands of his father.  This
      is not arguable as this was given anxious scrutiny and the appellant's
      account of domestic violence was accepted and it was accepted that the
      appellant could not return to his father's  care  (paras  76,  77  ,85
      ,89).

      3.    But it is also argued that the tribunal may have erred  in  that
      it failed to decide the issue of internal relocation and a sufficiency
      of State protection. This is an important issue given the findings  as
      to domestic violence, the apparent acceptance that the appellant could
      not contact his mother and siblings and a conclusion that there  would
      not be adequate reception facilities.

      4.    There is an arguable material error of law"

The Hearing

7.    At the start of the hearing  both  Ms  Wass  and  Mr  Jarvis  drew  my
attention to the rule 24 response which states

      'The respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
      permission to  appeal  and  invites  the  tribunal  to  determine  the
      application with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing  to  consider
      internal relocation.'

In the course of discussion, Mr Jarvis told me that he was happy to  concede
that  both  the  questions  of  internal  relocation  and   sufficiency   of
protection require to be determined by me today. In doing  so,  he  concedes
that the decision contains a material error of law.  Both  Ms  Wass  and  Mr
Jarvis asked me to listen to their submissions on  the  issues  of  internal
relocation and sufficiency of protection, then to make my  own  findings  on
those two areas and  substitute  my  own  decision.  Ms  Wass  asked  me  to
preserve the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings of fact.

8.    It is beyond dispute that the Judge clearly finds that  the  appellant
is  an  unaccompanied  minor  and  that  there  are  no  suitable  reception
facilities available in Albania. It is also common  ground  that  the  Judge
dismissed the appellant's appeal on both asylum and article 3  ECHR  grounds
without  considering  either   internal   relocation   or   sufficiency   of
protection. Those are two crucial  aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim.  The
failure to consider crucial aspects of the appellant's claim  amounts  to  a
material error of law. There is no  criticism  of  the  Judges  findings  of
fact.

9.    As I find that the decision contains a material error of  law,  I  set
the decision aside. As I am able to preserve the Judge's findings  of  fact,
I move on to consider internal relocation and sufficiency of protection.

10.   The Judge's findings of fact are that the appellant  is  a  victim  of
domestic violence at the hands of his domineering father; the  appellant  is
separated from his mother and his sisters and does not know where they  are,
but the appellant's grandparents, mother and sisters  continue  to  live  in
Albania.  The  appellant's  father  continues  to  live  in   Albania.   The
appellant's 18th birthday will fall on  1  April  2017.  The  appellant  has
lived in the UK since December  2014.  The  Judge's  specific  finding  that
there are no adequate reception facilities for the appellant in  Albania  is
preserved.

Background material

11.(a)       Albania  is  a  small,  mountainous  country  in   the   Balkan
peninsula,  with  a  long  Adriatic  and  Ionian   coastline.   Along   with
neighbouring and mainly Albanian-inhabited Kosovo, it has a Muslim  majority
- a legacy of its centuries of Ottoman rule. Approaching twenty per cent  of
the population are Christians,  divided  mainly  between  the  Orthodox  and
smaller Catholic denominations.

(b)   After World War II, Albania  became  a  Stalinist  state  under  Enver
Hoxha,  and  remained  staunchly  isolationist  until  its   transition   to
democracy after 1990. The 1992 elections ended 47 years of  communist  rule,
but the latter half of the decade saw a quick  turnover  of  presidents  and
prime ministers. Many Albanians left the country  in  search  of  work;  the
money they send home remains an important source of revenue.

(c)   Domestic  violence  is  not  specifically  recognized  as  a  criminal
offence in Albania's criminal code, although the general charge  of  assault
can be brought against an alleged abuser. In cases of  "serious  intentional
injury," the criminal code calls for three to ten years imprisonment,  while
in cases of "non-serious intentional injury," the criminal  code  stipulates
a fine or up to two years imprisonment. According to Amnesty  International,
unless the violence leads to serious injuries or the death  of  the  victim,
perpetrators of domestic violence are only prosecuted on the request of  the
victim.

(e)   Albania's Law on Measures Against Violence  in  Family  Relations  was
passed in 2006 and includes a statement calling for its entry into force  on
1 June 2007. The purpose of the law  is  "to  prevent  and  reduce  domestic
violence in all its forms by appropriate legal measures" and  "to  guarantee
protection through legal measures to members of the family who  are  subject
to domestic violence, paying particular attention to needs of children,  the
elderly and the disabled". The law allows for victims of  domestic  violence
to be issued protection  orders,  establishes  special  units  for  domestic
violence in police departments, and outlines specific  responsibilities  for
the ministries of the Interior,  Health,  and  Justice,  as  well  as  local
authorities. Amendments to the law were added on 30  September  2010.  These
call for the establishment of a shelter for  victims  of  domestic  violence
and a coordinated system of  referring  cases  of  domestic  violence  among
authorities.

(f)   The Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs,  and  Equal  Opportunities  is
the agency  responsible  for  implementing  laws  and  programs  related  to
domestic violence and gender  equality.  The  Minister  leads  the  National
Council on Gender Equality,  an  advisory  body  comprised  of  nine  deputy
ministers and three civil society  representatives.  The  Ministry  is  also
responsible for implementing and monitoring the National Strategy on  Gender
Equality and Domestic Violence.

(g)   The Center for  Legal  Civic  Initiatives  (CLCI)  is  a  Tirana-based
organization that offers free legal services and  psycho-social  support  to
victims of domestic violence and participates in the drafting  of  laws  and
state policies for gender equality. They  say  that  many  of  the  services
guaranteed by  law  have  been  implemented  effectively  and  have  brought
greater protection and access to justice for victims of  domestic  violence.
However, the CLCI has  also  stated  that  the  government  still  needs  to
establish some services for domestic violence victims, including free  legal
assistance to  victims,  local  governmental  24-hour  hotlines,  and  local
governmental rehabilitation centres for victims and abusers.

(h)   In 2010, the European Union (EU) reported that  although  Albania  has
made progress in establishing  a  "legal  and  institutional  framework"  to
prevent domestic violence, resources to support the laws  and  policies  are
"insufficient" at both the national and local level. The EU adds  that  this
lack of resources hampers the effective implementation. In  a  joint  shadow
report (in 2010) on the implementation of the Convention on the  Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, three  Albanian  NGOs  --  the
Gender  Alliance  for  Development  Center  (GADC),   the   Albanian   Women
Empowering Network (AWEN), and the  Network  Against  Gender-based  Violence
and  Trafficking  --  indicate  that  the  implementation  of  the  domestic
violence law is still in the "initial stages" at the local  level.  However,
they note that some municipalities have launched pilot projects to create  a
referral system that will assist domestic violence victims.

(i)    The  background  materials  tell  me  that  the  police   established
specialized units for handling cases  of  domestic  violence  in  the  major
cities of Albania. Special  reporting  requirements  for  domestic  violence
cases are in place at police stations, and officers have received  at  least
one training session about domestic violence  between  2007  and  2010.  But
there are also reports that the police are underfunded and  lack  sufficient
resources to address domestic violence

(j)   The Albanian government operates a national  shelter  for  victims  of
domestic violence   In  correspondence  with  the  Research  Directorate,  a
project officer with the UN joint program on Gender  Equality  and  Domestic
Violence explained that the shelter, which opened in Tirana in  April  2011,
can accommodate approximately 30 to 35 women and children (up to the age  of
14). The Executive Director of the Vatra Psycho-Social Centre said that  the
national shelter can accommodate up to 40 people per day and that  there  is
no time limit for how long they can stay at the shelter.

(k)   Some NGOs also operate shelters  for  victims  of  domestic  violence.
There are NGO-operated shelters in Tirana, Elbasan, and  Vlora.  UN  project
officer reports that there are also NGO-operated  shelters  in  Shkodra  and
Pogradec. There is also another one in Gjirokaster

Analysis

12.   In AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD 2007 EWCA Civ 12 the Court of Appeal  noted
that the SSHD's policy  was  not  to  return  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
children unless there were "adequate reception arrangements in  place".   It
was the SSHD's policy to grant them limited leave until their 18th  birthday
instead if arrangements were not in place.  The Tribunal held that where  it
is reasonably likely that members  of  the  child's  immediate  or  extended
family will make appropriate  arrangements  for  his  or  her  reception  on
return the removal of the child does not breach  the  policy  and  does  not
infringe his human rights. The Court of Appeal said that that was the  wrong
test.  The policy documents showed that  the  SSHD  had  to  be  "satisfied"
about the arrangements.  In  other  words  a  higher  standard  was  needed.
Moreover the Court  of  Appeal  also  rejected  the  argument  that  it  was
premature at the  appeal  stage  to  make  a  finding  on  whether  adequate
reception  arrangements  existed  because  the   Respondent's   own   policy
documents showed that reception facilities were considered by the  HO  at  a
far earlier stage  when  deciding  whether  discretionary  leave  should  be
granted. The Court of Appeal said that the  Adjudicator  should  have  found
that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law
because  he  had  not  considered  the  reception   arrangements   and   the
Adjudicator should have allowed the appeal under  section  86(3)(a)  of  the
2002 Act.

13.   R  (on  the  application  of  Nzumvira)  v  SSHD  (2008)  QBD  (Admin)
distinguished AA (Afghanistan) on the  grounds  that  the  Appellant  in  AA
(Afghanistan) was a minor at the time of both the Respondent's decision  and
the First-tier decision whereas in Nzumvira the Appellant was  an  adult  by
the time of the First-tier's decision and so there was  no  "disbenefit"  to
him.)

14.   There is a viable option of internal relocation  for  this  appellant.
There is no evidence to suggest that his father  has  any  influence  beyond
his own house in Albania. When the appellant left Albania was 13 or 14-year-
old boy. Within the next  six  months  he  will  reach  majority.  With  the
passage  of  time  he  has  matured  and  his  physical  capabilities   have
increased. There is a functioning police force  in  Albania.  The  appellant
can return to another part of  Albania  and  will  be  beyond  his  father's
reach.

15.   On the facts as the Judge found them to be the appellant's father  was
an impoverished drunk who dominated his own home,  but  had  no  significant
influence beyond  his  own  home.  It  is  realistically  possible  for  the
appellant to  return  to  a  place  close  to  his  home  village  and  live
separately from his father. The appellant could  return  to  Tirana  and  be
beyond the reach of his father there. On the facts as the Judge  found  them
to be there is no other agent of persecution.

16.   The background materials indicate that there is a  functioning  police
force in Albania. The appellant gives a history of the  police  refusing  to
assist his mother, but the background materials indicate  that  there  is  a
functioning police force and a criminal justice system available in  Albania
to assist the appellant.

17.   There is a  viable  option  of  internal  relocation.  The  background
materials indicate that there is a sufficiency of  protection  available  to
the appellant because in Albania there is a  functioning  police  force  and
criminal  justice  system.  There  are  shelters  for  victims  of  domestic
violence. I have to find that  the  appellant's  appeal  cannot  succeed  on
either asylum or article 3 ECHR grounds

18.   The Judge found as a fact that no article 8 ECHR grounds  are  argued.
No challenge is taken to that finding of fact, so it stands.

19.   There remains a clear and unchallenged finding of fact at [91] of  the
decision that the appellant is  under  18  years  of  age,  that  he  is  an
unaccompanied minor, and that there are  no  adequate  reception  facilities
available for the appellant. Although the appellant's appeal cannot  succeed
on asylum or article 3 ECHR  grounds,  it  is  now  for  the  respondent  to
consider the appropriate course of action for  an  unaccompanied  minor  who
has had his protection claim dismissed.

Decision

The Judge's decision promulgated on 14 July 2016 is tainted  by  a  material
error of law, and I must set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds

I dismiss the appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds

I dismiss the appeal on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 9 November 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

