

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/00644/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 1st July 2013                              |On 1st July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                          MR MOHAMED ALBARENI RIIZG
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood (Rochdale Law Centre)
For the Respondent:  Mr A Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born  on  26th  February  1980.  He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Heynes) dated 21st March  2013  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him asylum  and  to
    remove him to Egypt.

2.   Permission to appeal was originally refused by a Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 20th
    May 2013. Judge Chalkley found it arguable  that  the  judge  may  have
    erred by not making clear findings  on  the  core  of  the  Appellant's
    claim; namely his claimed political activities  and  suffering  at  the
    hands of the Muslim Brotherhood when they allegedly attacked him on 1st
    August 2012.

3.   Thus the matter came before me. My first  task  is  to  decide  whether
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes made an error of law and if so whether
    and to what extent the determination should be set aside.

4.   Mr Wood appeared before me as he had before Judge Heynes and it was  he
    who drafted the grounds seeking permission to appeal. Mr Wood  expanded
    upon the grounds before me.

5.   He argued firstly that the Judge had erred by misdirecting  himself  in
    law in relation to "an apparent requirement of the  Appellant  to  have
    suffered persecution before being entitled to succeed in his claim  for
    asylum in the United Kingdom". The grounds suggest that at paragraph 32
    of the determination, the Judge criticised the Appellant's evidence  on
    the basis that no attempt was made on his life in the 12  months  prior
    to his leaving Egypt. Mr Wood submitted it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    require an Appellant to have suffered severe physical harm in order  to
    succeed in his asylum claim and referred to the case of FK (persecution-
    refugee-political writer) Iran CG [2002] UKIAT 01328 which stated  that
    it was not necessary for someone who has a genuine fear of  persecution
    to wait until it happens before deciding to leave the country.

6.   Mr Wood is of course quite correct and had the Judge done so  it  would
    indeed have been an error of law. However, what the Judge actually said
    was rather different from the gloss being put on it by  Mr  Wood.  What
    the Judge said at paragraph 32 was that:-

         "Whilst, on the one hand, the Appellant claimed that he  would  be
         killed by the Muslim Brotherhood on return, if his own evidence  is
         to be taken at face value, no attempt was made on his life even  in
         the last 12 months of his time in Egypt. At worst,  he  experienced
         some harassment, an assault and a verbal threat. His  own  evidence
         does not suggest that he has been singled out or targeted."

     This also has to be set against the Judge's finding that the  Appellant
    had not been a member/supporter of 6th of April  Movement,  the  reason
    the Appellant claimed the Muslim Brotherhood were after him. I can  see
    no error in the Judge's approach. The Appellant's case was that he  was
    in such danger from the Muslim Brotherhood that he was forced  to  flee
    the country. However, he waited 12 months from when he says the  threat
    took place before he left and during that time no harm came to him. The
    Judge's comment is entirely appropriate in the circumstances. There was
    no incident that the Appellant relied upon 12 months later to instigate
    his departure.
7.   The second ground relied upon by Mr Wood  is  that the Judge had  erred
    in failing to apply the appropriate guidance contained in case law when
    considering the documentary evidence. He referred to  paragraph  43  of
    the determination wherein the Judge said this:-

              "I find the documentation that the Appellant  claims  to  have
             obtained, by his wife, from the hospitals is unreliable  given
             the  inconsistencies  in  the   medical   evidence   and   the
             Appellant's lack of reliability overall"


8.   It is suggested that the  Judge  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
    considered the documentary evidence in the round by taking into account
    the background country evidence on the prevalence of violence  directed
    to individuals arrested and detained by the Egyptian authorities.

9.   The Judge paid particular attention to the documents  produced  by  the
    Appellant. He reminded himself at paragraph  19  of  the  determination
    that the burden was on the Appellant to establish  that  the  documents
    were reliable and that in assessing reliability, he must have regard to
    the documents as a whole in the light of the surrounding evidence.

10.  The Judge first dealt with the Appellant's marriage  certificate  which
    he indicated was not contentious. He then turned his attention to  what
    he called medical reports but were in reality documents  given  to  the
    Appellant upon his release from  hospital.  The  Judge  considered  the
    earliest document,  dated  13th  June  2004  which  recorded  that  the
    Appellant had been in hospital for three days for a  procedure  related
    to a haematoma around his left testicle and the left part of his thigh.
    The Judge correctly noted that was partly, but not entirely, consistent
    with the description that the Appellant gave of his treatment  at  this
    time, namely that he had been beaten, sexually abused,  given  electric
    shocks and suffered an injury to his head and penis.

11.  The Judge then dealt with a report which is undated but stated that  on
    25th June 2005 the Appellant had a deep wound below his right  ear  and
    abrasions on his face and neck. This, the Judge  correctly  found,  was
    not consistent with the description of treatment the Appellant gave  at
    his interview when he claimed to have suffered the  same  treatment  as
    before and additionally that his finger and toenails had been  removed.
    The inconsistencies noted by the Judge in that report are startling.

12.  Similarly, at  paragraph  23  the  Judge  turned  his  attention  to  a
    document dated 3rd January 2009 which was also irreconcilable with  the
    Appellant's evidence when he stated that he had been  arrested  at  the
    end of December 2008 and detained for 35 days. Although  he  sought  to
    alter the dates at the hearing suggesting he had been arrested  at  the
    beginning of December; it still would not have been  possible  to  have
    been discharged from hospital on  3rd  January  2009  if  he  had  been
    detained for  35  days.  Furthermore,  that  report  referred  to  head
    injuries but the Appellant's account was  that  he  received  the  same
    treatment  as  before.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  the   Appellant's
    explanation  for  not  referring,  at  the  hospital,  to  having   his
    fingernails removed, namely because he was in too  much  pain  and  was
    mentally ill.

13.  The Judge also queried the reliability of the document given  that  the
    emotive language  used  (a  reference  to  pitiless  torture)  was  not
    suggestive of a medical report. The Judge also noted that the  document
    referred to methods of torture such  as  burning  with  cigarettes  and
    being subjected to loud noises causing loss of hearing.  These  however
    did not feature in the Appellant's own description of the treatment  he
    had been subjected to and there is no reference in the document to  the
    sexual abuse which the  Appellant  claimed  happened  on  each  of  his
    detentions. The Judge noted that the report gave no indication that  he
    received  treatment  for  his  "severe  depression"  or  that  he   was
    recommended for any such treatment. The Judge noted that there  was  no
    subsequent evidence  of  the  Appellant  having  treatment  for  severe
    depression and that although an adjournment had been  granted  for  the
    Appellant's representatives to obtain a medical report, none was placed
    before him nor was there any evidence that  the  Appellant  had  either
    sought or was receiving any form of treatment or medication in the UK.

14.  It is hardly surprising  given  those  very  significant  discrepancies
    between the Appellant's claims and what is contained in  the  documents
    that the Judge found them to be unreliable and certainly not supportive
    of the Appellant claims. The Judge's findings were entirely open to him
    on the evidence.

15.  The Judge dealt with the submission  by  Mr  Wood  that  the  treatment
    described by the Appellant was consistent with the background evidence,
    which he accepted in broad terms was the case. However, the  fact  that
    treatment described is consistent with  background  evidence  does  not
    mean that it happened to the Appellant and clearly the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied, on the basis of the significant difficulties in the evidence
    that in this case it had.

16.  The Judge went on to consider other  difficulties  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence. One was that when he first  arrived  in  the  UK  he  gave  a
    different name, a different date of birth and a different  nationality,
    claiming to be a national Syria and it was on  that  basis  he  claimed
    asylum. It was only at his substantive interview that he  decided  that
    he was Egyptian and gave the current reason for  needing  international
    protection. The Judge rightly pointed out that that makes no sense.  If
    the Appellant was in truth in danger of  persecution  in  Egypt,  there
    would be no reason whatsoever not to have said so at the outset.

17.  Other credibility issues noted by the  Judge  was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had spent 12 months without  problem  prior  to  leaving  the
    country and his claim to have been  involved  with  the  6th  of  April
    Movement since 2004 when it was not formed until 2008.

18.  Additionally, the Judge found the Appellant to  have  been  an  evasive
    witness and that he had to repeat questions in order to extract answers
    from him.
19.  The Judge specifically found at paragraph 42 that he rejected the  core
    of the Appellant's account. He  had  not  established  that  he  was  a
    supporter of 6th of April Movement and he rejected his  claim  to  been
    targeted by the Muslim Brotherhood.

20.  I find therefore there is no error  in  the  way  in  which  the  Judge
    assessed the documentary evidence placed before him or credibility as a
    whole. Mr Wood argued that the Judge was not entitled to make a finding
    based on the date upon which the  6th  of  April  Movement  was  formed
    because he did so with reference to background evidence  that  was  not
    specified by him. However, the Letter of  Refusal  clearly  refers,  at
    paragraph 14, to there being available country information stating that
    the Movement in question was only established in 2008. Mr Wood said the
    country information referred to  in  the  Letter  of  Refusal  was  not
    produced to the Appellant's representatives. It was  not  specified  by
    the Judge and therefore reliance should not have been  placed  upon  it
    and that finding was not open to the Judge. I reject that argument. The
    Appellant and those representing him were well aware that was an  issue
    to be dealt with by the  Appellant,  namely  that  his  claim  was  not
    credible because he joined a group supposedly four years before it  was
    formed. If there is evidence available to show the group was formed  in
    2004, then the Appellant should have produced it; he did  not.  In  any
    event, that is only one of numerous adverse  credibility  points  which
    were entirely open to the Judge.

21.  Mr Wood also  suggested  that  the  Judge  had  made  so  many  adverse
    credibility findings in relation to this  Appellant  that  he  was  not
    going  to  believe  anything  he  said.  That  is  an  unwarranted  and
    unjustified criticism. The Judge's decision was based on  the  evidence
    before him. The evidence was woefully short of sufficient to lead to  a
    decision in the Appellant's favour.

22.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  error  of  law  in  its
    determination of this appeal and its decision shall stand.  The  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                 Dated 1st July 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
