

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00579/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date Sent                    |
|On 27 September 2013                          |On 31 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                            MR ZAKARIA SAIDI ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by J R
Rahman, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr A Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This an appeal remitted by the Inner House of the  Court  of  Session  to
   the Upper Tribunal in terms of an interlocutor dated 13 October 2011  and
   accompanying Joint Minute.  The appeal was previously considered  by  the
   Upper Tribunal and dismissed on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  in  a
   determination dated 21 February 2011.

2) The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is a Bajuni  from  Somalia.
   The respondent did not accept this and in the refusal decision relied  in
   part upon a linguistic report  prepared  by  SPRAKAB.   At  the  previous
   hearing before the Upper Tribunal it was agreed by the  parties  that  no
   reliance should be placed on  the  SPRAKAB  report  in  respect  of  this
   appellant.

3) The appellant sought to rely on an expert report by Mr Brian  Allen.   Mr
   Allen accepted that the appellant is a Bajuni from the island of Chula in
   Somalia.  In its decision of 21 February 2011 the  Upper  Tribunal  found
   that the appellant is a Bajuni but not that he was  from  Somalia  rather
   than from Kenya.  The application to the Inner  House  was  made  on  the
   basis that the Upper Tribunal erred in law in failing to  state  adequate
   reasons for not accepting the evidence of Mr Brian Allen in  relation  to
   whether the appellant was a member of the Bajuni clan from Somalia.   The
   appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal in terms of the interlocutor of
   13 October 2011 to consider the evidence of Brian Allen  in  relation  to
   whether the applicant was a member of the Bajuni clan from Somalia and to
   provide adequate and comprehensible reasons for the decision reached.

4) At the hearing before me it was accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
   that if the appellant were found to be a Bajuni from Somalia  his  appeal
   would succeed.

Evidence

5)  The  appellant  was  called  as  a  witness  and  adopted  two   witness
   statements.  The first of these was dated 13 April 2010 and was  prepared
   for a hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  second  was  a
   supplementary statement dated 26 September 2013, prepared for the hearing
   before me.  According to the statement of 13 April 2010, the appellant is
   a Bajuni and was born on Chula Island  in  Somalia.   His  father  was  a
   fisherman.  Both his parents are now deceased.  He had  one  brother  and
   one sister.  His sister was killed by the Darood  militia.   His  brother
   was abducted by the Darood militia and the appellant  has  not  seen  him
   since.  The appellant lived a peaceful life with his family  until  1992,
   when he was about 6 years old, when violence  started  and  the  majority
   tribe began to attack the islands.  In 1993 Chula  was  attacked  by  the
   Darood, who killed the appellant's neighbours and members of his extended
   family.  The Appellant and his immediate family  managed  to  escape  and
   left together by boat for Mombasa.  There were about 9 or  10  people  in
   the boat altogether.  When they reached Mombasa they were sent  to  Jomvu
   Camp.  The appellant stayed there for about 5 years.  At the end of  1997
   the Kenyan Government announced that Jomvu Camp would be closed.  It  was
   believed at that time that it was safe to return to Somalia.  The  family
   were given the option of returning to Somalia or going  to  Kakuma  Camp.
   The family chose to return to Somalia.  On return to  Chula  Island  they
   found that some of the houses had been destroyed and some of  the  houses
   were occupied by the Darood.  All the boats had  been  confiscated.   The
   appellant's house had been burnt down.  The appellant and his family went
   into the bush to clear the bush and build another home in which to  live.
   His father had difficulty fishing because he  had  no  boat  and  he  was
   forced to be a labourer.  Although life was difficult and humiliating the
   family managed to live until April or May 1998 when  they  were  attacked
   again.  The village was invaded and some neighbours were beaten.  In July
   1998 the Darood broke into the appellant's home.  The appellant's  sister
   was raped.  The family were beaten.   After  this  the  family  lived  in
   constant fear.  In 2000 the appellant was at the  Madrasa  early  in  the
   morning when the Darood invaded the Madrasa intending to abduct youths to
   use as child soldiers.  The appellant was  stabbed  in  his  arm  with  a
   knife.  Because he was bleeding heavily he was left behind by the  Darood
   and he returned home.  In June 2002 the home was attacked  again  by  the
   Darood.  The appellant's father was badly injured.  In October  2003  the
   Darood attacked the family at night.  The appellant's father and  brother
   were fishing at sea.  The appellant was in the house with his sister  and
   mother.  The appellant was beaten.  His sister was raped and  received  a
   head injury.  She died of her injuries.  In May 2005 the appellant was at
   the Madrasa around noon when he heard the sound of shooting.   A  teacher
   told the students not to go outside.  After an hour they left.  When  the
   appellant went home he saw that two neighbours had been killed.  He found
   that all of his house had been  broken  down  and  his  mother  had  been
   murdered.  He was told she was killed by  the  Darood.   The  appellant's
   father and brother  carried  on  working  as  labourers  but  the  family
   remained in constant fear.  In September 2008 in the  early  morning  the
   appellant was woken by the sound of screaming from his  neighbours.   The
   house was then broken into and the appellant's brother was abducted.   He
   was tied up by the Darood and taken away.  The appellant was  left  alone
   with his father.  At the end of 2008 the appellant's father said  he  was
   going to work and to look for food.  He did not return.  That  evening  a
   friend of the appellant's father came and told  the  appellant  that  his
   father had been killed and thrown into the sea because he  was  suspected
   by the Darood of spying for the Hawiye.  The appellant's father's friend,
   Musa, told the appellant to come and live with him.   The  appellant  did
   this until Musa decided in February 2009 that  they  should  flee.   They
   left at night by sea in a boat with 8 people.  Musa had stolen the  boat.
   They sailed to Yemen, which took about 6 days.  They were afraid of being
   attacked by pirates or by Darood militia but they were prepared  to  take
   that risk because of the conditions they had faced on  land.   When  they
   reached Yemen the appellant stayed on the boat until he was told by  Musa
   that the boat had been sold and Musa took him into town.  He  handed  the
   appellant over to another person, called Salum.  The appellant stayed  in
   Salum's house for 3 days until he was taken to the airport and left Yemen
   by plane.  They changed planes and  then  took  a  train,  on  which  the
   appellant arrived in Liverpool.  The appellant claimed asylum.

6) In the appellant's supplementary  statement  of  26  September  2013,  he
   records that he has a partner, Maryam Ali.   They  have  a  child  called
   Zuheir Ali, born on 13 June 2011, and Maryam  is  now  expecting  another
   child due in October 2013.  Maryam is a British citizen of Somali  Bajuni
   origin.  The couple met at a wedding in Glasgow near the end of 2009  and
   started a relationship.  As Maryam lives in London, where she works as  a
   nurse, she will visit the appellant  in  Glasgow  or  he  visits  her  in
   London.   The  appellant  was  reluctant  to  tell   anyone   about   the
   relationship because he had been told by members of the Bajuni  community
   that if he did not have a right to stay in the UK he would not be allowed
   to marry or to have  a  baby.   It  was  not  acceptable  in  the  Bajuni
   community to have a relationship and start a family outwith marriage.

7) At the hearing before me the appellant was cross-examined by  Mr  Mullen.
   He confirmed that he was a Somali Bajuni from Chula.   He  said  he  came
   here from there in July 2009.  The appellant was asked if he had lived in
   any other country apart from Great Britain and the appellant replied that
   he had not.  He was then asked if he had lived in refugee camps in  Kenya
   and he confirmed that he had.   He was asked why he had said  no  to  the
   previous question.  The appellant relied that  this  was  not  a  country
   where he had lived.  He was inside a refugee camp and did not live inside
   the country.  He was in a refugee camp for 5 years.   He  confirmed  that
   this was Jomvu Camp.  He was asked if he could come and go from the  camp
   to the other parts of Kenya and he said that he could not.   He  left  at
   the end of 1997.

8) The appellant confirmed that apart from the time he had  spent  in  Jomvu
   he had spent all his life on Chula.  He was asked how long Chula  was  in
   kilometres.  The appellant said he did not know as he was  not  educated.
   He was asked how long it would take to walk from one end  to  the  other.
   The appellant said he could not give an answer but it was not  that  far.
   It was put to the appellant that he had spent a number of years on  Chula
   and could not say how long it would take to walk  from  one  end  of  the
   island to the other.  The appellant said he just used to  go  around  his
   own area and he was very young at the time.  The appellant was  asked  if
   he had spent any time on mainland Somalia and he said he had not.

9) The appellant was asked what made him leave  Somalia.   He  replied  that
   this was after his father was killed at the end of 2008.  He was  on  his
   own after this and he was a young man.  A friend of his father, who was a
   fisherman, helped him to escape.  He went from Chula to  Yemen  and  then
   from Yemen to another place where there were white people.  From there he
   took a plane.  He used someone else's passport to  enter  Britain.   This
   was given to him by an agent.  The agent was  arranged  by  his  father's
   friend Musa.  It was Musa who paid for the flight and the passport.  Musa
   sold his boat.  The appellant was asked how big this boat was and replied
   that it was not that big - it was a "machine boat".  He was asked  if  it
   was a small boat with an outboard engine.  The appellant answered that it
   was and described it as having a machine at the back which was taken  off
   when you were finished and put back on when you got in.  He described the
   boat as being about twice the length of the table he was  sitting  at  in
   the hearing room.  The appellant was asked  if  the  sale  of  this  boat
   raised enough money to pay for a passport and a flight for the  appellant
   to travel to the UK.  The appellant said he saw the money but he did  not
   know how much it was.

10) The appellant confirmed that he had met Maryam at the end  of  2009  and
   that they have a son together and another child on the way.   Maryam  and
   their son live in  London  and  the  appellant  lives  in  Glasgow.   The
   appellant spends two weeks at a  time  in  London  and  then  returns  to
   Glasgow to sign on in accordance with his reporting conditions.  When  he
   is in London he is the main carer for their son.

11) The second witness was Maryam Abubakar  Ali,  who  adopted  her  witness
   statement dated 26 September 2013.  In her statement she records that she
   was born in Kismayo in Somalia and is of Bajuni origin.  She came to  the
   UK at the end of 2000 or the beginning of 2001, when  she  was  12  years
   old.  She was given asylum and became a British citizen in 2004.  She and
   the appellant have a child, Zuheir Ali, born on 13 June 2011 and  at  the
   time of the hearing she was expecting another child in October 2013.  She
   works as a nurse in London and was on maternity leave at the time of  the
   hearing.  She confirmed having met the appellant at a wedding in Glasgow.
    Once Zuheir was born she would pay for the appellant to travel to London
   to help her and see his son.  She lives with her brother and she was very
   worried that he would be angry when he found out she  was  pregnant.   It
   was not part of Bajuni culture to have a relationship  without  marriage.
   She explained to her brother that she loved the appellant but due to  his
   circumstances and the position he was  in  they  could  not  marry.   She
   wanted to have the baby.  Her brother was very angry but he calmed  down.
   She described her relationship with the appellant as one  like  marriage.
   She knew they were being talked about in the Bajuni community.

12) At the hearing  the  appellant  confirmed  that  the  appellant  is  her
   partner.  She knows that he is from Chula in Somalia because  they  speak
   the same language and do  the  same  things,  even  though  she  is  from
   Kismayo.  She had family and friends from Chula.  Her father and  brother
   were fishermen.  She had never been to Chula but she had  introduced  the
   appellant to friends from Chula.  They got along very quickly and  easily
   and talked about difficulties in the island and other things.

13) In cross-examination Maryam Ali was asked about the  appellant's  visits
   to London.  She said that she and the appellant are  together  until  her
   brother comes home from work and then the appellant goes to stay  with  a
   friend.  The appellant stays to look after their son when Maryam  Ali  is
   on night shift.  Her brother knows about the relationship  but  does  not
   like them staying together in the  house  because  it  is  against  their
   religion.  Maryam Ali confirmed that she is  expecting  a  second  child.
   She was asked what prevents her and the  appellant  from  marrying.   She
   replied that they had thought about it but the appellant was scared.   He
   had been told that he was not allowed to marry if he did not  have  leave
   to remain and did not know what was happening to his case.   They  wanted
   to marry in accordance with their religion.

14) Maryam Ali was asked who looks after her son when she was working.   She
   said that a friend cares for him until 6.30  and  then  he  goes  to  her
   sister-in-law until she picks him up at 9.30.  The appellant was able  to
   look after him when he was in London.

15) In re-examination Maryam Ali said the appellant  is  able  to  stay  two
   weeks and then returns to Glasgow to sign on.  If he left the UK it would
   be very difficult for her, particularly as she was expecting  her  second
   baby.  The children needed a father.   She  herself  no  longer  had  any
   family in Somalia.  The question was raised  as  to  whether  Maryam  Ali
   could return to Somalia as a Bajuni.  Mr Mullen acknowledged that as  the
   child was a British citizen and a citizen of the European Union, he could
   not be expected to leave the UK to go to Somalia.

Submissions

16) In his submission for the respondent Mr Mullen replied  on  the  reasons
   for refusal letter.  He pointed out that this was the  appellant's  third
   appeal hearing and at the two previous hearings judges had found that his
   evidence was not credible.  The adverse credibility finding was not based
   on a SPRAKAB report but on the appellant's lack of knowledge of his  home
   island.  According to Mr Allen's report it would take 20 minutes to  walk
   between the two main  villages  on  Chula,  which  was  a  small  island.
   According to paragraph 19 of the reasons for refusal  letter  there  were
   two roads on Chula but at his asylum interview (Q172) the appellant  said
   there were no roads on the island.  At the hearing  today  the  appellant
   could not say how long it would take to walk  from  end  to  end  of  the
   island.  The island was three miles long by one mile wide and if  someone
   had lived most of their life there it was reasonable for them to know the
   distance from one end to the other.

17) Mr Mullen continued that in cross-examination  the  appellant  had  been
   asked if he had  been  to  any  other  country  and  he  said  no.   When
   clarification was sought about whether he had been to Kenya he  said  yes
   but he was in a refugee camp.  This was not a good answer.  In his  first
   witness statement he gave a detailed account of leaving Chula and he  was
   unlikely to have forgotten this.  It was clear from his witness statement
   he knew he was going to  Kenya  when  he  left  Chula.   The  appellant's
   evidence was characterised by not knowing, and being unable to  remember,
   matters which the appellant ought reasonably  be  expected  to  remember.
   This was not a case where the appellant claimed to have left  the  Bajuni
   islands as a young child and was unlikely to have any memory of his  time
   there.

18) Mr Mullen referred to the report by Mr Brian Allen.  There  was  nothing
   in  the  report  he  would  suggest  was  wrong  but,  for  example,  the
   description of the roofs of the Bajuni houses was not  exclusive  to  the
   Bajuni islands.  There was nothing to say that Bajuni villages  in  Kenya
   were not similar to those in the Bajuni islands.  The appellant described
   a Bajuni dance and Bajuni  activities  but  these  were  not  necessarily
   exclusive to  the  Somali  Bajuni  and  were  not  determinative  of  the
   appellant being Bajuni.

19) Mr Mullen referred to the appellant's account of his journey to the  UK.
    It was said that a friend of his father provided money  by  selling  his
   boat.  It was unlikely that the boat would have raised sufficient  money.
   The appellant's account was fabricated.

20) It was suggested to Mr Mullen that the appellant may have been  born  in
   Chula but left in 1993, as he described leaving for the first  time,  and
   never returned.

21) Mr Mullen responded that if the appellant had refugee  status  in  Kenya
   he had concealed this.  He could have the nationality of a third country.
    This was entering the realms of speculation.  There was no  evidence  to
   show that the appellant was born in Chula and left there, as  opposed  to
   never having been there.

22) Turning to Article 8, Mr Mullen relied upon the decision  of  the  Inner
   House in MS (India) [2013] CSIH 52, in terms of which the appellant would
   need a good arguable case to succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   The
   appellant has a British child and a British  partner  but  the  appellant
   divides his time between Glasgow  and  London.   His  removal  would  not
   breach Article 8.  He did not spend much time with  the  child,  who  was
   looked after by a friend and by the appellant's  partner's  sister-in-law
   when she was working.  Mr Mullen stated that he was  not  suggesting  the
   appellant's child would follow him if he  was  removed.   There  were  no
   reasons why the couple should not live together but they did not  do  so.
   The appellant was supported by his partner.

23) For the appellant Mr Winter  submitted  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
   under the Refugee Convention and under Article 8.  The  appellant  should
   be found credible.  The previous decision of the Upper Tribunal  was  set
   aside because of a failure to take account of the report by Brian  Allen.
   Mr Allen accepted the appellant spoke Kibajuni and was an ethnic  Bajuni.
   Mr Winter referred to the events described  by  the  appellant  on  Chula
   Island and to the money he required to travel to the UK.  The appellant's
   evidence was that he saw this money but did not know  how  much  it  was.
   The appellant had no real knowledge of what was paid.  Mr Winter referred
   in detail to the report by Mr Allen.  Even if  the  appellant's  evidence
   was not accepted as a whole then it was still the case that the appellant
   was a Bajuni from Somalia and he had not returned to Somalia  from  Jomvu
   Camp.  His claim might be essentially true even if it was embellished.

24) In relation to Article 8 Mr Winter referred to  the  best  interests  of
   the appellant's British child.  There were  administrative  obstacles  to
   the couple being together.  Finally Mr  Winter  submitted  in  accordance
   with AMM [2011] UKUT 00445 that even if the appellant was not  a  Bajuni,
   he could not return to Somalia.

Discussion

25) In his submission before me Mr Mullen challenged the credibility of  the
   appellant's evidence and  relied,  in  particular,  on  the  reasons  for
   refusal letter, which is dated 23 December 2009.  This letter  refers  to
   the appellant's lack of knowledge of the island of Chula and also alleges
   a lack of knowledge of the Bajuni  in  Somalia.   It  is  said  that  the
   appellant gave inconsistent dates about the death of his father  and  the
   occasion when he claims to have been stabbed.  His account  of  returning
   from Jomvu to Chula relying  on  arrangements  made  by  his  family  and
   transport  provided  by  a  mosque  was  inconsistent  with  the  country
   information, which stated that the repatriation of Bajuni was funded  and
   organised by UNHCR.  In his favour, however, the appellant has the report
   of Mr Brian Allen, the evidence of his partner, Maryam Ali, and a medical
   report. The  medical  report  is  described  in  the  refusal  letter  as
   inconclusive because it cannot say with  certainty  how  the  appellant's
   injuries were caused.

26) Maryam Ali had not been asked to give evidence at any previous  hearing.
    She gave her evidence before me in a very straightforward and  seemingly
   frank manner.  Not only  did  she  describe  her  relationship  with  the
   appellant in this country, but she accepted his  account  of  his  Bajuni
   origins and said that she had friends from Chula  who  appeared  to  have
   done so also.  I accept, of course, that Maryam Ali is not  an  impartial
   witness but her evidence ought not to  be  disregarded  on  this  account
   alone.  In particular, I see no reason not  to  accept  as  credible  her
   account of her relationship with the appellant.

27) I turn next to the evidence of Mr Brian  Allen.   Mr  Allen  interviewed
   the appellant in "the Swahili language  (Kibajuni  dialect)"  without  an
   interpreter.  Mr Allen had seen the appellant's asylum interview  record,
   the refusal letter, the medical report and a statement by Mr  Ali  Hassan
   Ali, who gave evidence for the appellant at a previous hearing.  Mr Allen
   asked the appellant about Chula and the other Bajuni islands.   He  asked
   about the Bajuni clans  including  their  work,  money,  and  food.   The
   appellant gave an account of the tsunami of 2004 and of Jomvu Camp.   The
   appellant described  traditional  dances,  festivals  and  clothing.   He
   described marriage customs and funeral customs, circumcision and  charms.
   He referred to having attended the Madrasa  and  described  other  Bajuni
   customs and the origin of the Bajuni.

28) Mr Allen points out that the Bajuni vary greatly in their  knowledge  of
   Kibajuni, which is dying out as a dialect.  The younger generation prefer
   coastal Swahili, which is used in many Bajuni homes.  In the  appellant's
   home the language spoken was Kibajuni but  when  he  was  in  Mombasa  he
   learned more Swahili.  When Mr Allen spoke to the appellant at  interview
   in Swahili the appellant responded in Swahili although he  used  Kibajuni
   words and spoke with a Somali Bajuni accent.  Mr Allen asked the  meaning
   of Kibajuni words taken from a list.  He states that the appellant had no
   way in advance of knowing which words he was to be asked.  The  appellant
   immediately recognised 30 out of 31 words and gave their correct  Swahili
   equivalents.  He explained the meaning of  other  Kibajuni  words.   This
   test together with the appellant's  use  of  Kibajuni  words  during  the
   interview and the appellant's Somali Bajuni  accent  satisfied  Mr  Allen
   that the appellant has been  exposed  to  Kibajuni  and  has  a  definite
   ability in this dialect.  Also present at the interview with Mr Allen was
   a Kibajuni interpreter who has been recognised  by  the  Home  Office  as
   coming from the Bajuni islands.  He attended the interview as an observer
   at Mr Allen's request.  He  confirmed  the  appellant's  fluency  in  the
   Kibajuni dialect.

29) Mr Allen concludes that the appellant had  some  accurate  knowledge  of
   Chula.  He knew about the two villages and the mosque.   His  description
   of customs was very much in line with Somali  Bajuni  customs.   He  used
   food names in line  with  Somali  Bajuni  tradition  rather  than  Kenyan
   Bajuni.  He described the  work  of  fishermen  in  accordance  with  the
   accounts given by Somali  Bajuni  fishermen.   He  described  the  Bajuni
   origins and the names given to them.  He had some accurate  knowledge  of
   the local currency and listed the names of Somali Bajuni clans.   He  has
   Bajuni features and speaks with a strong Somali Bajuni  accent.   He  had
   some accurate knowledge of the Somali islands.  He described the  tsunami
   at the end of 2004 in great detail.  He was describing things he had seen
   and experienced and was not just  conveying  information.   He  described
   life at Jomvu Camp in line with many reports that Mr Allen had heard.  He
   has a definite knowledge of Kibajuni and some  knowledge  of  the  Somali
   language.  His descriptions of the attacks on the Bajuni  people  by  the
   Somali majority tribes given in his interview and asylum  statement  were
   consistent with accounts of  these  attacks  that  Mr  Allen  has  heard.
   Taking these factors together, Mr  Allen  regards  them  as  very  strong
   evidence of nationality.  He describes himself as "completely  convinced"
   that the appellant is a Bajuni from Chula Island.  During the three  hour
   interview he gave no indication of coming from a different country  where
   Swahili is spoken.  Mr Allen records that he has lived in  Kenya  for  11
   years and Tanzania for 10 years and was very familiar  with  the  Swahili
   accents of these countries.

30) I regard Mr Allen's report as strong evidence that the  appellant  is  a
   Somali Bajuni in origin.  Mr Mullen submitted that some  of  the  matters
   referred to by Mr Allen, such as housing and customs, were unique neither
   to Somalia nor to the Bajuni.   It  is  clear  from  Mr  Allen's  report,
   however, that he relied on  cumulative  factors  as  well  as  individual
   factors.  I do not consider, however, that the appellant would  have  had
   to have been in Somalia in 2004 to describe the effect of the tsunami  as
   I see no reason to suppose that this would not have  impacted  also  upon
   the adjacent coast of Kenya

31) Nevertheless, there are some strong arguments in the  respondent's  case
   affecting  the  appellant's  credibility,  in  particular  his  lack   of
   knowledge of Chula, as well as discrepancies over dates.   Of  particular
   significance is the appellant's account of his journey from Yemen to  the
   UK, which he claims was financed by the sale of  a  small  boat  with  an
   outward motor.  This claim is inherently implausible.  I am not satisfied
   that the appellant has told the truth about how his journey to the UK was
   organised and financed.  Even if his father's friend had  sold  the  boat
   for a satisfactory sum, would this friend have been prepared to expend so
   much money on sending the appellant to  the  UK  rather  than  supporting
   himself in Yemen?  The appellant's evidence about his journey to  the  UK
   being financed from the  sale  of  his  father's  friend's  boat  is  not
   credible.

32) Nevertheless, if the appellant left Chula in 1993 around the age  of  8,
   rather than in 2009 at the age of 24, this  would  explain  his  lack  of
   knowledge about Chula.  His knowledge is much  more  of  the  sort  which
   would be expected from someone who left at the age of 8 than from someone
   who left at the age of 24.

33) Looking at the evidence as a whole, and in particular  the  evidence  of
   Mr Allen and of Maryam Ali, whom I find to be a credible  witness,  I  am
   satisfied that the appellant was born in Chula and is  of  Bajuni  origin
   but he left there around the age of 6 to go to Jomvu Camp in  Kenya.   It
   appears that he spent some years in Jomvu Camp.  What happened after that
   is difficult to ascertain.  Mr Mullen suggested that the appellant  might
   have acquired the nationality of another  country  but  this  is,  as  Mr
   Mullen acknowledged, no more than speculation.   Mr  Mullen  acknowledged
   that if the appellant was able to  establish  that  he  was  Bajuni  from
   Somalia then  his  appeal  should  succeed.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
   appellant has established that he was born a Somali Bajuni.  As such  his
   asylum claim should succeed.

34) As the appellant has established that he is a Somali Bajuni  it  is  not
   necessary to consider Article 8 in any detail.  Suffice it  to  say  that
   the appellant is someone who has a partner and a child in the UK and  his
   partner is expecting a second child.  The appellant's child is a  British
   citizen.  The appellant cannot return to his country of  origin  and  nor
   can his partner.  It is in the best interests of the child to  remain  in
   the UK with both parents.  These are very compelling reasons why it would
   be disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the UK.   Mr  Mullen
   acknowledged that the appellant's claim was made before the  introduction
   of the new rules in relation to private and family life in July 2012.

Conclusions

35) The previous decision of the Upper Tribunal has been set  aside  in  the
   Court of Session.

36) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum and  human
   rights grounds.

Anonymity

37) The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity and I  do
   not consider an order to this effect to be necessary.






Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

