

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00113/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     JH
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  8  June  1991.  He
      entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in a lorry and  was  arrested
      on 11 November 2013.  He claimed asylum.  On  10  December  2013,  the
      Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claim   for   asylum,
      humanitarian protection and further concluded that his  removal  would
      not breach the European Convention on Human Rights.   On  12  December
      2013, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove  the  appellant
      to Iran by way of directions as an illegal entrant.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 26 February 2014,  Judge  Halliwell  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal.  On 3 April 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Reed) granted
      the appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before  me.



The Appellant's Claim

   4. The basis of the appellant's claim before the First-tier Tribunal  was
      as follows.  The appellant was undergoing his military service in Iran
      with the Sepah.  He worked as a driver for an officer  in  the  Sepah,
      Commander "C".  The appellant formed an intimate relationship with C's
      daughter, "D".  He claimed that C discovered their relationship.   One
      day, D went to C's office.  There, C accused the appellant  of  having
      been with his daughter the previous weekend.  The appellant says  that
      he lied because it was a crime to  be  with  D.   An  argument  ensued
      during which C asked the appellant to swear on the Quran that  he  had
      not had sexual relations with D.  During this incident, the  appellant
      says that he tore a page from the Quran which is a capital offence  in
      Iran.  He managed to flee.  He was frightened because he had torn  the
      Quran and he went to a friend's house.  He called his father  and  was
      told that the house had been searched by the authorities  following  a
      complaint by C.  The appellant's father told him that the incident had
      been captured on a  security  camera.   The  appellant's  father  made
      arrangements for him to leave Iran and he  went  to  Tehran  where  he
      stayed for three days before leaving Iran with the  assistance  of  an
      agent.

   5. Since arriving in the UK, the appellant  claims  that  he  received  a
      summons and his military book which was sent to him by his family.

   6. The appellant fears that if returned to Iran he will face  prosecution
      and punishment for a capital offence arising out of his tearing a page
      out of the Quran.

The Judge's Decision

   7. Judge Halliwell  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
      appellant and concluded that the summons and military  book  had  been
      "created to bolster the case" (para 43  of  the  determination).   The
      Judge gave a number of reasons for his conclusions.

   8. First, he did not accept,  as  the  appellant  claimed,  that  he  was
      undergoing military service in October 2013 (when the incident with  C
      occurred) because the background evidence demonstrated that compulsory
      military service was undertaken when a person reached the  age  of  19
      (that would have been in June 2010 in the case of the  appellant)  and
      lasted for up to two years.  Consequently,  he  could  not  have  been
      undertaking military service in October 2013.

   9. Secondly, the Judge relied upon a change in the  appellant's  evidence
      as to the precise date on which the incident with C occurred.  In  his
      asylum interview, the appellant said that it occurred on  Saturday  26
      October  2013.   In  his  witness  statement  and  oral  evidence  the
      appellant said that it had occurred  4  days  earlier  on  Tuesday  23
      October 2013. The Judge rejected the appellant's explanation  for  the
      change in  date  which  was  that  the  incident  occurred  after  the
      appellant was on leave and the appellant  had  assumed  that  was  the
      Friday (as was usual) when in fact the  appellant  had  also  been  on
      leave the previous weekend prior to the Tuesday.  He had only realised
      his mistake when he received the summons which was dated Wednesday  23
      October 2013.  He then realised that the  incident  had  occurred  the
      previous day, Tuesday 22 October 2013.

  10. Thirdly, the Judge rejected the documentary  evidence,  in  particular
      the summons relied upon by  the  appellant.   He  rejected  an  expert
      report dated 16 February 2014 which stated  that  the  summons  was  a
      genuine document. The Judge relied upon the background  evidence  that
      summonses from Iran could be forged; that it was remarkable  that  the
      summons was issued one day after the allegation; and  that  a  summons
      was a document issued after an arrest warrant.

The Submissions

  11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hoshi relied upon the grounds of appeal
      upon which permission had been granted.

  12. First, he submitted that there  had  been  a  procedural  irregularity
      because the Judge had relied upon a matter which had not  been  raised
      at the hearing.  That was in relation to when the appellant could have
      undertaken his compulsory military service. Mr  Hoshi  submitted  that
      the background evidence relied upon by the Judge, namely  the  Country
      of Information Report for Iran (January 2013) at paras 10.01-10.04 did
      show that prima facie military service  began  in  the  year  that  an
      individual reached 19.  However, he pointed out that para 10.05 (which
      was not referred to by the  Judge)  demonstrated  that  there  were  a
      number  of  situations  where  an  individual  might  be   granted   a
      "deferment".  He submitted that the appellant had been denied  a  fair
      opportunity to deal with this issue which, Mr  Hoshi  informed  me  on
      instructions, was a matter which the appellant would seek  to  explain
      in evidence.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the appellant had  not  done  so
      because the matter had not been raised before the Judge.

  13. Mr Hoshi pointed out  that  the  Judge  relied  upon  this  (apparent)
      discrepancy between the appellant's claim and the background  evidence
      as part of his reasoning at paras 35, 42, 43  and  44.   He  submitted
      that the prominence given to this issue by the Judge, including taking
      it into account in para 42 when dealing with the  genuineness  of  the
      summons, meant that the Judge's error was material to his decision and
      should be set aside.

  14. Secondly, Mr Hoshi  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons why the summons was not genuine.  He failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for not following the expert's opinion  that  it  was
      genuine.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the Judge reasoned that  either  the
      documents were genuine and the appellant's evidence that the  incident
      occurred on the Saturday was false or that the incident did  occur  on
      the Saturday and so the summons was false. Alternatively, neither  the
      appellant's evidence  nor  the  documents  were  truthful.   Mr  Hoshi
      submitted that the Judge had  failed  to  consider  a  fourth  option,
      namely that the incident did occur on the Tuesday  (as  the  appellant
      claimed in his statement) and that his explanation was truthful and he
      only appreciated his mistake when he  saw  the  summons  which  was  a
      genuine one.

  15. Mr Hoshi submitted that, contrary to what the Judge said in  para  42,
      there was no evidence in the COI  Report  to  support  what  he  said,
      namely "that summonses from Iran can be forged".   Further, there  was
      no evidence to support the Judge's inference that  it  was  inherently
      unlikely that a summons would be issued the day after the incident.

  16. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards accepted that there had  been
      no specific reliance before  the  Judge  on  the  issue  of  when  the
      appellant  would  have  done  compulsory  military  service  in  Iran.
      Nevertheless, he pointed out that the issue had been raised in para 17
      of the refusal letter dated 10 December 2013.  Therefore, Mr  Richards
      submitted the appellant had notice and had an opportunity to deal with
      the apparent inconsistency of his claim with the  background  evidence
      but had failed to do so.  There was, therefore,  nothing  unlawful  or
      unfair.

  17. In any event, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had given a  number
      of reasons for ejecting the appellant's  account.  In  particular,  at
      para 42 the Judge gave  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  expert
      report and concluding that the summons was not reliable.  Mr  Richards
      submitted that the Judge had not  found  that  the  documents  were  a
      forgery but had rather reasoned that they were  unreliable.   So,  the
      Judge's comment about forged summonses being easily available in  Iran
      did not affect his reasoning.

  18. Mr Richards invited me to dismiss the appellant's appeal on the  basis
      that the Judge's reasoning was properly open to him  on  the  evidence
      and he had not erred in law.

  19. In reply, Mr Hoshi accepted that it could be said that  the  issue  of
      when compulsory military service would be undertaken by the  appellant
      had been raised in para 17 of the refusal letter.  But, he  submitted,
      that was too oblique a reference, when taken with the fact that it was
      not relied upon by the Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing  and  the
      appellant was not cross-examined about it, to trigger a responsibility
      on  the  appellant  to  rebut  any  suggestion  that  his  claim   was
      inconsistent with the background evidence on this point.

  20. Further, Mr Hoshi submitted that the  Judge  had  concluded  that  the
      summons was not genuine, in other words that it was a forged document.



  21. Mr Hoshi invited me to find that  the  Judge's  decision  contained  a
      material error of law and could not stand.

Discussion

  22. The Judge set out paras 10.01-10.04 of the COI Report for January 2013
      dealing with military service at paragraph 34  of  his  determination.
      That is in the following terms:

           "10 MILITARY SERVICE

             01. A submission to the 101st session  of  the  United  Nations
                 Human  Rights  Committee,  prepared  in  December  2010  by
                 Conscience and Peace Tax International (CPTI) stated:

                 'Recent information on military service in Iran is not easy
                 to obtain.  In its initial report under the  Convention  on
                 the Rights of the Child  [CRC],  submitted  in  1998,  Iran
                 indicated that  'every  Iranian  citizen  is  eligible  for
                 military service as of 21 March of the year he  reaches  19
                 [...] at age 19  Iranian  nationals  are  summoned  to  the
                 Conscription Office to clarify  their  draft  status  [...]
                 those persons found eligible to  serve  are  recruited  for
                 military service during the year they have reached the  age
                 of 19'.  There was no mention of military service in Iran's
                 second periodic report under the CRC, delivered in 2008.

                 During the war with Iraq, the period  of  military  service
                 was 28 months.  This was reduced in 1988 to 24 months.   It
                 has subsequently been shortened again and was 18 months  in
                 2006.  It  was  reported  that  in  June  2009  the  Majlis
                 approved further, stepped, shortenings  of  the  period  of
                 service    for    conscripts    with    higher    education
                 qualifications, ranging from  two  months  for  those  with
                 diplomas to ten months for holders of doctorates, which are
                 to take effect from 2011.' [30a]

             02. On 1 July 2009, War  Resisters'  International  (WRI)  also
                 reported on the reductions  to  military  service  to  take
                 effect from 2011, stating that:

                 'According to  the  latest  Majlis  ratification,  military
                 service for conscripts with a PHD  falls  [by]  10  months.
                 Master and bachelor graduates will serve  8  and  6  months
                 lesser respectively. The service decreased  [by]  4  and  2
                 months   for   associate   degree   and   diploma   holders
                 respectively....

                 The new regulation defines the maximum period  of  military
                 service up to 24  months  and  the  commander-in-chief  has
                 authority to change the period.' [25b]

             03. A research project by the  Small  Media  Foundation  (SMF),
                 published in May 2012,  included  information  on  military
                 exemption for gay and transsexual persons.  The SMF  report
                 also noted that, 'Compulsory military service usually lasts
                 18 to 24 months and exemption regulations are  strict.   It
                 is sometimes possible to buy  an  exemption,  but  this  is
                 risky, expensive and highly illegal.  Exemptions are highly
                 prized.  The official information concerning the  different
                 categories  of  and  reasons  for  military  exemptions  is
                 available   on   Iran's   official   police   website    at
                 http://www.police.ir [in Persian]. [108a]

             04. The Central Intelligence  Agency  (CIA)  World  Fact  Book,
                 updated 18 April 2012, accessed 23 May  2012,  stated  that
                 Iran's military service age and obligation were: '19  years
                 of age for compulsory military service; 16 years of age for
                 volunteers; 17 years of age for Law Enforcement Forces;  15
                 years of age for Basij Forces (Popular Mobilization  Army);
                 conscript military service obligation -  18  months,  women
                 exempt from military service.

  23. As this makes clear, it is usual for an individual to  be  conscripted
      into military service in the year in which he reaches the age  of  19.
      The maximum period of military service is up  to  24  months  although
      some individuals, depending on their background, may  serve  a  lesser
      period.

  24. Paragraph 10.03, whilst noting the compulsory military service usually
      lasts between 18-24  months,  also  points  out  that  the  "exemption
      regulations" are "strict.

  25. Paragraph 10.05 of the COI Report, which the Judge did  not  set  out,
      refers to the "surplus of manpower available" and the  possibility  of
      "deferment" in some cases:

             05. The CPTI submission dated December 2010 noted:

                 'The army maintains 220,000  conscripts  alongside  130,000
                 regular troops. This compares with well over 600,000  young
                 men  reaching  "militarily  significant  age"  each   year.
                 Clearly, even after medical examination and  the  exemption
                 of sole family breadwinners and sons and brothers  children
                 of "martyrs of the revolution" (ie those killed in the Iraq
                 war), there  is  a  surplus  of  manpower  available.   The
                 selection of those who  actually  serve  is  thus  made  by
                 ballot, but it was reported in  the  1990s  believed  [sic]
                 that those not selected  were,  like  students,  granted  a
                 deferment, rather than exemption, meaning that  they  might
                 leave the country only in  exceptional  circumstances,  for
                 three months, and on payment of a deposit.'"

  26. The appellant was born in June 1991 and  therefore  reached  his  19th
      Birthday in June 2010.  At that point,  according  to  the  background
      evidence, he became "eligible" for military service.  That service was
      likely to last for up to 24 months.

  27. On the basis of that, the Judge reasoned as follows at para 35 of  his
      determination:

           "The appellant is 22 years of age - he becomes  23  on  the  8th
           June this year.  He would have become  19  in  June  2010,  when
           (according to the  COI)  he  would  have  been  expected  to  do
           compulsory military service in Iran for two years.  On the basis
           of that evidence he would have finished  his  service  by  about
           June of 2012.  The incident on  which  he  basis  his  claim  to
           asylum, is said to have arisen in October 2013  -  well  over  a
           year after he would normally have completed his service."

  28. At para 42, the Judge also relied on this matter:

           "I conclude that the appellant has not proved his case  even  to
           the low standard of proof required.  There is  a  question  mark
           over his age and how it relates to his apparently late  military
           service starting two years after his 19th birthday."

  29. Again, at para 43 the Judge said this:

           "The appellant has  not  proved,  even  to  the  lower  standard
           required in the refugee claim, that he was in the middle of  his
           military service.  Given his age the likelihood is that  he  had
           completed his military service more than a year before  he  left
           Iran."

  30. Finally, at para 44 the Judge said:

           "It has not been proved that he left with  uncompleted  military
           service.  At his age the high probability is  that  his  service
           had been completed a year or more before."

  31. It is accepted that the Presenting Officer, at the hearing before  the
      Judge, did  not  expressly  rely  upon  the  "apparent"  inconsistency
      between the appellant's claim that he was undergoing military  service
      in October 2013 and the background evidence that he became  "eligible"
      in the year that he reached 19 which was, of course, in June 2010  and
      would have completed 24  months  service  before  October  2013.   The
      appellant was asked no questions about this by his Counsel  (then,  as
      now, Mr Hoshi); he was not cross-examined by  the  Presenting  Officer
      and  the  Judge  also  did  not  raise  the  issue  either  with   the
      representatives or seek clarification from the appellant.

  32. The only reference to this issue in the respondent's case is at  paras
      17-20 and, in particular, at para 17 of  the  refusal  letter.   Those
      paragraphs are as follows:

           Military Service

             17. You claim to have been twelve  months  into  your  military
                 service.  You were a soldier of zero rank  (SI  5.6).   You
                 joined military service in November 2012 aged 21 (SI).

                 10.04 The Central  Intelligence  Agency  (CIA)  World  Fact
                       Book, updated 22  August  2013,  stated  that  Iran's
                       military service age and obligation were:  '18  years
                       of age for compulsory military service; 16  years  of
                       age  for  volunteers;  17  years  of  age   for   Law
                       Enforcement Forces; 15 years of age for Basij  Forces
                       (Popular  Mobilization  Army);   conscript   military
                       service obligation is 18 months;  women  exempt  from
                       military service (2012)'

             18. Further, from your own statements of the time you spent  in
                 military service you have described, it  is  reasonable  to
                 infer, an almost casual experience.  You were able to carry
                 and answer  your  mobile  phone  freely  in  from  of  your
                 Commander.  You returned home each night and  at  weekends,
                 you had an active social life able to go out to restaurants
                 at night, often with the Commander's daughter.

             19. A COIR dated 1 August 2011 states:

                 A translated version of an August  2007  article  from  the
                 Swiss newspaper Le Temps stated:

                 "In the Islamic Republic of Iran,  military  service  lasts
                 eighteen months.  According to their educational background
                 and  skills,  those  called  up  (men  only)  join  various
                 administrative  structures  belonging  to  the  army,   the
                 Pasdanan  (Revolutionary  Guards),  or  the   Ministry   of
                 Defense; in the case of those without  university  degrees,
                 they go to the barracks in the provinces."

                 An Iran Global Post article of 15 February  2010  described
                 how doing their compulsory military service,  "As  part  of
                 their service, the Iranian  government  sends  soldiers  to
                 small, underprivileged areas  to  serve  its  community  in
                 different ways.  Depending  on  the  service  needed,  some
                 soldiers become teachers, other work in health clinics,  or
                 oversee farming activities." [3a] Whilst  a  December  2009
                 Wall Street Journal article on the death of a young Iranian
                 doctor stated, "Like all Iranian  males,  Dr  Pourandarjani
                 was required to  complete  a  19  month  military  service.
                 Doctors serve at government hospitals and clinics  as  part
                 of their military obligation."

             20. Your description of your military service is not consistent
                 with the background evidence above.  As you  have  provided
                 no evidence of  your  call  up  or  partial  completion  of
                 military service  to  avoid  speculation  it  falls  to  be
                 considered under para 339L."

  33. Although para 17 refers to the  age  of  compulsory  military  service
      (there stated to be 18) and also states that the appellant  began  his
      military service in November 2012 when he was aged 21, the  paragraphs
      do not explicitly draw any adverse inference  although,  perhaps,  one
      can be implied.  The reference to the appellant's "casual  experience"
      of military service was, however, one relied upon  by  the  Presenting
      Officer to doubt the veracity of the appellant's claim at the  hearing
      (see para 34 of the determination).

  34. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the fact that para 17  of
      the refusal letter raises the issue of the appellant's  age  to  begin
      military service is, in itself, sufficient  in  the  circumstances  of
      this appeal to conclude that the Judge was  entitled  to  rely  on  it
      without the  issue  being  raised  by  either  representative  at  the
      hearing.  The  appellant  was  not,  in  my  judgment,  given  a  fair
      opportunity to deal with  the  matter  which  featured  large  in  the
      Judge's reasoning leading to his adverse credibility finding.

  35. In many cases, where a point is taken in the refusal letter it will be
      clear that it is being relied upon by the Presenting  Officer  at  the
      hearing even if the Presenting  Officer  does  not  cross-examine  the
      individual on the issue.  An appellant's representative will generally
      have notice that a particular matter is being relied upon and  have  a
      fair opportunity to  raise  the  matter  with  the  appellant  in  his
      evidence and deal with it in submissions to the extent that he  wishes
      to do so.  Where an  issue  is  raised  for  the  first  time  in  the
      submissions, it may be appropriate to allow the appellant to give,  to
      the extent he wishes, evidence on the matter even at that late  stage.
      Generally, in such circumstances it is enough for the Judge  to  leave
      to the parties the evidence which they wish to lead  or  cross-examine
      on providing the issue is clearly raised and relied  upon.  The  Judge
      will generally, at least,  be  entitled  to  take  into  account  what
      evidence has been given (if any) on the issue and to reached  reasoned
      conclusions on it without himself raising it with the parties.

  36. Where an appellant is unrepresented, and a  Judge  considers  that  an
      important point arises in the evidence which is likely to  feature  in
      his reasons for reaching an adverse finding, it may well be  incumbent
      upon the Judge to raise  the  matter  at  the  hearing  otherwise  the
      appellant may not be seen to have a fair opportunity to deal  with  an
      issue relevant to the outcome of his appeal.

  37. Here the appellant was represented but the issue of the age  at  which
      he started military service was not  clearly  raised  or  relied  upon
      before the Judge. The bare reference to the usual age  for  compulsory
      military service in  the  refusal  letter  at  paragraph  17  was  not
      sufficient to make clear to the appellant and  his  representative  at
      the hearing that this issue was one  relied  upon  by  the  respondent
      given that the Presenting Officer placed no reliance upon it in cross-
      examination or in submissions at the  hearing.   By  contrast,  it  is
      clear that the Presenting Office did rely upon that part of  paras  17
      et seq of the refusal letter dealing with the  appellant's  experience
      of military service in the sense  that  it  was  too  "casual"  to  be
      believable.  In doing so, and by not referring to  the  issue  of  the
      appellant's age at which he undertook military service, the Presenting
      Officer must have left the impression that the respondent's  case,  in
      relation to the military service, was focussed only  on  the  "casual"
      nature of the experience.  That could only, in my  judgement,  confirm
      the reasonable onlooker's view that the Secretary  of  State  was  not
      relying upon the issue referred to in para 17 of the  refusal  letter.



  38. Yet, this issue featured significantly  in  the  Judge's  reasons  for
      finding the appellant's account not to be credible.  The  Judge  could
      (and should) have raised it if he considered it important but  he  did
      not.  As a result, the appellant was not given a fair  opportunity  to
      deal with the issue of  the  age  at  which  he  undertook  compulsory
      military service.  As para 10.05 of the COI Report  makes  plain,  but
      which  I  repeat  was  not  referred  to  by  the  Judge,  there   are
      circumstances in which an  individual  may  obtain  "deferment".   The
      background material refers to an individual  becoming  "eligible"  for
      military service "as of 21 March of the  year  he  reaches  19"  (para
      10.01).  It also notes that there is a "surplus of manpower available"
      such that the "selection of those who actually serve is thus  made  by
      ballot" (at para 10.05).  The Judge made no reference  to  para  10.05
      which recognised that, in fact,  not  every  individual  did  actually
      begin their compulsory military service in the year after they reached
      19.  Mr Hoshi informed me that the appellant does have an  explanation
      why he did not begin military service in  that  year.   However,  that
      evidence was never adduced before the Judge because the issue was  not
      raised at the hearing.

  39. Given the importance placed upon this issue by the Judge, as evidenced
      by his several references to it, the appellant was, in  my  judgement,
      not given a fair and proper opportunity to deal with the issue in  his
      evidence or in submissions by his representative. I am satisfied  that
      this was a material error in his decision to dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal.  It was, as Mr Hoshi pointed out,  also  referred  to  by  the
      Judge in paragraph 42 dealing with the reliability or  genuineness  of
      the summons. That said, in any event, there are flaws in  the  Judge's
      reasoning concerning the summons and its genuineness.

  40. The Judge dealt with the summons at paras 42 and 43 as follows:

           "42.  I have given all the  evidence  careful  scrutiny,  but  I
                 conclude that the Appellant has not proved his case even to
                 the low standard of proof required.  There  is  a  question
                 mark over his age and how it relates to his apparently late
                 Military Service starting 2 years after his 19th  birthday.
                 An Appellant's first account of his claim normally  carries
                 appreciable weight - especially if it is given  soon  after
                 the relevant events.  However, if the evidence then  starts
                 to vary over time, the evidence starts to carry less weight
                 and uncertainty is engendered over the initial account.  In
                 this case the Appellant was reciting, in interview,  events
                 that had supposedly  occurred  but  a  few  weeks  earlier.
                 There  was  no  reason  to  confuse  dates,  there  is   no
                 supporting  evidence  that  he  was  unduly   stressed   at
                 interview.  Viewing the interview as a whole it is  fluent.
                 I have come to the conclusion the summons and military book
                 have been procured to  bolster  a  claim.   If  the  events
                 occurred at all - it is remarkable that  a  summons  issued
                 the next day.  The  first  process  according  to  the  COI
                 evidence would be an arrest  warrant  -  a  document  which
                 would not be left with the family.  A summons  would  be  a
                 later document -  and  that  may  -  under  the  conditions
                 described in the COI - be left with the family.  I note the
                 Solicitors' Report which considers the  document  to  be  a
                 genuine summons.  However  it  does  not  appear  that  the
                 Solicitor who prepared the  Report  was  appraised  of  the
                 issue over the dates - and in particular whether in fact  a
                 summons would, or even could, be issued within one  day  of
                 an allegation.  It  bears  date  23rd  October  -  the  day
                 immediately following the day on which the events are -  in
                 the revised account - said to have occurred.  This issue is
                 not addressed in the Report - and this is at  the  core  of
                 the case.  It is possible the Summons  is  on  the  correct
                 form, but it has not been proven, even to the low standard,
                 that  it  is  what  it  purports   to   be   -   namely   a
                 contemporaneous document relating to the Appellant,  issued
                 the day after the asserted incident.  I note from  the  COI
                 the ease with which summonses from Iran can be forged.

           43.   I find that the Appellant's evidence is not to  be  relied
                 upon and I reject his account of the 'Quran' incident.  For
                 the reasons given I reject the Summons and Military Book, I
                 find they have been created to bolster  the  case  and  the
                 conflicting  dates,   and   consequent   changes   to   the
                 Appellant's account, serve to make his evidence  unreliable
                 and suspect.  It has not  been  proved,  even  to  the  low
                 standard, that the summons or  military  book  are  genuine
                 original documents."

  41. It seems to me plain that the Judge found the documents, in particular
      the summons not to be "genuine".  His reference in para 42 to the ease
      with which "summonses from Iran can be forged" can only be relevant to
      a finding that the document is not "genuine".   I  accept  Mr  Hoshi's
      submission, which was not doubted by Mr Richards,  that  there  is  no
      basis in  the  COI  Report  for  the  Judge's  statement  that  forged
      summonses are easily obtainable in Iran.   The  Judge  refers  to  the
      section of the COI Report for January 2013 at paras 11.49-11.50, 11.57
      and 11.59 at paragraph 33 of his determination.  It is unnecessary  to
      set those out in full here.  It suffices to say that nothing in  those
      extracts supports the Judge's view that forged  summonses  are  easily
      obtainable in Iran.

  42. In addition, the Judge took into  account  that  it  was,  in  effect,
      unlikely that a summons would be issued a day  after  the  appellant's
      claimed incident with C occurred.  Again, there is nothing in the  COI
      Report to which I was  referred,  or  which  was  relied  upon  by  Mr
      Richards,  to  demonstrate  that  it  was  unlikely,   and   therefore
      implausible, that a  summons  could  be  issue  within  a  day  of  an
      incident.  The Judge appears to link that  conclusion  with  his  view
      that, in any event, an arrest warrant would have to be issued before a
      summons.  That is, in fact, dealt with in para 11.49 of the COI Report
      set out by the Judge at para 34 of his determination.   Unfortunately,
      it sets out the sequence of events differently. There it states:

           "The consequence of non-attendance after issuing an  'Ehzariyeh'
           would usually be  the  issuing  of  an  arrest  warrant  and  an
           absentia verdict if the person is not found".

  43. The reference to an 'Ehzariyeh' is, as para 11.49 of  the  COI  Report
      states,  to  a  "summons".    Therefore,   the   background   evidence
      contradicted the Judge's view that there would  first  be  an  "arrest
      warrant" and that a "summons" would be a later document".

  44. Both this and the unsupported assumption that a summons could  not  be
      issued within a day of an event, fatally flaws the  Judge's  reasoning
      to doubt the genuineness of the summons  relied  upon  and  which  the
      expert concluded was "entirely genuine".  The Judge was wrong to  rely
      on the fact that the expert had  not  taken  into  account  whether  a
      summons could be issued within one day of an allegation since that was
      not a matter upon which the  Judge  had  any  background  evidence  to
      suggest that it was unlikely or impossible.

  45. Whilst I accept that the Judge had to assess the appellant's  evidence
      both written and  oral,  including  his  explanation  of  why  he  had
      mistakenly though the incident occurred on the  Saturday  rather  than
      the Tuesday. In relation to that, Mr Hoshi's submission that the Judge
      failed to appreciate a fourth possibility, namely that the appellant's
      account and explanation was true and the document was genuine  appears
      to have led the Judge only to consider  possibilities  which  involved
      either the appellant not telling the truth or the documents not  being
      genuine.  He does not appear to have left open  the  possibility  most
      favourable to the appellant.  But, in any event, the assessment of the
      appellant's evidence was, in my judgement, necessarily affected by the
      Judge's conclusion that the appellant's  account  could  not  be  true
      because he could not in  October  2013  have  still  been  undertaking
      military service.

  46. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the Judge erred in  law  in
      reaching his adverse findings which led him to dismiss the appellant's
      appeal.

Decision

  47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal involved the making of a material error of law.  That  decision
      cannot stand and is set aside.

  48. In those circumstances, both representatives invited me to  remit  the
      appeal for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  That, in
      my view, is the appropriate course given the nature and extent of  the
      fact finding required and applying para 7.2 of the Senior  President's
      Practice Statement.  It follows from the procedural irregularities  in
      the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

  49.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
      rehearing before a judge other than Judge Halliwell.









                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
