
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00283/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                            |Decision and Reasons promulgated |
|On 28 November 2017                       |On 22 January 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Morris, promulgated on 4 July 2017, in which  the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Albania born on 9 February 1999  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom on  2  January  2015.  The  appellant
        claimed asylum on the same day which was refused by the respondent.
        The appellant appealed against that decision which came before  the
        Judge. Having noted  the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny,  and  setting  out  the  procedural  history  and
        submissions, the Judge sets out his findings of fact at [30 -  110]
        of the decision under challenge.
     3. The Judge notes at [31] that the issues in the appeal turned to  an
        extent upon the credibility of the appellant.
     4. The appellants asylum claim is based upon the Convention Reason  of
        been a member of a 'particular social group' (PSG) [34]. The  Judge
        sets out Mr Draycott's submissions  in  relation  to  how  the  PSG
        should be defined at [40 (i) - (ii)], and comments upon  the  same,
        in the following terms:


                i) First, by reference to what  he  termed  his  "immediate,
                   impoverished and vulnerable family". I am  not  satisfied
                   such a group, even if it were to be expanded  to  include
                   all impoverished and vulnerable families in Albania,  can
                   be said to meet the requirement of  having  to  share  an
                   innate  characteristic  or  belief,  so  fundamental   to
                   identity or conscience that they should not be forced  to
                   renounce it. Neither am I satisfied that any  such  group
                   can be said to possess a  distinct  identity  in  Albania
                   because  members  are  perceived  as  different  by   the
                   surrounding society in that country.  It  is  established
                   that the possession of that characteristic  or  attribute
                   must distinguish the group from society at large.  Absent
                   this last factor, the group may be a social group, but it
                   will not be a "particular social group".


               ii) Secondly, by reference to the appellant  having  been  an
                   attempted victim of trafficking/forced labour by criminal
                   gang.  In  this  case,  although  I  accept  as  did  the
                   respondent, that the appellant was beaten  by  the  three
                   men who were seeking to persuade him to work with them in
                   pursuit of their criminal  activities,  by  reference  to
                   decisions such as that in R (on the application of BG)  v
                   Secretary of State to the Home Department [2016] EWHC 786
                   (Admin)  and  EK   (Article   4   ECHR:   antitrafficking
                   Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC),  I  am  not
                   satisfied that that constitutes  the  appellant  being  a
                   victim of trafficking/forced labour. Even if I  am  wrong
                   in  that  finding,  the  above  points  relating  to  the
                   characteristics of any such group apply equally.


     5. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant is a member of a PSG  and
        thus found the appellant had  failed  to  satisfy  him  as  to  the
        existence of a Convention Reason.
     6. In relation to the claim to be entitled to a grant of  Humanitarian
        protection, the Judge finds it necessary to look to the future  for
        the appellant to establish substantial grounds for  believing  that
        if return to Albania he will face a real risk of suffering  serious
        harm. The Judge noted the appellant speaks to his family in Albania
        two to three times a week and has not suggested  they  have  warned
        him that the gang members he claims to have suffered at  the  hands
        of previously continue to  look  for  him  or  have  indicated  any
        continuing interest in him.  The Judge finds, however, at [48] that
        if the appellant were returned to his home area  there  is  a  real
        risk of him suffering serious harm at the hands of  the  gang  that
        targeted him in the past.
     7. The Judge thereafter considered paragraph 399C  (iii)  and  whether
        owing to any identified risks the appellant is unwilling  to  avail
        himself of the available protection in Albania [49].
     8. At [50] the Judge repeats the finding the appellant  would  face  a
        real risk of suffering serious harm in his home area but  that  the
        appellant had failed to satisfy the Judge that if he were  returned
        to Albania the state authorities will be  unwilling  or  unable  to
        afford protection to him. The Judge finds at [54] that no  evidence
        was presented to suggest the authorities  knew  or  ought  to  have
        known of circumstances particular to the appellant's case but  were
        unlikely  to  provide  such  additional  protection  and  that  the
        appellant clearly stated on the occasion of the third beating  that
        he chose not to make the authorities aware of his predicament.  The
        Judge finds at [53] that he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
        had  demonstrated  that  if  he  were  to  return  to  Albania  the
        authorities would be unwilling or unable to afford protection.
     9. The Judge addresses the issue of internal relocation from [56].  At
        [62] the Judge finds the appellant has an aunt who lives  with  her
        family in Tirana. Although criminal activity  is  recorded  in  the
        country information in Tirana, the Judge found the appellant failed
        to satisfy him that with the support from his aunt and  her  family
        he would not be able to integrate  and  establish  himself  in  the
        capital city safely. The Judge  also  noted  other  family  members
        living in Albania. The Judge concludes at [64]:


             "In summary of this  point,  having  made  the  assessment  in
             accordance with AH (Sudan) referred to above, I find  that  no
             evidence has been presented to me to suggest that  the  impact
             on the appellant of settling elsewhere in Albania will be such
             that it would be unreasonable to expect  him  to  relocate  or
             that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so: i.e.  by
             reference to paragraph 47 of the  decision  in  Januzi,  I  am
             satisfied that the appellant can live a relatively normal life
             in his chosen place of relocation judged by the standards that
             prevail in his country of nationality generally and I have  no
             reason to believe that he cannot reach such a part of  Albania
             without undue hardship or undue difficulty. As such, it is not
             unreasonable to expect him to move there. Although there would
             obviously be difficulties in the appellant in relocating, I am
             not satisfied that for him to do so would be unduly harsh.


    10. The Judge did not find the appellant had established that he  could
        satisfy Articles 2 or 3 on protection grounds.
    11. In relation to the appellant's health, the Judge considered Article
        3 but having reviewed the evidence did not find that returning  the
        appellant would breach Article 3 ECHR.
    12. In relation to Article 8, the Judge found the appellant  unable  to
        succeed under the Immigration Rules. When  considering  the  matter
        outside the Rules, in the structured manner set out in Razgar,  the
        Judge concluded  the  decision  would  amount  to  a  proportionate
        interference in any protected right.
    13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a  number  of  grounds
        which was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.




Summary of submissions to the Upper Tribunal



    14. Mr Draycott submitted there were two issues before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal namely that  of  a  sufficiency  protection  and  internal
        relocation.
    15. The appellant's home area is said to  be  a  rural  area  near  the
        Macedonian border. It is submitted it is not disputed that criminal
        gangs in Albania are  involved  in  drug  trafficking  and  it  was
        submitted that a gang wished to recruit the appellant to be used in
        such activities. When the appellant refused to be recruited he  was
        beaten. The appellant's mother complained to the  local  police  on
        the first occasion but not the second.
    16. The appellant claims he was initially approached in March 2014  and
        then again in September 2014. In December 2014, the  appellant  was
        seriously beaten which was found by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        to amount to serious harm.
    17. It was  argued  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge found there is a generic sufficiency  of  protection
        and then went on to consider if the authorities were  unwilling  or
        not to provide protection. As it was found they were not  unwilling
        the appeal was dismissed. Mr Draycott submitted  that  the  nuanced
        approach required was not considered as there should have  been  an
        individualised assessment of the availability of protection and the
        balancing  of  the  competing  factors.  It  was   submitted   that
        protection would not be forthcoming as a result of deficiencies  in
        the local police and examples of corruption.
    18. Mr Draycott submits the proper test that should have  been  applied
        by the Judge is that set out at [18] of the decision of  the  Upper
        Tribunal of NA and VA  (protection:  Article  7  (2)  Qualification
        Directive) India [2015] UKUT 00432 in which it was found:


             It is a common case that where the persecution asserted  as  a
             threat to life, the Osman test must, as a matter  of  domestic
             law, be applied, given that Article  2  ECHR  is  one  of  the
             Convention rights protected by the Human Rights Act 1998.  The
             decision of the ECtHR in Osman concerned a  positive  duty  on
             state authorities to protect  life  derived  from  Article  2.
             There was no dispute that this obligation extends  beyond  the
             state's primary duty to secure the right to life  by  devising
             effective  criminal  law  provisions   and   appropriate   law
             enforcement machinery  for  the  prevention,  suppression  and
             punishment of offences. The Courts starting point was that:


                  "..... Article 2 of  the  Convention  may  also  imply  in
                  certain well-defined circumstances a  positive  obligation
                  on  the  authorities  to  take  preventative   operational
                  measures to protect an individual his life is at risk from
                  the criminal acts of another individual."

              See [115]. The Court continued in [116]:

                  "For the Court,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  difficulties
                  involved    in    policing    modern    societies,     the
                  unpredictability of  human  conduct  and  the  operational
                  choices which must be made  in  terms  of  priorities  and
                  resources, such an obligation must be interpreted in a way
                  which does not impose an  impossible  or  disproportionate
                  burden on the authorities. Accordingly, not every  claimed
                  risk to life can entail for the authorities  a  Convention
                  requirement to take operational measures to  prevent  that
                  risk from materialising. Another relevant consideration is
                  the need to ensure that the police exercise  their  powers
                  to control and prevent  crime  in  a  manner  which  fully
                  respects  the  due  process  and  other  guarantees  which
                  legitimately  place  restraints  on  the  scope  of  their
                  actions  to  investigate  crime  and  bring  offenders  to
                  justice, including the guarantees contained in Articles  5
                  and 8 of the Convention."

               The  Court  then  framed   the   principle,   or   test,   of
reasonableness:

                  "In the opinion of the Court where there is an  allegation
                  that the authorities have violated the positive obligation
                  to protect the right to life in the context of their above-
                  mentioned duty to prevent and  suppress  offences  against
                  the  person  (see  paragraph  115  above),  it   must   be
                  established to its satisfaction that the authorities  knew
                  or ought to have known at the time of the existence  of  a
                  real  and  immediate  risk  to  life  of   an   identified
                  individual or individuals from  the  criminal  acts  of  a
                  third party and that they failed to take  measures  within
                  the scope of their powers which, judged reasonably,  might
                  have been expected to avoid that risk. The Court does  not
                  accept the Government's view that the failure to  perceive
                  the risk to life in the circumstances known at the time or
                  to take preventative measures to avoid that risk  must  be
                  tantamount to gross negligence or wilful disregard of  the
                  duty to protect life (see paragraph  107  above).  Such  a
                  rigid standard must be considered to be incompatible  with
                  the requirement of  Article  1  of  the  Convention  (see,
                  mutatis mutandis,  but  the  above  mentioned  McCann  and
                  Others judgment, p.45,  para  146).  For  the  Court,  and
                  having regard to the nature  of  the  right  protected  by
                  Article 2, a  right  fundamental  in  the  scheme  of  the
                  Convention, it is sufficient for an appellant applicant to
                  show that the authorities did not do  all  that  could  be
                  reasonably expected of them to avoid a real and  immediate
                  risk  to  life  of  which  they  have  or  ought  to  have
                  knowledge. This is a question which can only  be  answered
                  in light of all the circumstances of any particular case".

             The   duty   to   take    case    sensitive    and    specific
             preventative/protective  measures  arises   only   where   two
             conditions are satisfied. The first is that there  must  be  a
             real and immediate risk to the life of an individual person or
             persons from the criminal acts of a third party. The second is
             that the relevant state agencies knew or ought to  have  known
             of this risk.

    19. It was submitted that the authorities were aware of  the  issue  as
        the appellant's family in Albania had told the police about it.  It
        is also submitted the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not undertake a
        proper engagement with the fact the appellant had  been  beaten  by
        way of serious beatings in the past and  how  the  same  should  be
        factored into the assessment. It was argued that as  the  appellant
        had suffered past persecution the Judge should have considered that
        this was demonstrative real risk  of  future  persecution.  Article
        4(4) Qualification Directive reads: 4.   The fact that an applicant
        has already been subject to persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to
        direct threats of such persecution  or  such  harm,  is  a  serious
        indication of the applicant's well-founded fear of  persecution  or
        real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good  reasons
        to consider that such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
        repeated.  It was submitted in light of this provision  the  burden
        of proof remained upon the Secretary of States throughout.
    20. Mr Draycott referred to the fact  that  despite  the  complaint  in
        September 2014 the police in Albania had failed to  deal  with  the
        same and that the country material provided refers to the fact that
        in rural areas many of the police  are  "in  the  pockets"  of  the
        criminal gangs. It was the appellants mother's  evidence  that  the
        police in that  area  receive  payments  from  the  gangs,  a  fact
        supported  by  the  available  evidence.  It  was   submitted   the
        protection from the police by those wanted by  the  criminal  gangs
        was limited and that the response of the  authorities  is  normally
        only available once the crime has been committed rather  than  them
        providing protection to an individual.
    21. Mr Draycott submitted this is an attempted trafficking case with an
        attempt to  recruit  the  appellant  to  undertake  forced  labour,
        meaning the UNHCR guidelines should have  been  considered  by  the
        Judge.  It  was   therefore   not   necessary   to   consider   the
        "characteristic" argument as the appellant can be a member  of  the
        group recognised by society. It  was  submitted  the  Qualification
        Directive must be read in the same way as the UNHCR  guidance.  The
        attempt to recruit the appellant is an innate  characteristic.  The
        gang will recall that the appellant  rebutted  their  advances  and
        fled putting him at real risk on return. It was submitted the gangs
        target individuals such as the appellant to get them  to  work  for
        them on the basis they are vulnerable individual  from  a  deprived
        background suitable for recruitment.
    22. Mr Draycott argued that the Judge's finding that  this  reason  did
        not represent the totality of the reasons is wrong in law and  that
        the reason the appellant was targeted engages a Convention reason.
    23. Mr Draycott submitted that the correct test that should  have  been
        applied is that found in TD and AD  (trafficked  women)  CG  [2016]
        UKUT 00092 which was relevant to considering whether the  appellant
        will be able to benefit from a sufficiency of protection.
    24. It was submitted the Judge erred in finding  the  appellant  had  a
        support network in Albania. In relation to the findings on internal
        relocation, Mr Draycott submitted the Judge had not properly  dealt
        with this issue. The Judge accepted the appellant faced a real risk
        in his home area [48 and 50 of First-tier  Tribunal  decision]  but
        found the gang was not interested in finding the appellant. It  was
        submitted the Judge misrepresented the appellants evidence at  [61]
        and failed to engage with  the  guidance  provided  in  AM  and  BM
        (trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 which held that due to
        the size of Albania  and  the  manner  in  which  Albanian  society
        operates 'internal relocation is unlikely to be effective for  most
        victims of trafficking who have a well-founded fear of  persecution
        in their home area'. It was submitted the applicant  faces  a  real
        risk of being killed by the gangs who, it was  submitted,  will  be
        able to find the appellant especially  in  light  of  the  need  to
        register when a person settles in a new area.
    25. Mr Draycott further referred to the medical evidence from Dr  Kumar
        which stated the  appellant  has  an  adjustment  disorder  and  is
        frightened of returning to Albania and the impact of the  appellant
        being returned. There was also evidence from the appellant's foster
        carer in a consolidated appeal bundle repeating the claim that  the
        appellant had a fear of return to Albania.  It  is  submitted  that
        although the Judge noted this evidence there is no  finding  as  to
        whether this was  accepted  and  how  this  will  impact  upon  the
        reasonableness of return and internal relocation.
    26. Mr Draycott referred to [65 - 68]  of  the  Judges  decision  where
        there is mention of Dr Kumar's  report  which  indicates  that  the
        diagnosis may be accepted but it is still found the appellant could
        not meet the relevant test. Mr  Draycott  repeated  the  submission
        that if the diagnosis was accepted it  should  have  been  factored
        into the assessment of the reasonableness of internal relocation.
    27. In response, Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  Judge  considered  the
        correct case  law  in  relation  to  the  question  of  sufficiency
        protection and made a clear decision in relation to the same.   The
        factual findings are based on the evidence.  The  Judge  noted  the
        appellant's ongoing contact with family and the lack of evidence of
        any ongoing interest in him. Whilst Mr Mills accepted another judge
        may come to a different conclusion it has not been  made  out  that
        the actual findings made were not reasonably available to the Judge
        on the evidence. It was accepted the appellant had complained  once
        to the police and that there was an investigation but there was  no
        evidence of the outcome and no further complaints had been made. As
        the appellant fears the gang in his  home  area  it  was  submitted
        there will be no arguable material error if there is  an  available
        internal relocation option.
    28. In relation to internal relocation  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the
        appellants submissions miss the point that the appellant's evidence
        was accepted including that of  risk  in  his  home  area.  It  was
        submitted there was no inconsistency in the decision of  the  Judge
        at [61]. The Judge does not  make  a  finding  that  the  gang  are
        actively pursuing the appellant. This is a finding the appellant in
        his home area may be seen and may be pursued by the  gang.  It  was
        submitted the Judge was entitled to find that there was no evidence
        that the appellant was being sought per se.
    29. In relation to  the  trafficking  issue;  Mr  Mills  submitted  the
        appellant is not a victim of trafficking or a potential victim.  At
        its highest the gangs wanted the appellant to work for them but  he
        refused and so was beaten for refusing. There is no  evidence  this
        is a forced labour case and authorities in respect  of  that  issue
        are not relevant.
    30. It was submitted the case law  does  not  support  a  finding  that
        internal relocation is not  unavailable  for  all  in  Albania.  In
        particular, the evidence indicated  that  the  appellant  had  been
        targeted by a gang from the next village as  found  by  the  Judge.
        There is  no  evidence  the  gang  has  national  or  international
        connections.
    31. Mr Mills submitted the suggestion the  gang  had  contacts  in  all
        Albania for that the police force was corrupt in all of Albania  is
        pure speculation.
    32. At [62] specific areas of potential relocation were  considered  by
        the Judge as the appellant has  family  in  three  different  areas
        providing a number of options for him. The Judge  found  they  were
        valid options.
    33. In relation to the mental health challenge,  it  was  accepted  the
        Judge does not appear to  discuss  the  same  in  relation  to  his
        reference to the reasonableness of internal relocation but at [62 -
        63] the Judge gives a correct legal self-direction and states  that
        in reaching the conclusion  he  has  considered  all  the  evidence
        regarding health issues. It is also submitted the Judge  was  aware
        of the views of the foster carers and that  all  the  material  was
        considered.
    34. The Judge was aware the appellant was 18 years of age  with  mental
        health issues. The Judge finds the appellant can return  to  family
        and that mental health care is available to him in Albania.
    35. In relation to the PSG argument, Mr Mills  submitted  that  at  its
        highest all that could be found was that the appellant was  "almost
        a victim of trafficking" although this had not even been  made  out
        on the facts. It was argued the Judge was entitled to  find  as  it
        did in relation to this issue.
    36. Mr Mills accepted the social group identified  by  Mr  Draycott  in
        relation to family could possibly form a PSG but it  was  necessary
        for the appellant to establish that he had been targeted due to the
        fact he was a member of this group which was not made  out  on  the
        evidence. It was also submitted that it did not mean in every  case
        if the person was targeted that they could make out such  a  claim.
        No material error arises.
    37. In response Mr Draycott submitted it was not clear from the  Judges
        reasoning that this was an opportunistic approach to the appellant.
        Mr Draycott repeated his claim that if the  appellant  was  in  his
        home area and the gang wanted retribution as he had shunned them he
        was at risk. The appellant could not remain in his home area and if
        the grudge continues the  impact  of  the  same  should  have  been
        considered in the decision.
    38. In relation to ongoing interest, Mr Draycott submitted that it  was
        all nuanced evidence and the finding the authorities are willing to
        provide protection is erroneous.
    39. It was argued the appellant is a minor due to his age and  that  if
        he had complied with the requests it would mean he will  have  been
        recruited and become dependent upon his coercers.   It  was  argued
        there was no challenge to the  claim  that  gangs  in  Albania  are
        engaged in trafficking and drug-related offences and that  this  is
        not a local issue.  It was  submitted  the  gang  is  linked  to  a
        national  criminal  syndicate  that  could  be  involved   in   the
        transportation of drugs through Albania to Europe as referred to in
        the country material.
    40. In relation to the medical evidence, Mr Draycott stated that if  Dr
        Kumar's prognosis is accepted this demonstrates what the  appellant
        is like in the United Kingdom  a  safe  country  which  raises  the
        question of what would happen to the appellant if he was sent  back
        to Albania. The report states that he will "shutdown" which  raises
        the question of whether internal relocation is reasonable.
    41. Mr Draycott repeated the  claim  that  the  reason  the  gang  were
        interested in the appellant was because he is vulnerable as he  has
        no male relatives to tell the gang  to  leave  him  alone.  It  was
        necessary to  consider  the  reason  why  the  appellant  has  been
        targeting and why the gang  are  showing  an  interest  in  him  to
        consider the question of the relevant PSG.



Discussion



    42. The appellant's characteristics is an Albanian  national,  born  on
        the above date of birth, who is from a family who are not  well-to-
        do, and who was approached by members of a local gang on  a  number
        of occasions who tried to recruit him but who on the third occasion
        beat the appellant as a result of his refusal, does not  appear  to
        be disputed. The fact the appellant exhibits psychological symptoms
        as outlined in the report  of  Dr  Kumar  does  not  appear  to  be
        disputed either.
    43. I find no arguable legal error in the findings by  the  Judge  that
        this is a group of local individuals targeting  the  appellant  for
        the  above  stated  reasons.  It  is  accepted  there  was  country
        information before the Judge speaking  of  the  connection  between
        criminal gangs and trafficking and the international drug trade but
        this does not mean, as submitted by Mr Mills, that each  and  every
        gang member has such connections as there is also within Albania  a
        local criminal fraternity as there is within any  European  country
        including the United Kingdom. Indeed, the majority of crime in most
        countries is committed by domestic criminals or criminal gangs with
        no international connection at all. The evidence before the  Judge,
        whilst referring to certain aspects of Albanian  criminal  society,
        failed to establish even to the lower standard applicable  to  this
        appeal that all gangs have such connections  to  the  international
        trafficking or drug market or would approach individuals  with  the
        intent of involving them in such trade  i.e.  trafficking  them  by
        forced labour. I do not find Mr Draycott has made out any  arguable
        legal error material to the finding of the Judge  that  this  is  a
        local  gang  who  targeted  the  appellant  for  the  purposes   of
        recruiting him in his home area.
    44. I do not find the assertion the Judge erred in not considering this
        matter by reference to the UNHCR guidance appertaining  to  victims
        of trafficking to have been made out. As Mr Mills submitted,  taken
        at its highest  if  the  potential  trafficking  element  had  been
        established before  the  Judge,  the  appellant  was  no  more  the
        possible victim of trafficking although, as stated, the trafficking
        element was not established before the Judge.
    45. It is accepted that the appellant was beaten on one occasion by non-
        state actors there being no evidence of state sponsors or  condoned
        persecution.  Although not discussed at the Error of  Law  hearing,
        it is accepted that whether a person has been subjected to  an  act
        of persecution is a fact sensitive analysis, it  was  not  arguably
        made out before  the  Judge  that  the  one  incident  of  violence
        inflicted upon the appellant was part of a sustained pattern of ill-
        treatment or sufficient to satisfy the definition  of  persecution,
        even if accepted it resulted in serious harm to the appellant.
    46.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006, Regulation 5(1), states:


         "In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act  of  persecution
        must be:
        (a)  sufficiently  serious  by  its  nature  or  repetition  as  to
        constitute a severe violation of a basic human right, in particular
        a right from which derogation cannot be made under  Article  15  of
        the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and  Fundamental
        Freedoms; or
        (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a violation of a
        human right which is sufficiently severe as to affect an individual
        in a similar manner as specified in (a).


        (2) An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:
        (a) an act of physical or mental  violence,  including  an  act  of
        sexual violence;
        (b) a legal, administrative, police, or judicial measure  which  in
        itself  is  discriminatory   or   which   is   implemented   in   a
        discriminatory manner;
        (c)  prosecution  or  punishment,  which  is  disproportionate   or
        discriminatory;
        (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a  disproportionate  or
        discriminatory punishment;
        (e) prosecution or  punishment  for  refusal  to  perform  military
        service in a conflict,  where  performing  military  service  would
        include crimes or acts falling under regulation 7.
        (3) An act of persecution must be committed for at least one of the
        reasons in Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention. "


    47. In OO (Sudan) v SSHD and JM (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1432, a
        case concerning homosexuality, the Court of Appeal  said  that  the
        Directive and consequent 2006 Regulations did not widen  the  scope
        of the concept of persecution established under domestic case  law.
        If persecution could not  be  established  under  UK  jurisprudence
        independently of the Directive and the  2006  regulations  then  it
        could not be established.
    48.  In  Sandralingham  [1996]  Imm  AR  97,  Staughton  LJ  said  that
        "persecution is persistent and serious ill treatment  without  just
        cause by the state or from which the state can  provide  protection
        but chooses not to do so".
    49. In MI (Pakistan) and MF (Venezuela) v Secretary of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 826 the Court of Appeal  held  that
        the  concept  of  persecution  for  the  purposes  of  the   Geneva
        Convention (and indeed the Directive) requires  that  the  past  or
        apprehended harm to the asylum seeker  must  attain  a  substantial
        level of seriousness. Family or social  disapproval  in  which  the
        state has no  part  lies  outside  its  protection.  Discrimination
        against members of a particular social  group  in  the  country  of
        origin is not enough, even  though  such  discrimination  might  be
        contrary to the standards of human rights prevailing in  the  state
        in which asylum is sought.
    50. In Ali Cem Kaya v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1195 the Tribunal had  found
        that a single brief period of detention and mistreatment could  not
        amount to persecution as it lacked "the pervasive element which  is
        commonly said to be a feature of persecution".  Brooke LJ  referred
        to the decision of Lord Justice Stuart Smith in Demirkaya in  which
        it was held that "at one end of the scale there  may  be  arbitrary
        deprivation of life,  torture  and  cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading
        punishment or treatment.  In such a case, the  conduct  may  be  so
        extreme that one instance is sufficient".  In Ali Cem Kaya  v  SSHD
        the  Court  of  Appeal  refused  to  intervene  and  accepted   the
        Tribunal's reasoned decision.
    51. In Tafara Nhengu [2004] EWCA Civ 298 the appellant  belonged  to  a
        drama group which performed at MDC rallies,  although  he  was  not
        himself an MDC member.  On one occasion, his group was attacked  by
        Zanu PF youths.  The appellant sustained injuries to his  head  and
        chest. On another occasion, he was chased by youths who  took  over
        the group's rehearsal venue and attacked the director's home.   The
        Adjudicator concluded that, if the appellant returned home he might
        suffer the sort of ill treatment to which he had  been  exposed  in
        the past.  The Adjudicator  found  that  that  did  not  cross  the
        threshold of persecution.  The Court of Appeal  effectively  agreed
        and said "There was nothing on which  the  Adjudicator  could  have
        found, nor did he find, that this appellant was at risk of anything
        more serious than  that."   The  Court  quoted  LJ  Staughton  from
        Ravichandran "It would I think be open to a Tribunal to find that a
        single beating, unless it was particularly  vicious  or  injurious,
        does not amount to persecution.  But if there is  a  real  risk  of
        repetition  the  position  would  be  different.  I  do  not  think
        therefore that the Tribunal's finding that  the  appellant  may  be
        beaten on his return entitles the appellant to claim that  that  of
        itself  amounts  to  persecution."   The  Court  also  referred  to
        Professor Hathaway's analysis.  Professor Hathaway said that it was
        a matter of degree as to whether conduct amounted  to  persecution.
        "At one end of the scale there  may  be  arbitrary  deprivation  of
        life,  torture  or  cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading  punishment  or
        treatment.  In such a case, the conduct may be so extreme that  one
        instance is sufficient; but less serious conduct may not amount  to
        persecution unless it is persistent".
    52. In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
        UKSC 31 (07 July 2010) Lord Hope said "the Refugee Convention  does
        not define "persecution". But it has been recognised that it  is  a
        strong word".  He went on  to  quote  from  Appellant  S395/2002  v
        Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (2003)  216  CLR
        473, para 40, McHugh and Kirby JJ said:  "Persecution  covers  many
        forms  of  harm  ranging  from  physical  harm  to  the   loss   of
        intangibles, from death and torture to state sponsored or  condoned
        discrimination in social life and  employment.  Whatever  form  the
        harm takes, it will constitute persecution only if,  by  reason  of
        its intensity or duration, the person persecuted cannot  reasonably
        be  expected  to  tolerate  it."   He  then  added  "To  constitute
        persecution for the purposes of the Convention  the  harm  must  be
        state sponsored or state condoned. Family or social disapproval  in
        which the state  has  no  part  lies  outside  its  protection.  As
        Professor J C Hathaway in The Law of Refugee Status (1991),  p  112
        has explained, "persecution is most appropriately  defined  as  the
        sustained or systemic failure of state protection  in  relation  to
        one of the core entitlements  which  has  been  recognised  by  the
        international  community."  The   Convention   provides   surrogate
        protection, which is activated  only  upon  the  failure  of  state
        protection. The failure of state protection is central to the whole
        system: Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001]
        1 AC 489, 495. The question is whether the home state is unable  or
        unwilling to discharge its duty to establish and operate  a  system
        for the protection against persecution of its own nationals".
    53. In MF (Venezuela) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  826    the  appellant
        claimed asylum on arrival on the basis that he had been politically
        active against the ruling party and  in  consequence  had  suffered
        constant  physical  and  psychological  abuse  as   a   result   of
        campaigning against the late President Chavez, spat on  by  police,
        received threatening calls and  been  threatened  with  guns.   The
        Court of Appeal upheld the Tribunal's finding that the threshold of
        persecution was not reached.
    54. In relation to the argument appertaining to  PSG,  it  is  accepted
        that a family is the clearest example of a social group.  The Judge
        sets out the correct case law and legal self-direction in  relation
        to this aspect. Mr Draycott's assertion the Judge applied the wrong
        test or failed to appreciate or understand the appropriate guidance
        is not made out.
    55. Although being a member of an economically disadvantaged family may
        be one of  the  factors  that  leads  criminal  gangs  to  identify
        potential  victims,  and  the  fact  the  gang  originated  from  a
        neighbouring village makes it likely they would know  the  economic
        circumstances of those in their locality, the question  before  the
        Judge remained did the appellant suffer persecution as a result  of
        his membership of any identify  particular  social  group.  As  the
        assertion the appellant is a victim of trafficking was not made out
        before the Judge, and nor was it establish the appellant  had  been
        persecuted by virtue of a  Convention  reason,  no  arguable  legal
        error  arises  on  the  basis  of  that  aspect  of   Mr   Draycott
        submissions.
    56. What must be accepted, as identified by the Judge, is that  due  to
        the evidence  of  an  assault  upon  the  appellant  on  the  third
        occasion, as a result of his refusal to work for the gang, there is
        an arguable real risk that if returned to his home area he  may  be
        encountered by the gang in the future who may repeat the request he
        joins him and who, if he refuses again, may inflict harm  upon  him
        by way of  further  acts  of  violence.  The  Judge  was  therefore
        required  to  consider  issue  of  sufficiency  protection   and/or
        internal relocation.
    57. It is accepted the material before the Judge speaks of examples  of
        corruption in the rural police  forces  in  parts  of  Albania  who
        receive payment from criminal gangs. Even if there is  a  mechanism
        in force to provide protection in such areas it is unlikely  to  be
        enforced by the police if they are in the pay  of  the  gangs  i.e.
        those they are being asked to investigate.
    58. What was not established before the Judge was that the  authorities
        to whom the first approach was reported were  in  the  pay  of  the
        gangs such that they failed to properly investigate any  complaint.
        The appellant's mother clearly felt able to approach the police  to
        complain  about  the  initial  approach.  It  is  not  known   what
        information was provided in relation to the identity of  the  gangs
        or of the nature of the specific complaint. If the gang  approached
        the appellant asking him to join  them  but  he  refused,  with  no
        evidence on adverse violent consequence, what is the nature of  the
        breach of the Albanian criminal law? The fact of the matter is that
        when a  clear  act  of  criminality  occurred,  namely  a  physical
        assault, the evidence before the Judge is  that  no  complaint  was
        made to the police. Had such a complaint been made there  may  have
        been a proper investigation and action taken. The  assertion  there
        was no available protection is therefore a matter of speculation so
        far as the specific facts of this appellant are concerned.
    59. The submission by Mr Draycott that the action  of  the  police  was
        reactionary whereas they were required  to  provide  protection  to
        prevent any adverse acts, is not in accordance with the  Oman  test
        relied upon him  in  his  early  submissions.  The  Upper  Tribunal
        identified  in  NA  and  VA  [2015]  UKUT  00432  that  whether   a
        sufficiency of protection existed is  a  case  sensitive  issue  in
        which two conditions had to be satisfied. The first is  that  there
        must be a real and immediate risk to the life of an appellant  from
        the criminal acts of third parties. What was not arguably establish
        before the Judge is that the  criminal  gang  wanted  to  kill  the
        appellant. This does not form part of the  submissions  before  the
        Upper  Tribunal.  The  argument  is  that  the  appellant  will  be
        subjected to further beatings if he refuses to work for  the  gang,
        who it is claimed wish to traffic him although that aspect was  not
        made out before the Judge. The second element is that the  relevant
        state agencies knew ought to  have  known  of  that  risk.  If  the
        alleged risk relates to a threat to the appellants life there is no
        evidence that the authorities were made aware of the same. The only
        evidence is of the report of the  first  attempt  by  the  gang  to
        approach the appellant and not what develop thereafter.
    60. The assertion the Judge was required to take a nuanced approach  to
        the evidence is not disputed. It is not made out, however, that the
        Judge applied the wrong test in law or failed to take into  account
        the relevant evidence when assessing this aspect of the case.
    61. The legal position  before  the  Judge  is  that  set  out  in  the
        Qualification Directive which reads when considering the  level  of
        protection  required  under  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
        International   Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations    2006,
        Regulation 4(2),:


             "(2) Protection shall be regarded as generally  provided  when
             the actors mentioned in paragraph (1)(a) and (b)  (see  above)
             take reasonable steps to prevent the persecution or  suffering
             of serious harm by operating an effective legal system for the
             detection, prosecution and  punishment  of  acts  constituting
             persecution or serious  harm,  and  the  person  mentioned  in
             paragraph (1) has access to such protection".


    62. The Judge was required to consider whether the Albanian authorities
        had taken reasonable steps to prevent persecution or suffering. The
        finding by the Judge that such reasonable steps had been taken both
        in terms of a general analysis  of  the  position  in  Albania  and
        specifically in relation to the appellant on the basis of what  the
        authorities knew had occurred to him at  the  hands  of  the  local
        gang, has not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error.
    63. Even if it had been found that there was no  effective  sufficiency
        of protection in  the  appellant's  home  area,  a  rural  area  of
        Albania, whether the decision to dismiss the appeal amounted  to  a
        material error depends upon the question  of  whether  there  is  a
        sufficiency of protection in the urban parts of  Albania  or  other
        areas occupied by members of the appellant's family  to  which  the
        Judge  found  he  had  a   viable   internal   relocation   option.
        Insufficient evidence was adduced before the  Judge  to  support  a
        finding that the appellant would not be  able  to  benefit  from  a
        sufficiency protection in all of Albania.  The  assertion  to  this
        effect by the appellant is not arguably made out  on  the  evidence
        before the Judge.
    64. In relation to the question of internal relocation, it  is  correct
        to note the Judge recorded relevant provisions of  the  Immigration
        Rules and case law in the body  of  the  determination.  The  Judge
        identified areas  within  Albania  to  which  the  appellant  could
        arguably relocate and the fact that despite having regular  contact
        with his family on a weekly basis there  was  no  evidence  of  any
        ongoing interest being shown in the whereabouts of the appellant by
        the criminal gang or any other individual or group of  individuals,
        is relevant to the overall conclusion.
    65. The Judge noted the test was whether relocation was  reasonable  in
        all the circumstances. Although there are certain  aspects  of  the
        evidence the Judge could have included in the determination,  which
        is already a lengthy and detailed document, it is not a legal error
        for the Judge not to record finding in relation to each  and  every
        aspect of the case advanced before him.
    66. In this case I find the Judge clearly considered the evidence  with
        the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  as  a  reading  of  the
        determination clearly shows. The medical evidence and that  of  the
        foster parents was clearly taken into account  by  the  Judge.  The
        subjective fear referred to by the appellant of return  to  Albania
        is understandable in relation to his home area where he  previously
        suffered at the hands of the criminal gang who beat him as a result
        of his third refusal to join them.  While  such  an  event  may  be
        sufficient to breach article 3 it was not made out  that  there  is
        any real risk of any future breach in other parts of Albania on the
        evidence before the Judge. This is an arguably sustainable finding.
        The appellant's subjective fear was not  objectively  made  out  in
        Albania other than in the appellant's home area.
    67. The Judge was aware of the diagnosis of Dr Kumar but clearly  found
        there are psychiatric services available in  Albania.  It  was  not
        made out before the Judge that the appellant's medical presentation
        was sufficient to engage article 3 ECHR  if  returned  to  Albania.
        Whilst the diagnosis of personality disorder is  noted,  for  which
        cognitive  intervention  may  be  the  most  appropriate  form   of
        assistance, the material before the Judge did  not  establish  that
        such help would not be available or that there will be a breach  of
        article 3 on return as the appellant currently presents.
    68. The test in relation to internal relocation has always been whether
        it is 'reasonable' in all the circumstances  for  an  appellant  to
        relocate to another part of their home state. The Judge  was  aware
        the appellant would not be returned to fend for himself as he has a
        number of family members in Albania with  whom  he  is  in  regular
        contact and other family members whom it was not shown would not be
        able to provide support and assistance by way of  accommodation  on
        return. The finding by the Judge that there is  a  viable  internal
        relocation option has not been shown to be  outside  the  range  of
        findings available to the Judge.
    69. So far as the submission by Mr Draycott concerning the  application
        of Article 4(4) of the Qualification Directive  is  concerned,  the
        first point to note is the findings by the Judge does not include a
        finding that the appellant has suffered past  persecution.  On  the
        basis of  the  evidence  past  persecution  is  not  been  arguably
        established before the Judge or it made  out  that  the  burden  of
        proving an entitlement  to  international  protection  should  have
        passed to the Secretary of State. The position adopted by the Judge
        that the burden of proving such entitlement lay upon the  appellant
        has not been shown to be  tainted  by  arguable  legal  error.  The
        finding by the Judge that the appellant had failed to discharge the
        burden is similarly not been shown to be tainted by arguable  legal
        error.
    70. In the alternative, if the burden had lain upon  the  Secretary  of
        State Article 4 (4) provides that "The fact that an  applicant  has
        already been subject to persecution or serious harm, or  to  direct
        threats of such persecution or such harm, is a  serious  indication
        of the applicant's well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of
        suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
        that such persecution or serious harm will not be  repeated".  Good
        reasons were made  out  before  the  Judge  namely  that  the  harm
        previously suffered by the appellant  related  specifically  to  an
        event in his home area when he refused to assist the  gang  on  the
        third occasion. It was not shown that any real risk of future  harm
        existed outside the appellant's home area.  As  a  viable  internal
        flight option exists there are good reasons to  consider  that  the
        vast serious harm will not be repeated.
    71. The Court of Appeal have recently reminded  us  that  decisions  of
        other judges should not be set aside without good reason.  That  is
        why the applicable test  is  whether  the  person  challenging  the
        decision has establish the existence of legal error material to the
        decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  As  Mr  Mills  noted  in   his
        submissions, it matters not whether another judge would  have  made
        this decision but whether the decision made was one reasonably open
        to the Judge who  made  it  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  made
        available when applying the correct legal test. I find that despite
        Mr Draycott's best endeavours and  the  usual  detail  incorporated
        within the submissions and arguments in support of the  appellant's
        case, it has not been made out that the  decision  is  infected  by
        arguable legal error to the extent that the Upper Tribunal  as  any
        basis for interfering with the same. The appellant's case has  been
        submitted taken at its highest if all the submission stand up. As I
        have found, this is not the case. The Judge undertook the necessary
        fact sensitive analysis of all  relevant  issues  and  no  arguable
        legal error warranting setting aside of the  earlier  decision  has
        been made out.


Decision

    72. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    73. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008



Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 18 January 2018

