

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00726/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decision and Reason Promulgated:     |
|On 25 April 2016                      |On 1 July 2016                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     r n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Dirie, instructed by the Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Uganda. She  applied  for  asylum  in  the
   United Kingdom and that application was refused by the  Respondent  in  a
   Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  ("RFRL")  dated  14  December  2014.   The
   Respondent made a decision to remove the Appellant as an illegal  entrant
   under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  The  Appellant
   appealed  that  decision  under  section  82  (1)  of  the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the appeal was  dismissed  by  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Page in a decision promulgated on  16  October  2015.
   The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  against  this  decision  and
   permission was granted on 16 November 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Frankish on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had miscalculated  the
   Appellant's age and that this led to  a  number  of  adverse  credibility
   findings.


   The Grounds


2. Ground 1 contends that the First-tier Tribunal gave insufficient  reasons
   for rejecting the medico-legal report prepared by Dr Alison Battersby,  a
   psychiatrist.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  due   to   the
   discrepancies and inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence  he  could
   discount the possibility of her story being true. It is submitted that in
   the light of the conclusions of the medico-legal  report  the  First-tier
   Tribunal failed to give sufficient reasons  for  its  conclusion.  It  is
   asserted that the Judge failed to engage with the substance of her expert
   evidence which it is asserted was suggestive of her account being true.

3. Ground  2  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
   Appellant's date of birth was 22 December 1974, stated that the Appellant
   in her screening and substantive interviews said that she  realised  that
   she was a lesbian in 1988 and then concluded that she had been aware that
   she was a lesbian since the age of 23-24  years.  The  Appellant  submits
   that the calculation was wrong and a correct calculation  would  put  her
   age at 13/14 in 1988. It is argued that this is a material error  because
   the Judge refers  to  this  erroneous  calculation  at  paragraph  59  as
   demonstrating that the Appellant had made a false claim. He  stated  that
   her evidence was irreconcilable with her claim to have realised she was a
   lesbian in 1988 and then that she could not have been in secondary school
   in 1988. It is submitted that  the  Judge  places  heavy  weight  on  the
   miscalculation and concludes that the Appellant had invented her account.
   The error is said to be material because the Upper Tribunal could not  be
   confident that the Judge would have reached the same conclusions  had  he
   properly taken account of the evidence.

4. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge failed to  give  sufficient  reasons  for
   findings of fact. The Judge concluded that the  Appellant  was  inventing
   her evidence in relation to staying in White City 18 days before claiming
   asylum. The Judge accepted that there was  an  address  called  MacKenzie
   Close but held the Appellant's ability not to remember more against  her.
   It is also submitted that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  Dr
   Battersby's report where she stated that memory and recall were  impaired
   in PTSD and that the Appellant may find it difficult to give a  stage  by
   stage description of her experiences. Further it is stated in the grounds
   that the Judge did not find the Appellant's evidence that  she  had  been
   raped credible. It is submitted that the Judge did  not  give  sufficient
   reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account; merely  that  it  did  not
   have "the ring of truth" to it.  He  did  not  consider  the  Appellant's
   account that the matter was dealt with within the community by the  Local
   Council.

5. Ground 4 asserts that the Judge failed to apply relevant guidance. It  is
   asserted that the Jude failed to consider the plausible explanations  for
   the Appellant's conduct. The UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection
   No: Claims to Refugee Status based on Sexual  Orientation  and/or  Gender
   Identity are cited as  is  the  Respondent's  document  "Sexual  Identity
   Issues in the Asylum Claim" dated 11 February  2015.  The  Appellant  had
   been diagnosed with moderate PTSD and it is asserted that the Judge erred
   in failing to consider Dr Battersby's report and  the  relevant  guidance
   when considering why the Appellant did not provide further details. It is
   argued that this is a material error of law as it forms a basis  for  the
   Judge to conclude that the Appellant fabricated her evidence.


   The Hearing

6. Ms Dirie  submitted  that  the  Judge  gave  substantial  weight  to  the
   findings flowing from the miscalculation of age. It was material and  had
   infected the rest of his findings. The most pertinent was  that  he  said
   her account had the hallmarks of invented stories.  This  conclusion  was
   based on his miscalculation and mathematical error.

7. The points taken in Ground 1 in relation to the medico-legal report  were
   linked with Grounds 3 and 4, although they  were  distinct  and  separate
   grounds. The report was provided by Dr Battersby  who  had  a  specialism
   sexual trauma. The Judge did not outright reject it but it countered what
   he was saying. He says she  would  have  PTSD  and  discounted  that  her
   account was true. He had made his own clinical findings and  supplemented
   them with his findings. Dr Battersby carried out a critical and  clinical
   analysis.  In  the  light  of  the  guidance  in  JL  (medical   reports-
   credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC), he was not obliged to accept it
   but further reasons could have been given.

8. Ground 3 asserted that there were  insufficient  findings  of  fact.  The
   Judge stated at paragraph 57 that the  Appellant  was  having  difficulty
   with regard to the address in White City. That finding was erroneous  and
   at the same level as the error with regard to the age. It was clear  that
   memory and recall were affected by PTSD. The Judge  had  not  taken  that
   into account. He made statements that had no basis saying that it did not
   have a ring of truth to it. He did not give full reasons for the  adverse
   findings. The reluctance that the  Appellant  would  have  shown  talking
   about her identity needed to be looked at in the light of  her  suffering
   PTSD. The Judge did  not  take  account  the  guidance  and  when  sexual
   identity was an issue it came out in stages.

9. Mr Richards submitted that there was an error of  fact.  That  error  was
   confined to paragraph 59 and then at paragraphs 60 to 66 he made a series
   of findings against her credibility for reasons totally unconnected  with
   the age issue. He found for example that the  Appellant  had  applied  to
   come to the UK to join her husband, a matter which she  denied,  but  she
   went on to claim to be a lesbian and he found that she gave  birth  to  a
   son in circumstances that were not  the  result  of  a  rape  as  claimed
   undermining her claim to be a long term lesbian. He found  that  she  did
   not return to Uganda as claimed and went into the  circumstances  of  her
   alleged arrest in Uganda and found against her on that for  reasons  that
   were independent of the unfortunate error in paragraph  59.  That  single
   error was not  such  as  to  displace  the  other  well-reasoned  adverse
   findings of credibility set out in the determination and it could not  be
   argued that the Judge gave insufficient reasons. It was  a  comprehensive
   analysis of her evidence and he had specifically  taken  account  of  the
   expert's report. The conclusions of Dr Battersby were not binding and  he
   was the arbiter of fact and  having  taken  account  of  the  report  and
   conclusions he came to the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
   witness of truth. Those findings were properly open to the Judge who  was
   not making as asserted clinical findings but  making  findings  of  fact.
   There was no material error of law and the decision ought to stand.


10. Ms Dirie submitted with regard to the age being an issue, it  was  quite
   clear that this point with regard  to  age  was  the  lynch  pin  of  his
   findings and it was material to his findings.

11. The parties agreed that if I were to find error agree  that  the  appeal
   should be remitted for rehearing.


   Discussion and Findings

12. Permission to appeal in this case was not limited, but it is clear  from
   the  grant  of  permission  that  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Frankish
   considered that  the  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
   miscalculation as to the Appellant's age leading to  adverse  credibility
   findings was the ground with the most force.


13. It is evident from  the  decision  in  this  case  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal heard extensive evidence, as he stated at paragraph  52  of  the
   decision that his notes of evidence ran to 32 pages. He  disbelieved  the
   Appellant's account to be  a  lesbian  and  to  have  been  arrested  and
   detained as a result. He came to that conclusion on the basis of what  he
   found to be numerous discrepancies in the evidence. Those conclusions are
   largely well-reasoned and grounded in the evidence. However, at paragraph
   34  the  First-tier  Tribunal  miscalculated  the  Appellant's  age.   At
   paragraph 59 of the decision he noted that the Appellant had said in both
   her screening interview and her asylum interview that she  realised  that
   she was a lesbian in 1988. He accepted that  she  was  born  in  December
   1974. He then embarked  on  the  following  reasoning  and  came  to  the
   following conclusions:


       "At paragraph 9 of her witness statement dated  14  September  2015,
       prepared carefully for the appellant as her evidence in chief at the
       hearing, she gave information  that  is  irreconcilable  wither  her
       claim to have realised she was a lesbian in 1988. In 1988 she was 23-
       24 years old. In her witness statement dated 14 September  2015  she
       said at paragraph 7 that she attended primary and  secondary  school
       then went to college to do her O levels, and then  did  her  teacher
       training. It was at secondary  school  that  she  realised  she  was
       attracted  to  girls  and  not  boys  and  her  first   relationship
       (paragraph 9) was with  "S  M",  a  relationship  which  started  at
       secondary school. They were friends  initially  and  that  developed
       into something more serious. They shared a dormitory at school.  The
       appellant could not have been at secondary school in 1988.  In  both
       her screening interview and at question 57 of her  asylum  interview
       she said that she came to realise that she was lesbian in  1988  and
       realised that this was because she "fancied girls". In her interview
       with Dr Battersby on 11 September 2015 she said she  had  her  first
       relationship aged about 15/16 when she met a girl at boarding school
       and they began  a  relationship  they  kept  secret.  This  was  the
       relationship with S because she  said  to  Dr  Battersby  that  this
       relationship continued clandestinely until her partner was killed in
       2012. The appellant gave the years as 1988 that  she  realised  that
       she was a lesbian in both her screening interview  and  full  asylum
       interview. This story has all the hallmarks of  an  invented  story,
       only to be expected when a story is invented. She has  invented  one
       version, forgotten  it  and  then  invented  another  impossible  to
       reconcile with the earlier version. It is invention upon invention."



14. It is clear from the  Appellant's  age  that  she  would  have  been  at
   secondary school in 1988 and that her account of when she  realised  that
   she was gay  tied  in  with  the  chronology  she  had  provided  in  her
   interviews, witness statement and to Dr Battersby. It is also  clear,  in
   my view, that the miscalculation of age led the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
   conclude that her account of her realisation of  her  sexual  orientation
   could not have been true.


15. Mr Richards urges me to conclude that despite this  adverse  credibility
   finding being flawed due to being premised on a false factual  basis  the
   remaining adverse credibility findings nonetheless render the decision  a
   safe one. It is right that the Judge  roundly  rejected  the  Appellant's
   account and otherwise gave rational reasons that were open to him on  the
   evidence. However, due to the nature of the  evaluation  of  evidence  in
   asylum claims and the heightened scrutiny required in such  claims  I  do
   not consider that it is  possible  to  excise  the  adverse  finding  and
   conclude that the decision remains safe.


16. In Karanakaran v SSHD v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2000] 3 All ER 449 the Court of Appeal held that in asylum cases in  the
   evaluation of evidence "no probabilistic cut  off  operates".  Everything
   capable of having a bearing has to be given the weight, great or  little,
   due to it.  The Court of Appeal also said that importantly the Convention
   issues from first to last are evaluative, not factual.  The facts, so far
   as they can be established, are signposts on the road to a conclusion  on
   the issues: they are not themselves conclusions.


17. In ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844 Moses LJ  held  at  paragraph
   [10]

       "A series of material factual errors can constitute an error of law.
        It is trite in not only the  field  of  judicial  review  but  also
       statutory appeals and appeals by way of  case  stated  that  factual
       errors, if they are significant to the  conclusion,  can  constitute
       errors of law."

18. At paragraph [18] Sir Stanley Burton added:

       "A material error of fact is an error as to a fact which is material
       to the conclusion.  If there is any doubt as to whether or  not  the
       incorrect fact in question was  material  to  the  conclusion,  that
       doubt is to be resolved in favour of the individual who complains of
       the error."

  19. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the Appellant was inventing her
      account based on what he found to be numerous discrepancies  of  which
      her age at the realisation of her sexual  orientation  was  clearly  a
      major one.  It is not possible to conclude that it was not material to
      his conclusion in the overall assessment of credibility and any  doubt
      is to be resolved in the Appellant's favour.  I  therefore  find  that
      there was a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There was a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. I set it aside.

Due to the extent of judicial fact finding this matter  should  be  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for complete rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 1 July 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
