


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00901/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 16th September 2015                 |                On 22nd December 2015 |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani (Counsel)
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  A  Fijiwala  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom (made on 28th January 2014) was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malins ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  15th
    April 2015.  In brief summary, the judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    asylum grounds of appeal were not made out on the basis of the  account
    he gave of events said to have occurred in Sri Lanka in 2006 and a risk
    arising by virtue of visits from the Sri Lankan authorities to his home
    in 2009.  She concluded that the appellant was not a person of  adverse
    interest to the authorities, notwithstanding his decision to  join  the
    British Tamil Forum in September 2013, a little over four  years  after
    his arrival and that there was nothing other than a minimal  risk  that
    he would appear on a "watch list" so  as  to  put  him  risk  of  being
    stopped at Colombo Airport on return.  The appellant's  case  was  also
    advanced on the basis of his mental ill-health.   The  judge  concluded
    that evidence given by an expert in this context was not of  assistance
    and that, in any event, there were health care facilities available  to
    the appellant in Sri Lanka.  Overall she found that he was not at  risk
    of persecution or ill-treatment by virtue of his claimed profile  as  a
    person of adverse interest or by reason of his mental  ill-health.   So
    far as Article 8 is concerned, she found that  there  was  no  imminent
    prospect of the appellant being removed as his mental  ill-health,  and
    perhaps other matters, remained  unresolved.   She  accepted  that  the
    appellant had established a family life here with  his  fianc�e,  whose
    immigration status is yet to be decided  and  found  that  no  detailed
    Article 8 assessment was required in these circumstances.

2.   The appellant applied for permission to  appeal,  contending  that  the
    judge erred in three respects.  First, having upheld the findings of  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  dismissed  an  appeal  brought  by  the
    appellant in 2012,  the  judge  purported  to  apply  the  "Devaseelan"
    guidelines.  However, she did not direct  herself  that  this  guidance
    permitted different findings based on new  evidence.   In  the  present
    appeal this consisted of medical evidence.   The judge erred in finding
    that she was bound by the earlier judge's findings of fact and  by  his
    rejection  of  medical  evidence,  the  judge  in  the  present  appeal
    describing those earlier findings as "irrefutable".

3.   Secondly, although the judge was careful to state that  she  could  not
    and ought not to usurp the role of the  medical  expert,  the  decision
    showed that she made adverse findings in relation to  injuries  claimed
    by the appellant, without any evidential basis for doing so.  Moreover,
    in finding the appellant's account of some of his injuries implausible,
    the judge overlooked that none of these matters was put to the  medical
    expert who attended and who answered questions from the judge on  other
    matters.

4.    Thirdly,  the  judge  misunderstood  the  nature  and  effect  of  the
    medicines prescribed to the appellant and made assumptions about  their
    impact on him on the basis of what  she  described  as  the  well-known
    effects upon soldiers of an antimalaria drug, Lariam.

5.   Fourthly, the judge made findings without regard to  all  the  relevant
    evidence.  In particular,  she  found  that  admission  to  immigration
    detention appeared to  have  been  the  catalyst  for  the  appellant's
    depression, without regard to medical evidence in  the  form  of  notes
    from a GP  showing  that  he  suffered  signs  of  depression  and  was
    prescribed antidepressant medicines before detention.  In finding  that
    the delayed onset of  PTSD  was  improbable  in  the  appellant's  case
    because the delay between the trigger  event  and  the  onset  was  six
    years, apparently on the basis of the oral evidence of the expert,  the
    judge erred as the expert gave no upper time limit.  In this ground, it
    is also contended that the judge did not  properly  apply  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319 or  country  evidence.
    This showed that the appellant's presence in  London  for  an  extended
    period was a highly relevant consideration in the  assessment  of  risk
    and that one of the appellants in GJ succeeded on human rights  grounds
    in part because of the inadequacy of facilities in Sri Lanka  to  treat
    mental ill-health.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on  11th  May  2015.   In  a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of  State  made  on  20th  May  this  year,
    prepared without  sight  of  the  decision,  it  was  stated  that  the
    Secretary of State was unable to  agree  that  the  decision  contained
    material errors of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Bandegani said that the judge directed herself  correctly  that  the
    earlier findings of fact were a  starting  point,  in  accordance  with
    Devaseelan, but there was no direction that  earlier  findings  may  be
    departed from in certain circumstances.  Later  in  the  decision,  the
    judge described herself as bound by the earlier findings.  It was clear
    from Jabor [2004] EWCA Civ 804  that  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  were
    precisely that and there was no lawful basis for the judge finding  the
    earlier findings of fact "irrefutable".

8.   So far as the second ground was concerned, the  judge's  findings  here
    were not sufficient.  The decision was  lengthy  and  thorough  but  on
    close reading, it was apparent that  more  was  required.   There  were
    particular findings regarding the injuries  claimed  to  have  occurred
    during the  appellant's  detention,  listed  at  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision but the evidence before the Tribunal did not, in fact, support
    those findings.  An example was the extent and nature of the damage the
    judge found occurred to the appellant's penis and urethra, which led to
    doubt being cast on his subsequent flight and  his  later  studies  and
    work. There was, in fact, nothing  to  show  that  the  damage  was  so
    substantial that the appellant could not leave his place  of  detention
    and flee Sri Lanka, with help from his lawyer and father,  or  that  he
    would not have been able to undertake  studies  or  work  subsequently.
    The inference drawn by the judge and the finding at paragraph  16  were
    unsustainable.  In any event, if there were concerns, they should  have
    been put to the expert, Dr Katona.  The expert's evidence  was  to  the
    effect that the appellant struggled on and was able to  function,  even
    if only in a superficial way.  If the judge  had  doubts  or  concerns,
    they should have been put to  the  witness.   In  reaching  an  overall
    conclusion that Dr Katona's evidence was not of assistance,  the  judge
    did not properly assess the expert's evidence that  the  injuries  were
    one of two triggers causing  PTSD,  the  other  being  the  appellant's
    detention.  The judge also speculated on the effects  of  the  physical
    ill-treatment at paragraph 19 of the decision even though she  properly
    accepted that she was not qualified in any formal sense to do so.   She
    went on to deal with the clinical effects of Lariam but  none  of  that
    was put to Dr Katona.  This was the basis of the third ground.

9.   The fourth ground was that the judge erred in failing  to  have  regard
    to the GP's notes,  which  showed  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    depression before his immigration detention.  Dr Katona's evidence  was
    that his fear of what would happen on return was so strong  that  there
    was a real risk of suicide but the judge failed to  take  into  account
    and apply guidance from the Court of Appeal in J and Y.  There  was  no
    reference to these cases and the only mention of health care facilities
    appeared at paragraph 21.6 in the decision.   In  GJ  and  Others,  the
    third appellant was found to be at real risk in  part  because  of  the
    nature and extent of his mental ill-health.  The judge did not accept a
    submission in the present appeal that the appellant's case was  on  all
    fours but, in any event, she did not consider J and Y.   In  a  similar
    way, the judge did not engage with country guidance in the light of the
    appellant's decision to join the  British  Tamil  Forum.   This  was  a
    proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka, as the country  evidence  showed.
    Even if the appellant joined the organisation in an opportunistic  way,
    the judge was nevertheless required to deal with the  country  evidence
    and engage with it.  The appellant would be returned and in  the  light
    of his mental ill-health, and as he could not be expected to lie  about
    his circumstances, there was a real risk that he would be detained  and
    ill-treated.  The decision contained no engagement with  this  part  of
    the country guidance and country evidence.

10.  In response, Ms Fijiwala said that no error was shown by what  appeared
    in the first ground.  Even if there were an  error  here,  it  was  not
    material.  The judge was clear that the earlier decision was merely the
    starting point.  She clearly agreed with the earlier  findings  but  it
    was open to her to do so.  Although she described herself as "bound" at
    one point, a full reading of paragraph 15 showed that  she  would  have
    reached the same conclusion in the light of her assessment.   The  same
    chronology was involved and so there was no material error.  There  was
    no error either in the judge describing  her  findings  as  being  made
    through the "prism" of the earlier findings, as she agreed  with  those
    earlier findings.

11.  There was also no error shown  in  the  second  ground,  regarding  the
    medical evidence.  The judge made a number of findings and not just the
    particular ones Mr Bandegani had drawn attention to.  It  was  open  to
    the judge to find the appellant's  reasons  and  his  explanations  not
    credible.  The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for  the
    judge and the decision showed that she considered the  evidence  before
    her carefully.  So far as the particular injuries were  concerned,  the
    appellant's account was that he was able to walk away from the place of
    his detention and it was open to the judge to find that he  would  have
    gone to a hospital if he had  suffered  the  torture  or  ill-treatment
    claimed.  Moreover, these were not the only findings made by the judge.
     She was entitled to find that damage to parts of the appellant's  body
    would have been palpable.  As this part of the case concerned  physical
    injuries, they  were  not  within  the  expertise  of  Dr  Katona.   He
    considered the matter  of  the  late  onset  PTSD  and  the  judge  was
    perfectly able to make the findings she did regarding  the  appellant's
    studies and employment.  She was entitled  to  find  that  given  those
    activities, the diagnosis of delayed onset PTSD was not a reliable one.
     The judge dealt with this at paragraph 18(5)(c) of  the  decision  and
    reached her conclusion in the paragraph which followed.

12.  It was clear from the decision that the judge was  well  aware  of  the
    medicines the appellant was taking.  She invited Dr Katona to take  her
    through the particular drugs and made findings at  paragraph  19.   The
    judge made observations on these and concluded that the  appellant  was
    taking an ever increasing dose.   There  was  no  merit  in  the  third
    ground.

13.  So far as the fourth ground was concerned, the judge took into  account
    the appellant's weight loss, low mood and period of detention and these
    were all factors in her assessment, as was apparent from a full reading
    of paragraph 19.1.  There was further consideration later on, the judge
    finding that the appellant only complained to his GP of dry skin and  a
    verruca.  She made a clear finding that the appellant  did  not  suffer
    the trauma claimed and his low mood was likely to have  arisen  because
    of concerns about his immigration status.  The judge did refer  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in J and found that the appellant did not meet
    the fifth component  of  the  test  set  out  in  that  decision.   The
    appellant who succeeded in GJ and Others was in a  different  position.
    It had been accepted in his case that he suffered ill-treatment in  Sri
    Lanka but this was not so in the present appeal.   He  had  firm  plans
    regarding suicide which was not the case with the appellant  here.   On
    the particular facts, the  severe  illness  and  suicide  risk  of  the
    appellant in GJ were accepted.  Paragraphs 449, 452 and 456 of  GJ  and
    Others made all of this clear.  The Upper Tribunal  in  GJ  and  Others
    also found that there are some facilities to treat mental ill-health in
    Sri Lanka  and  in  the  present  appeal,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's sister had been able to gain access to  facilities  in  the
    past.  She was entitled to conclude that the appellant was not at  real
    risk of a breach of his Article 3 rights in this context.  She went  on
    to consider diaspora  activities.    Although  she  did  not  refer  to
    country evidence  expressly,  there  was  no  error  in  the  light  of
    paragraph 336 of GJ and Others.

14.  In a brief reply, Mr Bandegani  said  that  paragraph  336  of  GJ  and
    Others was very helpful to the appellant's case as the  Upper  Tribunal
    had in mind there country evidence showing that there was  heavy  state
    penetration of the Tamil diaspora, the authorities  being  vigilant  to
    detect perceived threats to the unitary state.  Moreover, the judge had
    before her country evidence from the Secretary  of  State  dating  from
    August 2014, postdating GJ and Others, which was not available  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That country evidence suggested that a  risk  will  be
    present for those perceived as terrorists or  threats  to  the  unitary
    state.

15.  So far as treatment in Sri Lanka was  concerned,  the  evidence  before
    the judge was that the appellant's sister  received  treatment  over  a
    decade ago.  The clear conclusion reached by the Upper Tribunal  in  GJ
    was that facilities in Sri Lanka are inadequate and sparse and  limited
    to the big cities.  The judge simply did not engage with this evidence.
     Although she suggested that weight loss and the other  symptoms  might
    be reasons explaining the appellant's poor state, none of that  engaged
    with Dr Katona's clear evidence that the appellant had  suffered  major
    trauma and that this was the cause.  The evidence from  the  GP  showed
    that the appellant  suffered  hallucinations  in  2011,  prior  to  his
    detention.

16.  So far as the third ground was concerned, the judge in  fact  described
    the debate about Lariam as relevant.  Mr Bandegani  accepted  that  she
    referred to the particular medicines the appellant was taking  but  the
    medical evidence all pointed one way.  So far as the second ground  was
    concerned, it was circular to  suggest  that  the  judge  was  entitled
    simply to rely on negative findings made by the first judge where  what
    was required was an engagement with the evidence before  the  judge  in
    the present appeal.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

17.  The decision has been prepared by a  very  experienced  judge  and  the
    architecture of the document is impressive.  There can be no doubt that
    she approached her task with  vigour  and  with  an  altogether  proper
    intention to bring the litigation to a conclusion,  not  least  because
    the decision under appeal was the second made in the  appellant's  case
    and, in addition, there have been two applications for judicial  review
    and injunctions to restrain the appellant's removal to Sri Lanka.

18.  Ms Fijiwala made a careful and precise response to the first ground  in
    support of the appellant's case,  regarding  the  judge's  approach  to
    findings of fact made by the earlier judge in  2012.   It  is,  as  she
    submitted, clear that the judge agreed with those findings.   She  was,
    on the other hand, faced with a considerable amount  of  new  evidence,
    given by Dr Katona and others, supporting a  case  that  the  appellant
    suffered  severe  ill-treatment  while  in  detention,  notwithstanding
    rejection of that case by the earlier judge.  The decision  shows  that
    the judge properly directed herself at  the  outset  that  the  earlier
    findings were her starting point, in the light  of  guidance  given  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The experienced judge was,  of  course,
    very familiar with that case.

19.  The salient feature of the appellant's case in the present  appeal  was
    the wealth of medical evidence.  Engagement  with  this  evidence,  not
    available in 2012, was required to assess whether the earlier  findings
    remained reliable and sound.  With some reluctance, not  least  because
    of the detail and evident thoroughness shown in the  decision,  I  find
    that Mr Bandegani's submission that the judge erred in this respect  is
    made out.  In paragraph 15(c) of the decision, containing  findings  of
    fact regarding events in August 2006 in Sri Lanka, including the severe
    ill-treatment claimed to have occurred, the judge described the earlier
    findings as ones "by which (she is) of course bound".  This part of the
    analysis contributes to the conclusion  that  the  appellant  travelled
    abroad for economic betterment and to rejection of the  claim  that  he
    suffered ill-treatment.  In paragraph 17 of the decision, rejection  of
    that case is described as  the  result  of  "inevitable  findings  made
    through the prism of the preserved findings of (the earlier judge)  and
    my findings of fact above".  Those findings refer back  to  and  cannot
    sensibly be separated from rejection of the account of events in August
    2006.  The related  finding  at  paragraph  17(c)  that  the  appellant
    fabricated an account to Dr Katona is clearly made and certainly should
    not be seen in isolation from the other findings.   Nonetheless,  there
    was a gulf between  rejection  by  the  earlier  judge  of  the  claims
    regarding events in 2006  and  the  medical  and  psychiatric  evidence
    relied upon by the appellant in the  present  appeal,  maintaining  his
    case in that regard.  Resolution of that conflict  required  engagement
    with Dr Katona's evidence concerning delayed  onset  PTSD  and  trauma.
    That the judge felt herself bound by the earlier findings gave them  an
    apparently unshakeable foundation which, as a matter of law,  they  did
    not have.

20.  So far as Mr  Bandegani's  other  submissions  are  concerned,  I  also
    accept that in the light of the clear finding, properly made, that  the
    appellant suffers from severe mental ill-health, more was  required  in
    relation to the application of guidance given in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.
     Paragraphs 21.3 and 21.4 of the decision deal with this aspect and the
    judge made  a  particular  finding  that  the  fifth  of  the  criteria
    identified by the Court of Appeal was not met, in other words that  the
    risk of  suicide  was  not  objectively  well-founded.   However,  that
    finding is one which flows from the judge's conclusion that Dr Katona's
    assessment of the likely impact of removal on the appellant was not  of
    assistance and there is a reference back  to  paragraph  17(c)  of  the
    decision, which is  where  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    fabricated his account. Dr Katona's evidence was not the  only  medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the brief  finding  in  the
    light of J does not fully engage with that evidence.

21.  Finally, so far as country evidence and country guidance is  concerned,
    the assessment of the facilities available to the appellant on  removal
    to Sri Lanka proceeded on the basis of the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant is mentally very unwell.  In paragraph 21.6 of  the  decision
    attention was drawn to recourse  to  health  care  by  the  appellant's
    sister and there is a finding that the appellant is  unlikely  to  feel
    inhibited by fear from accessing this help.  In the light of the  Upper
    Tribunal's findings of fact in GJ and  Others  regarding  the  relative
    paucity of facilities to  treat  mental  ill-health,  and  taking  into
    account the historic nature of the recourse the appellant's sister had,
    I conclude that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal required  a
    closer application of the country guidance given by the Upper Tribunal.

22.  In summary, the decision contains material errors of law  and  must  be
    set aside.  So far as the appropriate venue for remaking is  concerned,
    I accept Mr Bandegani's submission that the appropriate  venue  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal, having regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's practice statement, made in 2012.   The  judge  noted  that
    many issues remain unresolved regarding the state  of  the  appellant's
    health and there is no imminent prospect of removal.   I was told  that
    it is likely that Dr Katona will give evidence, although the  appellant
    may well not.  An up-to-date assessment will be required.  The  hearing
    will be de novo and no findings of fact are preserved.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  shall  be  remade
in the First-tier Tribunal at the Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre,  before  a
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins.

ANONYMITY

The  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  shall
continue in force, unless and until varied by a court or Tribunal.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
