
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00936/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                     hs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Rene, Counsel, instructed by Hetheringtons
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make a direction prohibiting  disclosure  of  publication  of  a
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  appellant
    in these proceedings.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, born in 1978, who arrived in  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on 27 September 2004.  Following expiry  of
    her visa, the following  year,  she  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.  She claimed asylum on 12 December 2012, on the  basis  that
    she was a lesbian, wanted by the  authorities  of  Uganda  for  alleged
    offences relating to her sexuality.  The  appellant  claimed  that  she
    would be arrested, ill-treated and possibly killed, if returned to that
    country.

3.   The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  application  on  20
    January 2013.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, which
    dismissed her appeal.  That determination was, however,  set  aside  by
    the Upper Tribunal, which remitted the matter for  re-determination  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing on 29 July 2013 at Taylor
    House, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  It  is  this  determination
    that is the subject of the present appeal.

4.   Judge Talbot made comprehensive adverse credibility findings  regarding
    the  appellant.   At  the  hearing,  the  respondent  adduced   written
    "application details" regarding the application the appellant had  made
    in 2004 for her visit visa.  The details, if correct, contradicted  the
    appellant's claim not to have had "any contact with her father for some
    three years prior to [2004] and indeed that he had disowned her because
    of her  lesbianism"  [31].   The  "application  details"  recorded  the
    appellant's father, NM, as the sponsor, giving a telephone  number  for
    him.

5.   The "application details", which I am fully satisfied were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, recite the correct VAF number.   The  issue,
    accordingly, is whether the judge was entitled to  place  "substantial"
    weight on  this  evidence.   I  am  in  no  doubt  that  he  was.   The
    "application details"  were  directly  contradictory  of  an  important
    strand in the appellant's account of her alleged experiences in Uganda,
    prior to arriving in  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr  Rene  criticised  the
    document for not being the  actual  application  form;  however  it  is
    manifest that the document purports to be a record  made  by  the  High
    Commission in Kampala, drawing  on  the  information  supplied  in  the
    application.  There is no dispute that the photograph accompanying  the
    details is of the appellant.  Neither before the judge  nor  before  me
    has any matter been raised, which casts doubt upon the veracity of  the
    document.  In all the circumstances, the appellant  has  not  begun  to
    show that the judge was acting irrationally or otherwise unlawfully  in
    giving the matter the weight he did.

6.     Criticism is also made of [32] of the  determination,  in  which  the
    judge noted a discrepancy between the date  of  the  so-called  "arrest
    warrant" and the date on which the  appellant  was  allegedly  informed
    about it by her mother.  The grounds contend that, whilst the judge was
    in fact correct to note that this discrepancy existed  as  between  the
    appellant's oral evidence and the date on the warrant, in her interview
    she had stated that she was informed two weeks after her  arrival.   It
    is, however, trite law that it is for a judicial fact  finder  to  make
    what he or she may of  the  evidence,  absent  irrationality  or  other
    illegality.  In the circumstances, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    perfectly entitled to place weight on what the appellant  had  said  in
    oral evidence.  A person's inability to be consistent about a concocted
    story is, after all, capable of being exposed in oral evidence.

7.   It was a central aspect of the appellant's claim to be a  lesbian  that
    she was in a same-sex relationship with a Ugandan citizen in the United
    Kingdom.  That lady gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
      As  recorded  at  [30]  of  the  determination,   the   judge   noted
    discrepancies between the evidence of the appellant  and  her  witness.
    Again, he was, I find, entitled to place weight on those matters.   The
    judge also made use  of  the  determination  which  another  judge  had
    promulgated in respect of the witness, based on her own asylum claim to
    be a lesbian, in which that other judge found that the witness "is  not
    a lesbian and that she has concocted a story which  I  find  cannot  be
    believed... I do not accept that she is a lesbian  or  has  been  in  a
    relationship with [HS]".  Judge Talbot found that he was,  in  all  the
    circumstances able to "agree with the finding made by Judge Kaler about
    that relationship".

8.   Mr Rene criticises this approach.  There is, however, nothing  remotely
    problematic about it.  It was plainly highly material for the judge  to
    be given access to a judicial finding (which has not been shown to have
    been overturned) about the very relationship which  the  appellant  was
    putting forward as an important aspect of her own claim to be  in  need
    of international protection.   It  is  clear  from  a  reading  of  the
    determination in the present case that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    has not blindly followed the conclusions of Judge Kaler.

9.   At the hearing before me, Mr Rene submitted that  Judge  Talbot  should
    have considered whether, even if the woman with whom the appellant  was
    having a lesbian affair was not, in fact, a lesbian,  that  matter  was
    not known to the appellant.  I entirely agree with Ms Everett that this
    is to concoct a substantially different claim, to the one  put  forward
    by the appellant at the hearing.  That  claim  involved  third  parties
    giving evidence to the  effect  that  they  believed  the  couple  were
    lesbians.

10.  Mr Rene criticised the determination, as regards the treatment  of  the
    evidence of two witnesses, Mr G and Ms  L.   He  contended  that  their
    evidence was  not  challenged  by  the  respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  There is some uncertainty about whether  it  was  so
    challenged; but, in any event, it is manifest that the  judge  has  not
    erred as regards his treatment of these witnesses.  Their  evidence  is
    fully set out at [20]-[21] of the determination.   At  [35]  the  judge
    found that their evidence "constitutes very limited corroboration  that
    this is a lesbian relationship (as opposed to a mere friendship)".   In
    all  the  circumstances,  the  judge  was  entirely  entitled  to  that
    conclusion.

11.  Mr Rene asked me to examine various photographs of the appellant and  a
    lady, said to be her lesbian partner in Uganda.  These photographs were
    before Judge Talbot and are referred to at [35] of  his  determination.
    Having looked at them, I do not consider that the judge can be said  to
    have erred in law in failing  to  give  the  photographs  any  material
    weight.  They are all at least as indicative of two female  friends  as
    they are of two women in a sexual relationship.

12.  At [33] the judge noted a discrepancy  between  the  appellant's  claim
    that she had joined an organisation in Uganda called "Freedom to  Roam"
    and her response at interview, that she had not joined an  organisation
    in that  country.   Mr  Rene  submitted  that,  at  one  point  in  her
    interview, the appellant had asserted she had joined that  organisation
    whilst in Uganda.  Whilst that is so, what the judge had  in  mind  was
    question 99: "Did you join any organisation yourself  in  Uganda?",  to
    which the response was "No".  Once again, the judge was fully  entitled
    to place weight on that undoubted contradiction.

13.  At [34] the judge placed significance on the fact  that  the  appellant
    did not claim asylum until eight years after her arrival in the  United
    Kingdom.   He noted but rejected her explanation, that she did not have
    information about how to go about this and  that  she  was  "afraid  of
    being sent back".  Once again, the grounds seek to challenge  this,  on
    no better basis than  that  the  judge  ought  to  have  found  to  the
    contrary.

14.  In conclusion, I find that there is no merit whatsoever in any  of  the
    grounds of challenge to the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appellant has quite properly been found not  to  be  a  witness  of
    truth, who has manufactured a story about being a  lesbian,  merely  in
    order to resist the proper application to her of the Immigration  Rules
    of the United Kingdom.

Decision

15.  The determination does not contain an error of  law.   The  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



