
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00545/2014
                                                               aa/00549/2014
                                                               aa/00548/2014
                                                               aa/00547/2014
                                                               aa/00546/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 23 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     S S
                                   a i b s
                                   a l b s
                                    b a s
                                    w a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Palmer instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These appeals are subject to an anonymity order made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The five appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first  appellant  was
    born on 13  April  1972  and  is  the  mother  of  the  remaining  four
    appellants.  They were born respectively on 25 June 1995,  30  November
    2007, 19 January 1999 and 6 September 2003.  Consequently,  at  present
    they are aged 19, 6, 15 and 10 respectively.

 3. The first appellant claimed asylum on 29 January  2012.   The  children
    are dependants upon her claim.

 4. The basis of the claim is that the first appellant fears that  her  two
    youngest daughters (the third and fourth appellants), "ALBS" and  "BAS"
    would be subject to female genital mutilation (FGM) if they returned to
    Nigeria.  Both the first appellant and her eldest daughter, the  second
    appellant, "AIBS", it is accepted, have undergone FGM.  In the light of
    that, the first appellant claims that she would not be able to  prevent
    her husband's family carrying out FGM on her two youngest daughters.

 5. The Secretary of State  refused  the  first  appellant's  claim  on  21
    February  2012  and  certified  it  under  s.96  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Further submissions were  made  on  8
    May 2012 and again  on  23  September  2013.   Those  submissions  were
    refused on 27 November 2013.  Following a  pre-action  protocol  letter
    dated  30  December  2013,  the  decision  of  27  November  2013   was
    reconsidered and on 8 January 2014 the respondent made  a  decision  to
    remove  the  appellants  by  way  of  directions  under  s.10  of   the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 6. The appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing on 11 March  2014,  Judge  Burnett  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.  On 11 April  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Deans) granted  the  appellants  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Thus, the appeals came before me.

The Submissions

 7. Mr Palmer, who represented the appellants, relied upon the  grounds  of
    appeal which he expanded upon in his oral submissions.

 8. First,  he  challenged  the  Judge's  finding  that  it  had  not  been
    established that the first appellant's two  daughters  (ALBS  and  BAS)
    were at risk of undergoing FGM in Nigeria.  He submitted that the Judge
    had been wrong to discount the expert's opinion that they were at  risk
    and it was not rational to conclude they were not at  risk  given  that
    the first  and  second  appellants  had  themselves  undergone  FGM  in
    Nigeria.

 9. Secondly, Mr Palmer submitted that the Judge's conclusion in respect of
    Art 8 that the family's  removal  to  Nigeria  would  be  proportionate
    failed to have proper regard to the "best interests" of  the  children,
    including that the second appellant and  fourth  appellant  were  at  a
    "critical period in their education", namely undertaking A  levels  and
    GCSEs respectively; and had also failed to take into account  that  the
    fifth appellant  (the  first  appellant's  son)  had  been  in  the  UK
    continuously for more than seven years.

10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  Judge  had
    taken into account the expert report but had found the first  appellant
    not to be a credible witness, in particular in relation to her evidence
    as to why the fourth appellant, BAS had not  been  subject  to  FGM  in
    Nigeria.  The Judge had taken into account the background  evidence  in
    relation to the reducing prevalence of FGM in Nigeria and, Mr  Richards
    submitted, had come to a proper and rational conclusion that the  third
    and fourth appellants were not at risk of FGM in Nigeria.

11. Secondly, as regards Art 8 Mr Richards submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    fully taken into account the best interests of the children,  including
    the impact upon their education.  He had taken into  account  a  social
    worker's report which did not state that the children's best  interests
    were to remain in the UK and the Judge had clearly been mindful of  the
    fact that the children had been in the UK for upwards of  seven  years.
    Mr Richards referred me to the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874,  especially
    at [60] that the UK could not "educate the world".  The Judge had  been
    entitled to find that it was not unreasonable for the family to  return
    to Nigeria and then  to  conclude  that  their  removal  would  not  be
    disproportionate.

Discussion

     The Asylum Claims

12. I will first  deal  with  the  Judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellants' asylum claims.

13. The Judge dealt with this at paras 76-94  of  his  determination.   The
    background was, as I have said, that it was accepted before  the  Judge
    that the first appellant and the second appellant had been the  subject
    of FGM in Nigeria.

14. The appellant relied upon an expert report from Dr C Momoh (at pages 32-
    44 of the appellant's bundle)  dated  15  September  2013.   The  Judge
    summarised Dr Momoh's views at paras  80-81  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "80. The appellant obtained an expert report from Dr C  Momoh.   Dr
             Momoh sets out her experience and qualifications.   There  was
             no challenge that she was not a suitable expert.  I accept she
             is an expert in her field.  The  expert  states  that  FGM  is
             widely  practiced  in  Nigeria.   She  refers  to   statistics
             regarding the incidents of FGM in Nigeria.  It is stated  that
             68% are circumcised by the age of five (in 1998).  In 2012 the
             prevalence  was  41%.   The  expert  expresses  that  FGM   is
             performed depending upon the tribe, family preference and  the
             reasons for the practice.  The expert  states  that  the  main
             reason why it is performed in Nigeria is to  curb  promiscuity
             and that it helps reduce complications at childbirth.   It  is
             expressed by the expert that  some  communities  believe  that
             uncircumcised   women   are   'promiscuous,    unclean,    and
             unmarriageable'.  According to Dr  Momoh,  FGM  varies  across
             cultures, ethnic groups and tribal affiliations.

         81.  The expert concludes that in light of  the  first  appellant's
             history, her daughter ALBS will be subjected to FGM and  would
             be at risk of being abducted  because  of  the  strong  belief
             within the deeply rooted attitude  of  the  first  appellant's
             husband's  family.   She  also  concludes  that  there  is  no
             prospect of internal relocation because of social mobility and
             due to housing and financial problems."

15. The Judge did not accept the expert's view that the  third  and  fourth
    appellants would be at risk on return.  He gave  reasons  for  this  at
    paras 82-91 as follows:

         "82. I do not accept the conclusion of the expert.  The expert  has
             not explained how she came to the conclusion  that  the  first
             appellant's daughter ALBS, would be subjected to FGM when  BAS
             had not been subjected to FGM when present in Nigeria, and BAS
             was with her father.  I also note that after BAS was  returned
             to the first appellant, BAS was still not circumcised  despite
             the first appellant being in Nigeria until September 2004.

         83.  The expert does not state in her report  what  the  particular
             cultural  beliefs  are  of  the  Yoruba,  and  whether  it  is
             necessary for the biological  mother  to  be  present  at  the
             circumcision.  This is important in  assessing  any  potential
             risk  to  the  appellant's   daughters   and   assessing   her
             credibility.  This is the reason the first appellant gives  as
             to why BAS has not been circumcised.

         84.  I note also that the expert has confined her  risk  assessment
             to the third appellant and the report does  not  include  BAS,
             the fourth appellant, in the risk assessment  (see  paragraphs
             45 and 55).  This is not explained.  I hence give  the  report
             little weight.

         85.  The report confirms that the first and second appellants  have
             been subjected to female circumcision (FGM).   Also  that  the
             third and fourth appellants have not been  subjected  to  FGM.
             It is argued by the appellant that  the  fact  that  this  has
             occurred supports the risk assessment for the  future  of  the
             third and fourth  appellants.   I  do  not  agree.   It  is  a
             consideration of the potential of risk,  however,  it  is  not
             determinative.  The  expert  notes  that  culture,  and  other
             practices and beliefs, are important in why FGM is  performed.
             The expert also notes the statistics of the incident  of  FGM.
             It appears from the statistics she quotes, that  the  practice
             prevalence is  falling,  which  suggests  a  change  in  these
             cultural beliefs and practices.

         86.  It is for the Tribunal to  consider  the  credibility  of  the
             account given by the appellants and in  particular  the  first
             appellant.  I do not find the first appellant credible.  It is
             not explained by the expert why FGM  could  not  be  performed
             without her mother being present.  Also if the family were  so
             set on performing the FGM why it was not  performed  when  her
             daughter (BAS) was returned to  the  first  appellant  and  so
             would be in  her  presence.   She  stated  she  could  not  do
             anything and could not stop it.  It appears inconsistent  with
             the actions of the family that they would not then perform FGM
             at that time.  The fact that BAS has not been subjected to FGM
             whilst she was in Nigeria before 2006 is also an indication of
             the lack of potential risk to the first appellant's children.

         87.  I found the first appellant an unsatisfactory witness.  I note
             that she did not claim asylum until after her application  for
             a residence card had been refused.  She has been visiting  the
             UK since 2004 (at least) and has lived continuously in the  UK
             since 2006 but did not claim asylum until 2011.   This  delay,
             especially since the birth of her daughter  in  2007,  affects
             the  credibility  of  her  account   to   need   international
             protection.

         88.  I do not accept that the appellant did not return  to  Nigeria
             before 2006.  There was an entry stamp in her passport by  the
             Nigerian immigration  dated  19th  October  2004.   Making  an
             application in Nigeria by sending  her  passport  through  the
             post, does not explain this stamp.  This is another reason why
             I did not find the first appellant credible in  her  evidence.
             I also note there were stamps dated 29th April, 19th  May  and
             September 2006.  This is also not consistent  with  the  first
             appellant's claims.

         89.  I have considered the evidence of  the  other  two  appellants
             (AIBS and BAS).  I note that BAS is a vulnerable  witness.   I
             have given due allowance for this.  However, she  was  just  7
             years  old  when  she  left  Nigeria.   The  information   she
             provided, as to risks in Nigeria, is based upon what  she  has
             been told by her mother.  I do not accept  this  part  of  her
             evidence.  I also do not accept that Femi her uncle was killed
             by her father's family.  The second appellant (AIBS) is  older
             but once again her  information  is  not  independent  of  her
             mother.  Most of her evidence about risk were not based on her
             own independent recollections.  I give her  evidence  in  this
             regard little weight.

         90.  I also note that the first appellant claims that her husband's
             family found her in Kaduna because of "ju ju".  This is simply
             incredible.

         91.  I have also noted  and  taken  into  account  the  appellant's
             immigration history and the assertion by the  respondent  that
             section 8(2) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc.) Act  applies.   The  Act  requires,  that  if
             certain activity  is  displayed  by  an  appellant  then  this
             damages her credibility.  I have taken this into account in my
             assessment.  I do find  that  the  first  appellant's  actions
             affect her credibility."

16. Consequently, at para 93 he concluded that:

         93.  I have reminded myself of the burden and standard of proof  in
             asylum claims.  I have considered  all  the  evidence  in  the
             round.  I do not accept the appellants' claims to be  at  risk
             of FGM or being killed if returned to Nigeria."

17. Mr Palmer challenged the  Judge's  reasoning  on  a  number  of  bases.
    First, he submitted that the Judge had failed  properly  to  take  into
    account the expert report of Dr  C  Momoh.   Secondly,  the  Judge  had
    failed to take into account the "past persecution" experienced  by  the
    first and second appellants in undergoing FGM which was  indicative  of
    future risk unless there were good reasons otherwise as set out in para
    339K of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

18. As regards  Mr  Palmer's  first  contention,  the  Judge  accepted  the
    expertise of Dr Momoh.  However, he did not accept her conclusions  and
    he gave a number of reasons in para 82 et  seq  of  his  determination.
    Central  to  this  was  the  Judge's  view  of  the  first  appellant's
    credibility and her explanation of why the  fourth  appellant  had  not
    been circumcised in Nigeria.  The appellant's case was that in 2002 she
    had left her home area of Ibadan to move to Kaduna in order to  prevent
    the circumcision of the fourth appellant which,  although  neither  she
    nor her husband wanted, her husband's parents  did.   She  claims  that
    while she lived in Kaduna for around four months the  fourth  appellant
    was abducted.  She reported this to the police but was told  it  was  a
    family matter.  The first  appellant  claims  that  her  daughter  (the
    fourth appellant) was returned on condition that  the  appellant  would
    accept that she  would  undergo  FGM.   She  claimed  that  the  fourth
    appellant did not undergo FGM because the  first  appellant's  presence
    was required under Yoruba tradition and she was  able  to  avoid  being
    present whenever her husband's family came.  Thereafter,  in  September
    2004 the first appellant came to the UK leaving the fourth appellant in
    Nigeria because her husband promised to keep the fourth appellant  safe
    from FGM as she (the first appellant) was not present.   Those  matters
    are set out in the Judge's determination at paras 35-39.

19. The Judge did not consider the first appellant  to  be  a  satisfactory
    witness.  She had been in or visiting the UK since 2004 and  had  lived
    here continuously since 2006 but had not claimed asylum until 2011 (see
    para 87).  Further, he did not accept the first  appellant's  statement
    that she had not returned to Nigeria before 2006 given that  there  was
    an entry stamp in her passport for Nigeria from October 2004.   He  did
    not, therefore, accept her evidence  that  the  stamp  arose  from  her
    sending the passport to the Nigerian High Commission to obtain a  visa.
    It was a Nigerian immigration stamp based upon entry.  Also, there  was
    no background evidence to support the first appellant's claim that  the
    mother of a child to be subject to FGM had to be present  and,  as  the
    first appellant claimed, hold the child (see para  13  of  her  witness
    statement dated 4 March 2014), before FGM could be performed.  Further,
    Dr Momoh, the appellants' expert, made no mention of this tradition  in
    the Yoruba tribe in her expert report.  The Judge reasoned,  therefore,
    that there was no explanation of why FGM had not been performed on  the
    fourth appellant between 2004 and 2006 when  the  first  appellant  was
    outside the UK but the fourth appellant was living with her father and,
    therefore, could be reached by his family whom, it was claimed,  wished
    the fourth appellant to undergo FGM.  Further there was no evidence  to
    explain why the fourth appellant had not been subject to FGM after  she
    had been abducted, following the first appellant's relocation with  her
    to Kaduna in 2002, and subsequently  until  the  first  appellant  left
    Nigeria for the UK in September 2004.

20. In my judgment, the Judge's reasons are both  adequate  and  cogent  to
    underpin his finding  that  the  first  appellant's  evidence  was  not
    credible, in particular in explaining why the fourth appellant had  not
    been subject to FGM despite the apparent opportunity that the family of
    the first appellant's husband had to carry it out either before 2004 or
    during the period 2004-2006 when the first appellant was in the UK  and
    the fourth appellant was living with her husband. This  undermined  the
    expert's conclusions which the Judge was, as a result, entitled not  to
    accept.

21. Further, the Judge was entitled to take into account  what  the  expert
    said about the decreasing prevalence of FGM in Nigeria.   That  is  set
    out at para 80 of the determination and paras  18-19  of  the  expert's
    report.  As at 1998, the expert refers to background  material  showing
    that 57 per cent of women were circumcised before the age of 1 and over
    68 per cent by the age of 5.  However, again  referring  to  background
    evidence, the expert notes that in 2012 the national prevalence of  FGM
    was 41 per cent.

22. Although these figures, in themselves, could  not  have  compelled  the
    finding made by the Judge, they were relevant.  The compelling part  of
    the Judge's reasoning is that which I have already set out in  relation
    to the first appellant's credibility and the finding that, as a result,
    there was no explanation as to why the fourth appellant  had  not  been
    subject to FGM when the opportunity appeared to arise.

23. I am satisfied that the Judge, having taken  into  account  the  expert
    report, was entitled to find that the appellant had failed to establish
    there was a real risk that her daughters would undergo FGM  because  of
    the wishes of her husband's family.

24. As regards Mr Palmer's second contention, those reasons  which  I  have
    just set out in large part meet the  argument  made  by  Mr  Palmer  in
    relation to para 339K.  That is in the following terms:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated." (my emphasis).

25. The Judge clearly had in mind that  the  second  appellant  (the  first
    appellant's eldest daughter) had been subject to FGM.  Paragraph  339K,
    of course, raises the common sense approach  to  evidence  that  if  an
    individual has in the past been  subject  to  persecution,  all  things
    being equal, it may be permissible to infer that they will be  at  risk
    in the future.  That of course is not directly  relevant  here  as  the
    past persecution was in relation to the second appellant  (and  perhaps
    the first appellant herself some time ago) rather than  the  third  and
    fourth appellant who  are  now  said  to  be  at  risk.   Nevertheless,
    applying the same general approach, given that they all  form  part  of
    one  family,  the  Judge  has  given  "good  reasons"  to  justify  his
    conclusion that, even on the basis that the first and second appellants
    have undergone FGM, the risk to the third and fourth appellants is  not
    well-founded in the light of the fact that  the  family  of  the  first
    appellant's husband has had ample opportunity to carry out their desire
    to subject the fourth appellant to FGM in the past but did not  do  so.
    The Judge's adverse credibility finding, which is entirely  sustainable
    for the reasons he gave, justifies his finding that the appellants  had
    failed to establish that there was a  future  risk  to  the  third  and
    fourth appellant of undergoing FGM.

26. Mr Palmer referred me to the expert view at page 38 of the  appellant's
    bundle in respect of her physical examination of the fourth appellant's
    genital area  which  appeared  "normal"  and  which  is  stated  to  be
    "consistent to the information given by [the first appellant] that [the
    fourth appellant's] FGM was attempted at age 5 while  she  was  out  of
    Nigeria". There are two points that can be made about this.  First,  it
    is far from clear why this is said  positively  to  support  the  first
    appellant's account.  The absence of injury is equally indicative  that
    nothing happened and that the first appellant is not telling the truth.
     Secondly, the suggestion that there was an attempt to carry out FGM on
    the fourth appellant whilst the first appellant was out of Nigeria,  is
    wholly inconsistent with the first appellant's evidence  that  FGM  can
    only be carried out on her  daughters  with  her  present.   In  short,
    although I was referred to this part of  the  expert's  report,  in  my
    judgment, it does not take the first appellant's case any further.

27. Mr Palmer did not rely upon any other basis to  challenge  the  Judge's
    conclusion in relation to the risk to the third and fourth appellant of
    undergoing FGM.  He expressly disavowed any reliance on the  suggestion
    in the grounds that the Judge had erred by failing to consider the risk
    to the first appellant as a "lone woman" returning to Nigeria.  He  was
    right to do so and there was no evidence that would be her situation.

28. For the reasons I have given, the Judge was entitled to  find  that  it
    was not established that there was a  real  risk  that  the  third  and
    fourth appellants would undergo FGM if returned to Nigeria.

    The Article 8 Claims

29. I now turn to the Judge's consideration of Art 8.

30. Mr Palmer made a number of submissions relating to the consideration of
    the circumstances and best interests of the first appellant's children.



31. First, he submitted that the Judge had failed to take into account  the
    fact that the second and fourth appellants had been  in  the  UK  since
    2006 when they were 11  and  7  respectively.   Unlike  the  other  two
    appellants, who were younger, they had established ties in the UK since
    their arrival outside the home as recognised in the case law such as MK
    (Best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC)  and  Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC).  The Judge had made no reference to this case law and
    had failed to take into account the effect on these appellants'  social
    and educational ties to  the  UK.   In  relation  to  that,  Mr  Palmer
    submitted that the Judge had failed to give sufficient  weight  to  the
    fact that both children were at "critical periods in  their  education"
    undertaking respectively A levels and GCSEs.

32. Secondly, Mr Palmer submitted that the Judge had made a  factual  error
    in applying para 276ADE(iv) to the fifth appellant who had been in  the
    UK for seven years continuously since he first arrived with  the  first
    appellant in September 2004.  Consequently, Mr  Palmer  submitted  that
    the fifth appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of  para  276ADE(iv)
    having, at the date of application, namely 20 February  2012,  been  in
    the UK for seven years.  Mr Palmer submitted that the Judge  was  wrong
    to enquire into whether it would "not  be  reasonable  to  expect  [the
    fifth appellant] to leave the UK" since that was introduced  into  para
    276ADE(iv) with effect from 13 December 2012 by HC  760.   It  did  not
    apply to an application made before that date and here the  application
    date taken by the respondent was prior to that date.

33. I will deal first with the latter argument.  Prior to 13 December 2012,
    para 276ADE(iv) provided that:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         ....

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK for at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any  periods  of
             imprisonment); ..."

34. By virtue of HC 760, para 276ADE(iv) was amended from 13 December  2012
    to include the following additional words:

         "and, it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to  leave
         the UK."

35. It is clear from the implementation  provisions  of  HC  760  that  the
    amendment to para 276ADE(iv) made by para  201  of  HC  760  came  into
    effect on 13 December 2012 but that where an application had been  made
    before 13 December 2012

         "and the application has not been decided before that date, it will
         be decided in accordance with the Rules in  force  on  12  December
         2012".

36. It would seem,  therefore,  that  the  applicable  Rule  to  the  fifth
    appellant  was  that  in  force  prior  to  13  December  2012  as  any
    "application" was prior to that date.

37. At paras 99-100, Judge Burnett grappled with the issue of when it could
    be said the fifth appellant's "application" had  been  made.   At  para
    103, he recognised that the amendment to para 276ADE was not  contained
    in the Immigration Rules until the amendment in  HC  760  took  effect.
    However, whether or not it applied, he found at para 103  that  it  was
    not until 21 September 2013 that it could be said that any of the child
    appellants had been in the UK for  seven  continuous  years.   On  that
    basis, none of the child appellants could satisfy the  requirements  of
    para 276ADE.

38. Mr Palmer submitted that that was factually inaccurate in  relation  to
    the fifth appellant who had been in the UK since September  2004.   The
    difficulty with this submission is that it is based upon what the first
    appellant said was the situation.  The first appellant's case was  that
    the fifth appellant came with her in 2005 and that she did  not  return
    to Nigeria before 2006.  The Judge did not accept her evidence in  that
    latter respect, not least because of  the  Nigerian  immigration  entry
    stamp dated 19 October 2004.  The first appellant  now  says  that  the
    fifth appellant remained in the  UK  when  she  travelled  to  Nigeria.
    However, the first appellant's evidence was that she did not return  to
    Nigeria before 2006 and the Judge did not accept  this  or  indeed  her
    credibility in relation to her evidence in  general.   The  Judge  was,
    therefore, in my view  entitled  to  conclude  that  it  had  not  been
    established that the fifth appellant had been continuously  in  the  UK
    for seven years until 21 September 2013 which was the date seven  years
    after the first appellant last entered the UK on 21 September 2006 when
    (she claimed) she entered with the second and fourth  appellants.   The
    Judge was entitled to conclude that she had not  established  that  the
    fifth appellant had not returned to Nigeria with her prior to that date
    and had most recently, therefore, returned with her in September  2006.
    It follows that at the date of application, namely  20  February  2012,
    the fifth appellant could not establish that he had been in the UK  for
    seven continuous years as required by para 276ADE(iv).

39. The fifth appellant could not meet the requirement in  para  276ADE(iv)
    in force before 13 December 2012.  I,  therefore,  reject  Mr  Palmer's
    submission that the Judge erred in law by failing  to  find  that  para
    276ADE(iv) - in its unamended form prior to 13 December 2012 -  applied
    and the requirements were met by  the  fifth  appellant.   Even  if  it
    applied, the fifth appellant could not succeed under it.

40. What the Judge in fact did was  to  consider  whether  the  appellants,
    including the fifth appellant, met the requirements of para  276ADE(iv)
    from the point at which they could  establish  seven  years  continuous
    residence in the UK, namely 21 September 2013.  It was in that  context
    that he applied the amended version of para 276ADE(iv) in force from 13
    December  2012  including  the  requirement  that  it  would  "not   be
    reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK".  Since  the  Judge
    was also considering Art 8 of the ECHR  he  was  entitled  to  consider
    whether, at the date of hearing, the appellants met any requirement  of
    the Immigration Rules as relevant to the issue of  proportionality  and
    the weight to be given to the legitimate aim of the economic  wellbeing
    of the country (see Haleemuddin v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  558).   If  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  that  was  an
    important factor in determining whether the appellants  should  succeed
    under Art  8  outside  the  Rules  and  whether  they  could  establish
    "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances that  justify  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules (see MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192
    and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC)).

41. That was the approach followed by the Judge (see paras 113 and  115  of
    his determination) and whether as an aspect of the Immigration Rules or
    in assessing the child appellants' "best interests", it was relevant to
    determine whether it was unreasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK.
    That then leads to Mr Palmer's remaining submissions.

42. The Judge clearly had in mind that the "best interests" of the children
    were a "primary" consideration.  He was referred in submissions to  the
    Supreme Court's decision in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  (see
    para 58 of the determination) and at para 118  noted  that  their  best
    interests were a "primary consideration".

43. At paras 104-109, the Judge dealt in detail with the  circumstances  of
    the child appellants as follows:

         "104.    I have therefore considered whether it would be reasonable
             to expect the children to leave  the  UK.   I  have  carefully
             considered the social worker's report.  She concludes that the
             children need to remain with their mother in  a  family  unit.
             They  need  to  achieve  living  circumstances  where  it   is
             considered they are adequately provided for and they are  safe
             and feel safe.


         105. I consider that in determining whether it  is  reasonable  for
             the children to leave the UK,  it  is  necessary  to  consider
             their best interests.  It is clear that generally when a child
             has lived in a country for such a period of  time,  the  child
             will have put down roots and hence it will be less  reasonable
             to remove them from that stable  environment.   However,  that
             does not mean that it will never be reasonable to  remove,  or
             require a child, who has lived in the UK for 7 years to  leave
             with their parents.  An assessment needs to be performed.


         106. It is in the children's best interests to be with their mother
             as part of a stable family unit.   Their  mother  has  had  no
             permission to remain in the UK since 2006.  She  has  made  an
             application to remain in the UK on the basis  of  being  in  a
             relationship with an EEA national.  She  did  not  effectively
             pursue that application or attend  the  appeal  hearing.   The
             first appellant's immigration history is poor.


         107. The children can receive an education in  Nigeria.   It  might
             not be as good as in the UK but that does not mean  that  that
             consideration should prevail.  I note two of the children  are
             at critical periods in their education.


         108. The appellants still  have  family  in  Nigeria.   The  social
             worker commented that the children need access to  aspects  of
             their Nigerian culture and their chosen religion.   This  will
             be achieved to a greater extent in Nigeria.


         109. The social work report did not conclude  that  the  children's
             best interests will be to remain in the UK.  I do not consider
             it unreasonable in all the circumstances of the case  for  the
             children to leave the United Kingdom.  I appreciate  that  the
             children are innocent in the choices  that  their  mother  has
             made and have taken that into account in my assessment."

44. I do not accept Mr Palmer's submission that the Judge  failed  properly
    to consider the circumstances of the child appellants in particular the
    length of time they had spent in the UK and that  in  relation  to  the
    second and fourth appellants that they were at a "critical  period"  in
    their education.

45. The Judge directed himself at para 105 in relation to the importance of
    a child's period of residence in the UK and that  they  will  have  put
    down roots which will make it less reasonable to  remove  them  from  a
    stable environment but also noting that that did not mean that whenever
    a child had lived in the UK for seven years with their parent it  would
    never be reasonable to remove them.  Mr Palmer accepted that that was a
    proper self-direction.

46. Mr Palmer drew my attention to para (v) of the head note in  MK,  where
    the Upper Tribunal said:

         "It is important when  considering  a  child's  education  to  have
         regard  not  just  to  the  evidence  relating  to  any  short-term
         disruption of current schooling that will be caused by any  removal
         but also to that relating to the impact on  a  child's  educational
         development, progress and opportunities in the broader sense.

47. Mr Palmer also referred me to paras (ii) - (iv) of  the  head  note  in
    Azimi-Moayed as follows:

         "ii)    It is generally in the interests of children to  have  both
         stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
         the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
         which they belong.

          iii)  Lengthy residence in a country  other  than  the  state  of
         origin can lead to development of social cultural  and  educational
         ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the  absence  of
         compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to   lengthy
         residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present  policies  have
         identified seven years as a relevant period.

          iv)   Apart from the terms of published policies and  rules,  the
         Tribunal notes that  seven years from age four   is  likely  to  be
         more significant to a child that the first  seven  years  of  life.
         Very young children are focussed on their parents rather than their
         peers and are adaptable."

48. Whilst the Judge did not expressly refer to  MK  and  Azimi-Moayed,  he
    clearly had in mind the principles and approach set out in those cases,
    that it is in  the  interests  of  children  to  retain  stability  and
    continuity in both their social and educational provision  and  that  a
    period of residence of seven years, particularly where that seven years
    arises from the age of 4, rather  than  the  first  seven  years  of  a
    child's life, is likely to be more significant.  The  Judge  took  into
    account  the  social  worker's  report  and  her  conclusion  that  the
    children's needs were to remain with their mother  in  a  family  unit.
    The Judge  took  into  account  that  the  children  could  receive  an
    education in Nigeria but that even if it was not as good as in  the  UK
    that did not mean that a  disruption  to  their  education  even  at  a
    "critical" period should necessarily  prevail.   The  Judge  took  into
    account that the appellants had family in Nigeria and that  the  social
    worker had commented that it was important for them to retain access to
    their Nigerian culture and religion.  The Judge noted the social  works
    report did not conclude that it was in the children's best interests to
    remain in the UK.  It is not suggested that the social worker's  report
    said anything different.

49. The Judge concluded that it was not unreasonable for  the  children  to
    leave the UK and that it was in their best  interests  to  remain  here
    despite the educational consequences for them.

50. Mr Richards drew my attention to EV, a recent decision of the Court  of
    Appeal.  There, at [60] Lewison LJ stated that:

         "I cannot see that the desirability of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

51. Mr Richards relied upon that passage in Lewison LJ's judgment.  As  the
    Court of Appeal makes clear, having referred to MK and  ZH  (Tanzania),
    the  need  to  maintain  immigration  control  can  outweigh  the  best
    interests of children.   It cannot be said, in my judgment, that  Judge
    Burnett's assessment of the children's best interests or his conclusion
    that it would not be unreasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK  was
    legally flawed.  He took into account the social worker report and  the
    relevant circumstances of the children's education in  the  UK,  noting
    that it might not be as good in Nigeria.  In assessing  proportionality
    (and the weigh to be given to the public interest) he was  entitled  to
    take into account the first appellant's poor  immigration  history  and
    that she had no permission to remain in the UK since 2006 (see EV).

52. Merely  to  disagree  with  the  Judge's  finding  comes  nowhere  near
    overcoming the "very high hurdle" of irrationality or  perversity.   In
    Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40] Carnwath LJ  (as  he  then
    was) stated in relation to  a  challenge  to  a  Judge's  finding  that
    removal was disproportionate on the ground that it was perverse:

         "[t]he mere fact that one Tribunal has reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law. ..."

53. Likewise, I would add merely because a Tribunal has reached what may be
    seen as an "unusually  not generous" view of the facts  does  not  mean
    that it has made an error of law.  It may well be that not every  Judge
    assessing the circumstances of these appellants  would  have  concluded
    that it was proportionate  to  remove  them.   However,  it  cannot  be
    concluded that no reasonable judge  could  reach  the  conclusion  that
    Judge Burnett did on  these  facts.   Consequently,  in  assessing  the
    circumstances of the children at paras  104-109  and  then  considering
    whether, under Art 8, their best interests and the  proportionality  of
    their removal, the Judge did not err in law in  dismissing  the  appeal
    under Art 8 (or indeed the Immigration Rules).

Decision

54. The First-tier Tribunal decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals did
    not involve the making of an error of law.

55. The decision to dismiss the appeals on all grounds stands.





                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

