
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA001972015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Belfast                                   |                                  |
|On 26 July 2016                           |On 27 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                             MAZEN MOHAMED NASER
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Jebb, instructed by Nelson Singleton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1. In a decision promulgated on 5 November 2015, the President of the  Upper
   Tribunal set out reasons why the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   involved the making of an  error  of  law  and  set  it  aside.  He  gave
   directions with which the parties have complied, and  directed  that  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal be remade in the Upper Tribunal.


2. For a number of reasons, this has not proved  possible.  The  matter  was
   not listed again until 23 February 2017, that hearing being adjourned  on
   the basis of a letter from the appellant's GP stating the he  was  unable
   to attend the hearing and would not be able to attend  for  some  months.
   Although the letter from  the  Upper  Tribunal  advised  the  appellant's
   solicitors to seek further medical evidence giving a clear diagnosis  and
   prognosis of the appellant's medical condition, this was not done.


3. On 20 July 2017 a further application for an adjournment  on  grounds  of
   ill health was made. The letter from  the  GP  stated  only  that  he  is
   "suffering from an agitated depression. This causes extreme  anxiety  and
   low mood. I believed that he is not currently  medically  fit  to  attend
   court at present". The appeal was adjourned, and converted  into  a  Case
   Management Review.


4. As Mr Jebb accepted, the letter from the GP  is  wholly  inadequate.  The
   diagnosis is vague, and no reference is made to  any  of  the  recognised
   disease classification  indices.  There  is  no  indication  of  how  the
   diagnosis was reached, or whether the appellant is  receiving  treatment,
   or if there is any prognosis for recovery.


5. As both parties agreed, the core issue in this case  is  the  appellant's
   nationality. It will be  necessary  to  consider  all  of  the  evidence,
   including the Sprakab evidence afresh, and to remake the decision on  the
   appellant's nationality.


6. Given the length of time since the last fact-finding exercise, and  given
   that what is required is a fresh finding on the core  issue,  I  consider
   that it would now be appropriate and in the interests of justice to remit
   the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, a course of action with which both
   parties agreed.


7. The appellant is put on notice  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  very
   likely to proceed to remake the decision in his absence  without  further
   detailed and cogent evidence of his illness, supported by a report from a
   psychologist or psychiatrist explaining the reason for the diagnosis, any
   prognosis, any treatment being given, and why no  reasonable  adjustments
   could be made to enable the appellant to give evidence.



   Directions



   1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh.


   2. The appeal must not be  listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S
      Gillespie


   3. The appeal will be listed on the first available date.


   4. The appellant must at least 14 days before  the  hearing  set  out  in
      writing any reasonable adjustments that he requires to enable  him  to
      give evidence.


   5. Any request by the appellant for an  adjournment  on  medical  grounds
      must be made 7 days before  the  hearing  and  must  be  supported  by
      detailed and cogent evidence of his illness,  supported  by  a  report
      from a psychologist or psychiatrist  explaining  the  reason  for  the
      diagnosis, any prognosis,  any  treatment  being  given,  and  why  no
      reasonable adjustments could be made to enable the appellant  to  give
      evidence



Signed                                  Date:  26 July 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





