
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-cj-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00710/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2017                            |On 8 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                      mr Muhammad Shifan Mohamed Sumaid
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  24  March  1989.   He
    left Sri Lanka on 18 February 2010 and arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
    with a valid student visa which he subsequently extended until 29 April
    2014.  However on 28 June 2012, his student leave was curtailed because
    his college had its licence revoked.  On 18 March 2014,  the  Appellant
    was encountered working at a fast food restaurant and was  informed  of
    his curtailed leave.  He made an asylum application on  24  April  2014
    when he gave a different name viz Fahad Abdul Hameed  and  a  different
    date of birth.

 2. He stated that the basis of his claim was that his father ran a  travel
    business and assisted Tamil people to leave the country.  He stated  he
    was Tamil and of Muslim religion.  He did not suggest that any  members
    of his family or himself had any involvement in the LTTE but he  stated
    that his father had assisted a woman called  Jeyamalar,  who  had  been
    staying in their house,  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  and  in  December  2007
    soldiers had come to the house and broken in.  The Appellant  had  been
    badly treated and interrogated whilst detained but had  been  released.
    The business had been destroyed and he had then relocated to Colombo in
    May 2008 where he remained until February 2010.

 3. His application for asylum was refused on  11  September  2015  and  he
    appealed against this decision.  His appeal came before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Cassel for  hearing  on  13  October  2016.   In  a
    decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  9  November  2016,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  He did not find the Appellant  to  be  credible.
    In particular at [38], whilst he accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Tamil, at [39] he said that he was uncertain as to  his  true  identity
    given that the Appellant admitted to using three different names.   The
    Appellant had produced documents purportedly in support  of  the  claim
    but the judge did not accept that any reliance could be placed on these
    documents  given  that   there   were   significant   differences   and
    discrepancies, for example the identity card showing the name he claims
    to have  been  given  Fahad  had  been  misspelt  Pahad,  [D22  of  the
    Respondent's bundle].  He did not find there was any credible  evidence
    linking the Appellant's father  to  the  travel  agency  business.   In
    relation to any  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  his  Asylum
    Interview  Record  the  Appellant  describes  attending  one   peaceful
    demonstration in total since he has been in the United Kingdom.  In his
    statement at [26] he referred to attending "a few protests outside  the
    Houses of Parliament".  At [44] the judge held "I do not accept that he
    will have come to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities in London
    and find that this evidence is self-serving and an attempt  to  bolster
    his claim for asylum".  At [50] the judge held as follows:

         "His claims are based on his assertion  that  if  returned  to  Sri
         Lanka he would face  mistreatment  due  to  his  imputed  political
         opinion and religion.  I have found that  he  is  not  credible  in
         these assertions.  He does not fall into any of the  categories  at
         risk described in GJ and Others  (Post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
         Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) either by reason  of  his  imputed
         political opinion or religion, and for the same  reasons  as  above
         these claims also fail and are dismissed."

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made in time on 15 November
    2016.  The grounds in support of the application asserted:

      1) that time should have been allowed for the preparation of a medical
         report to support the Appellant's claim he  had  suffered  physical
         injuries;

      2) the judge had erred in his consideration of the  Appellant's  Tamil
         ethnicity in that he failed to consider the implications this would
         have on the outcome of the determination;

      3) whilst the judge was correct that the central issue in  the  appeal
         was the Appellant's  credibility,  the  judge  placed  considerable
         emphasis on the issue of the Appellant's identity rather than focus
         on the risk of persecution on account of being Tamil or Muslim;

      4) the Appellant's rights under Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights will be violated if returned.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 19 December 2016 on the following grounds:

         "3.  With regard to ground (1) the judge  gave  sound  reasons  for
             refusing to adjourn the hearing for preparation of  a  medical
             report.  In particular the Appellant had had ample time  prior
             to the hearing to commission such a report.  No error  of  law
             is identified.

         4.   It is arguable the judge  has  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
             analyse, in the  light  of  GJ,  the  risk  to  the  Appellant
             returning to Sri Lanka as a Tamil.

         5.   It is also arguable that the judge has erred  in  law  in  the
             assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

         6.   I grant permission on grounds (2) and (3)."

 6. A Rule 24 response was submitted on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 29 December 2016 which asserts:

         "5.  The Appellant does not fall within any of the risk  categories
             identified in GJ and Others.  It is  clear  that  the  country
             guidance cannot assist the Appellant and therefore the outcome
             of the judge's decision could not have been different.

         6.   Since the judge accepted the Appellant's claim to be a  Tamil,
             the matter of consideration of the Appellant's  name  and  the
             damage to the  Appellant's  credibility  due  to  the  use  of
             aliases and forged documents is immaterial and does not assist
             the Appellant.

         7.   The Respondent will submit that the determination  exposes  no
             material error of law."

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented  by  Ms  Qureshi
    who made submissions in line with the grounds of appeal  and  grant  of
    permission.  When asked to clarify which category of GJ the Appellant's
    case was based on, she responded that it was  paragraph  (7)(a).   This
    provides as follows:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."

 8. In his response, Mr Armstrong submitted that the main issue was whether
    the Appellant does fall under any of the risk categories.  His evidence
    was that he was never a member or supporter of the LTTE and it  is  now
    eight years since the LTTE were defeated.  Therefore it  was  difficult
    to see why the Appellant would be of interest to the authorities  post-
    conflict.  It was his submission  that  the  Appellant  does  not  fall
    within (7)(a) because it is difficult to see how he would be seen as  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state or perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  separatism.   The
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom as  a  student  and  only  claimed
    asylum four years later after his college had closed.  He submitted the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  well  reasoned  and  the
    judge came to findings open to him having heard all the evidence.   The
    judge made express reference to GJ in his decision at [31] and [50] and
    invited me to uphold the decision, noting also that the  Appellant  was
    able to leave Sri Lanka without any issues and without being stopped so
    he did not fall within category (7)(d) of GJ which provides:

         "A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a 'stop' list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant."

 9. In her response, Ms Qureshi submitted  that  identity  is  not  just  a
    consideration of name but also background and family and the fact  that
    his father ran a travel agency assisting Tamils  was  significant.   He
    would therefore be perceived to be more than a simple supporter of  the
    LTTE and the judge had erred in failing to assess the claim properly in
    light of the country guidance decision.



Decision

10. I find no material error of law in the judge's decision.  As  the  Rule
    24 response correctly  points  out,  whilst  the  judge  made  findings
    against the Appellant in relation to  his  identity,  he  was  at  [38]
    prepared to accept that he was a  Tamil.  I  agree  with  the  rule  24
    response that in these circumstances  the  damage  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility as a result of  the  use  of  aliases  is  immaterial.  The
    overriding  issue  in  this  case  is  whether  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's account as put forward, even put as its highest,  would  he
    be at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka bearing  in  mind  the
    guidance set out  in  the  case  of  GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It is clear that even
    at its highest the Appellant's claim was not capable  of  reaching  the
    threshold set out in GJ  in  relation  to  the  current  categories  of
    persons at real risk of persecution  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  these
    categories being set out at paragraph (7) of the headnote,  which  sets
    out the country guidance.

11. On that basis there was no error of law, material or otherwise, in  the
    judge's decision, which I uphold.



Signed: Rebecca Chapman                               Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

