
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA000252015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 May 2016                                |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                    [k k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on [ ]  1994.   He  appeals
    to the Upper Tribunal (UT) with  permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker given on 13 April 2016.  Judge Coker identified an arguable error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) in that he said
    that the immigration judge who heard the case considered  the  evidence
    before him without reference to the medical evidence but then  assessed
    the medical evidence discounting it because of his adverse  credibility
    findings.  She thought the other grounds to be "not so strong" but gave
    permission to argue all grounds.

Background

2.   The appellant first came to the UK on  2  December  2014.   He  claimed
    asylum shortly thereafter.  A screening  interview  was  conducted  the
    following day.  The substantive  asylum  interview  took  place  on  17
    December 2014.  The appellant claimed in interview to  be  a  Tamil  of
    Hindu religion.  He claimed to be from  Kaithady  Jaffna.   He  claimed
    that his father was in charge of the Kaithady  LTTE  finance  and  that
    this involved other members of the family collecting money from  people
    for the LTTE, for example, the appellant's grandmother collected  money
    for them.  The appellant's sister was required to go to Vanni with  his
    father but the appellant, his father and sister  had  no  contact  with
    each other since November 2005.  The  appellant  claims  that  his  own
    problems began on 25 May 2014 when he was blindfolded and put in a  van
    by two men.  He was then taken to a camp run by the  Sri  Lankan  Army.
    There, he claims, he was put in a room and tortured  for  five  or  six
    days.  He claims that he was  physically  beaten  about  the  head  and
    punched  on  his  nose.   He  claims  that  they  wished  to  know  the
    whereabouts of his father and sister.  Eventually,  the  appellant  was
    driven to an unknown place where an elderly man on a bicycle found  him
    and took him to a house.   From  there,  the  appellant  was  taken  by
    rickshaw back to his home town of Kaithady.  When he got home  he  told
    his  grandmother  what  had  happened  to  him  and   the   appellant's
    grandmother told his uncle what had happened.  The  appellant  did  not
    seek medical treatment for the injuries  he  received.   The  appellant
    claims that following his release the army came to his house  once  but
    they did not search his house.  The appellant did not dare to  go  with
    them but stayed inside.  They "peeped their heads" into the lounge  and
    then left.

3.   The appellant claims that on 16 November 2014 he was  taken  again  and
    tortured for further information.  On this occasion he was  blindfolded
    by men of the CID who came to his house.  They told him that they  knew
    where his father and sister were as they had  them  in  custody.   They
    accused the appellant of telling lies and physically  beat  him.   They
    also sexually tortured him.  They said he would  be  transferred  to  a
    different camp and gave him his clothes back.  The  appellant  had  his
    fingerprints taken and he was made to sign some papers.  The  appellant
    was then taken to his uncle's house and he stayed for about three days.
     The appellant's uncle paid a ransom to get  him  released.   Following
    his release, the appellant decided, with the  help  of  his  uncle,  to
    escape from Sri Lanka.  He therefore flew to Singapore and  from  there
    to an unknown country before entering Uzbekistan.  From  Uzbekistan  he
    took a direct flight to the UK.

4.   The respondent rejected the application because he did  not  accept  it
    was true.  He took account of the background information but it was not
    accepted that the Sri  Lankan  government  would  wish  to  detain  the
    appellant.  His allegations of torture were  noted  but  not  accepted.
    The respondent considered the appellant had knowingly  entered  the  UK
    using a false passport and  therefore  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 was  engaged.   The
    respondent did not accept the appellant had a genuine  fear  of  future
    persecution or a need for international protection.

5.   The appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  asylum/recognise
    his claim for  human  rights  protection/humanitarian  protection  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manyarara who rejected it.  The
    Immigration Judge did not accept the appellant's account and noted that
    the appellant had not had any contact with his father since  2005.   He
    commented on the lack of detail and referred to a number of authorities
    on scarring.  The appellant's injuries were referred to  in  a  medical
    report by Mr Martin which was before the judge.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant had been unable to discharge the burden which rested
    on him and as a "healthy man" could return to Sri Lanka safely.  So the
    Immigration Judge concluded that the appeal should be dismissed on  all
    grounds on which it had been argued.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

6.   The respondent  submitted  a  response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 stating that there was no material  error
    of law as the Immigration Judge had given clear reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's account, due  to  the  narrative  not  being  credible.
    Furthermore, the  adverse  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    father's involvement with the LTTE and the lack of ongoing interest  by
    the authorities in the appellant would not be altered  by  the  medical
    evidence.  The Immigration Judge was aware of the medical evidence  and
    therefore this was not a case where the error was material.

7.   At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Coleman submitted that the Immigration Judge had dealt with  the  other
    evidence first and then the medical  evidence.   He  pointed  out  that
    paragraph  44  of  the  decision  consisted  of  a  rejection  of   the
    appellant's claim whereas paragraph 50 contains the Immigration Judge's
    adverse credibility findings in relation to certain scarring  found  on
    the appellant.  Mr Coleman submitted that  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    wrong to conclude the appellant had not suffered these injuries as  the
    result of torture.  He referred to a case called SA Somalia [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1302 which, he claimed, said  that  all  the  evidence  had  to  be
    considered before an adverse credibility finding could be made.  In any
    event, his client suffered from psychological trauma  and  it  was  not
    accurate of the Immigration Judge to say, as he did, that the appellant
    was in "good health".

8.   Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, said  that  she  relied  on
    Rule 24 response.  Even if there was some error in the approach to  the
    medical evidence this had not been the main  issue  in  the  case.  The
    Immigration Judge had made comprehensive findings. The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FTT) was not tainted by any  failure  to  approach
    the medical evidence in the correct way. In relation  to  a  number  of
    issues, including the father's involvement with the LTTE,  whether  the
    appellant was tortured as claimed  and  his  ongoing  interest  to  the
    authorities of Sri Lanka, the Immigration Judge had been able  to  make
    clear findings and it was not  clear  how  they  were  related  to  the
    medical evidence.  It was fundamental to the appellant's case that  his
    father was an LTTE member if that account was to be believed.  However,
    this was rejected by the Immigration Judge.  The medical  evidence  was
    not likely to assist this issue.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller noted  that  the
    appellant's case was that he had lived  with  his  grandmother  in  Sri
    Lanka and  had  extensive  family  or  friends  there.   There  was  no
    corroboration of his account as his father had been a volunteer in  the
    LTTE.

9.   I was referred to the leading case  of  GJ,  which  suggests  that  the
    authorities of Sri Lanka are only concerned with  persons  who  pose  a
    genuine threat to the state of Sri Lanka.  It was submitted that  there
    was no immediate risk of reprisals.  It is the respondent's  view  that
    there was no  immediate  risk  of  reprisals  to  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's complaints  relate  to  2014  some  five  years  after  the
    cessation  of  hostilities.    Ms   Brocklesby-Weller   accepted   that
    corroboration was not a  legal  requirement  but  nevertheless  it  was
    relevant to look at the quality of the evidence overall and  there  was
    an absence of any evidence  to  corroborate  the  appellant's  account.
    Allegations relating to the appellant's father were  not  supported  by
    anyone else.

10.  The Immigration Judge had commented at paragraph 38 on the  absence  of
    contact between the appellant and his  father  since  2005.   This  was
    described by her as "remarkable".  The Immigration Judge  was  entitled
    to look at the inherent implausibility of  the  account  and  to  treat
    critically the evidence of scarring.

11.  In addition to the case of GJ the Immigration Judge  also  referred  to
    the  leading  case  of  KV.  These  references  demonstrate  that   the
    Immigration Judge had the up to date country guidance material in  mind
    throughout his decision.

12.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller   thought   the   medical   evidence   was   not
    determinative of the case and the FTT had made clear findings  of  fact
    which could be sustained by the Upper Tribunal.   There  were  a  large
    number of "holes" in the appellant's account.  As far  as  the  medical
    evidence was concerned the Immigration Judge was entitled to reject it.
     She failed to see the relevance  of  the  psychiatric  evidence.   She
    particularly  relied  on  paragraph  30  of  the  decision  where   the
    Immigration Judge states that he had considered  both  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and had looked at the evidence in the round.  He  had
    taken account of all the evidence both oral or written.

13.  As far as the medical report by the A&E consultant was concerned,  this
    was largely based on the appellant's own account, the  truthfulness  of
    which was challenged by the respondent.   As  far  as  the  psychiatric
    report was concerned, there were no significant memory lapses  nor  was
    this suggested.  Overall, the Immigration Judge would  be  entitled  to
    reject the medical evidence as well as the other evidence.

14.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller conceded that in the event an  error  of  law  was
    found by the UT it would be necessary to remit the matter to the FTT to
    hear the case de novo.

15.  By reply Mr Coleman accepted only the last point.   He  said  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  had  made  numerous  factual   errors   about   the
    appellant's health,  for  example  at  paragraphs  76  and  71  of  the
    decision.  The Immigration Judge, fundamentally, had not looked at  all
    the evidence before reaching his decision and  his  decision  was  "not
    good enough".

16.  I reserved my decision as to whether there was a material error of  law
    and if so what the most effective and fair means of disposal  would  be
    if I found such an error.

Discussion

17.  The appellant claims that since he was 3 years old  his  father  was  a
    supporter of the LTTE and had worked in their finance  department.   He
    claims that his father had to move to Vanni in 2005.   He  claims  that
    his father remained in charge of the Kaithady LTTE Finance Section.  He
    also  claimed  that  his   grandmother   collected   money   for   that
    organisation.  However, his own problems only began in 2014 when he was
    taken away by the Sri Lankan Army.  At that time  the  appellant  lived
    with his grandmother.  The appellant was blindfolded, placed in  a  van
    and taken to a camp.  Whilst blindfolded he was placed in  a  room  for
    five or six days.  Three men physically beat him by hitting him  around
    the head.  However, he was eventually released  and  was  found  by  an
    elderly man on a  bicycle.   When  the  appellant  explained  what  had
    happened to him he was taken by auto rickshaw to his house in Kaithady.
     There he decided to escape to the UK.

18.  I have been referred to two authorities in support of  the  proposition
    that in considering medical  evidence  a  judge  should  consider  that
    evidence as an inherent part of his credibility  findings.   He  should
    not "compartmentalise" that evidence,  as  happened  in  the  cases  of
    Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and SA Somalia [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302.   I
    would add that a judge should keep an open mind as to all the  evidence
    and ideally should give his conclusions in  a  clear  and  logical  way
    explaining why he rejects any evidence.

19.  I have considered carefully whether the Immigration  Judge  here  dealt
    properly with the medical evidence or whether he reached conclusions on
    the credibility of the appellant and  then,  as  Judge  Coker  thought,
    asked himself whether it altered  his  conclusions.  Those  conclusions
    included making comprehensive adverse credibility findings.

20.  I have concluded that the Immigration  Judge  did  not  fall  into  the
    error of reaching conclusions first and then asking himself whether the
    medical evidence altered these  conclusions.  He  clearly  demonstrated
    that he considered all the evidence before  reaching  his  conclusions.
    The Immigration Judge's decision could have been better structured  but
    he set out the burden and standard of  proof  in  paragraph  8  of  his
    decision and in paragraph 19(f) set out fully  the  arguments  for  the
    appellant including the argument that he had suffered PTSD.   This  was
    supported by a psychiatric report which  indicated  that  he  had  been
    sexually assaulted.  The Immigration Judge noted that one of the issues
    he had to deal with was whether the appellant's injuries, including his
    physical injuries, had been inflicted in the  manner  complained  of  -
    i.e. torture.  He made it clear that these were  preliminary  findings.
    The Immigration Judge's consideration of the case included  looking  at
    the risk factors in the leading authority  of  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319,
    which has subsequently been approved in the case of MP [2014] EWCA  Civ
    829.  Essentially, the Immigration Judge considered that  whatever  the
    historical involvement with the LTTE, the authorities in Sri Lanka  did
    not have the inclination to pursue every past member of the LTTE.  They
    were concerned with those who would be a genuine threat to the unity of
    the Sri Lankan State.

21.  It seems that the Immigration Judge reached clear  conclusions  looking
    at all the risk  factors  and  setting  them  against  the  appellant's
    account and the medical evidence.  He found that the appellant was  not
    of interest to the authorities, having not been a member of the LTTE in
    the past.  Crucially,  he  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    father's involvement in that organisation.  He looked at the  scale  of
    scarring described in the Istanbul Protocol.  He noted that  the  scale
    of consistency ran from "consistent"  to  "diagnostic  of"  torture  in
    paragraph 46.  He also noted that the report relied on in this case  by
    Dr Martin described the scarring as "consistent with torture".

22.  The Immigration Judge was specifically criticised  by  Mr  Coleman  for
    suggesting that the injuries the appellant suffered were  "typical"  of
    those caused by a third party and that third  party  must  have  caused
    those injuries at the appellant's instigation. It  was  suggested  that
    there was no evidence to back up such a conclusion. I am satisfied that
    the Immigration Judge kept an open mind as to the possibility that  the
    physical injuries found by  Dr  Martin  should  lead  him  to  reach  a
    different  view  of  credibility   despite   the   other   unfavourable
    conclusions he had reached. However,  the  Immigration  Judge  made  it
    clear, for example at  paragraph  64  of  his  decision,  that  he  had
    considered  "all"  the  evidence  "cumulatively".   In  my   view   the
    Immigration Judge had not closed  his  mind  to  the  medical  evidence
    leading him to a more favourable view of the appellant's case,  despite
    his preliminary view that neither the appellant nor his father had been
    involved with the  LTTE.  However,  the  Immigration  Judge  found  the
    appellant's account to be untrue.

23.   The  Immigration  Judge  considered  the  appellant's  account  to  be
    untruthful.  However, that finding was reached  after  considering  all
    the evidence.  He did not treat credibility as being  determined  prior
    to considering the medical evidence.  The  Immigration  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 51 of his decision that the account in the medical report  of
    Dr Martin was "largely based" on the appellant's evidence and this  was
    so.  He bore in mind that the appellant had  many  injuries  consistent
    with torture.

24.   The  criticisms  of  paragraph  67-77  are   unfounded.    Here,   the
    Immigration Judge is dealing "belt and braces"  with  the  question  of
    whether the appellant has psychological or psychiatric  injuries  which
    themselves would bring him within Article 3 of the  ECHR.   He  clearly
    concluded that the appellant had no such injuries in this case.  Again,
    the Immigration Judge reiterated in paragraph 69 that he had considered
    the case of Mibanga  and  considered  whether  the  indication  in  the
    psychiatric report that the appellant had suffered past stress ought to
    lead  him  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  overall  account   was
    reasonably likely to be true.  Although  these  passages  contain  some
    errors (such as the reference to the appellant being a  "healthy  man")
    they do not, in my view, essentially undermine the Immigration  Judge's
    overall conclusions.

25.  Paragraphs 78-83 of the decision deal with the question of  whether  an
    Article 8 claim arises and these have not been  challenged  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Conclusion

26.  The Immigration Judge reached conclusions that he was entitled to  come
    to on the evidence.  I agree with the  respondent's  Rule  24  response
    that  whatever  weight  the  Immigration  Judge  gave  to  the  medical
    evidence, the appellant  faced  the  fundamental  difficulty  that  his
    account of his father's past involvement with the  LTTE  was  rejected.
    The Immigration Judge did not accept  that  he  was  of  any  potential
    ongoing interest to the authorities.  In any event, following the  case
    of GJ, even  if  historical  problems  had  existed  and  even  if  the
    appellant had been detained  in  2014,  as  he  claimed,  I  doubt  the
    appellant would be of a sufficiently high profile figure to be at  risk
    on return.  This  too  was  a  conclusion  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    entitled to come to on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material  error
of law and this appeal is dismissed.  The decision to refuse  the  appellant
asylum and find that he does not qualify for humanitarian protection  and/or
there would be no breach of  his  protected  human  rights  under  the  ECHR
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 16.6.16


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 16.6.16


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

