
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00404/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                 MAKSUT [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Heller, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
& Dyer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on  17  February  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Miller dismissed the appeal  of  the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Albania, against a decision made by the respondent on 17 February  2016
    refusing his claim for asylum and human rights protection.

2.   Despite accepting that the appellant was a minor of Gorani ethnicity  a
    victim of domestic abuse and a victim of modern slavery, the respondent
    was not satisfied that on return to Albania, once he had turned 18,  he
    would be a risk of persecution or serious harm.

3.   The judge came to the same conclusion as the respondent.

4.   The grounds set out five points. I will deal with  each  in  turn  save
    for ground 3 (which relates to the issue of Convention reason).

5.   The first ground alleges that the statement by the  judge  at  para  25
    ("Ill-treatment  does  not  cross  the  threshold  of   severity   into
    persecution, even taken cumulatively,  unless  there  are  particularly
    strong and credible elements. The test of persecution is  and  must  be
    kept at a high and demanding level") is  a  non-sequitur  because  "one
    cannot know whether the FTTJ believes the treatment mooted out  to  the
    appellant does, or not cross the threshold".  This ground is devoid  of
    merit. In this paragraph the judge was simply summarising the  relevant
    legal principles. She was not  purporting  to  state  findings  on  the
    appellant's case. They came later and were very clear in  stating  that
    the appellant's situation would not engage the persecution threshold.

6.   Ground 2 take issue with the judge's statements in paragraph 27 and  28
    that she found a repetition of past  abuse  inflicted  on  him  by  his
    father and two shepherds, Astrit and Guci, unlikely,  in  view  of  the
    absence of any significant evidence. What sort of evidence, the grounds
    ask, should the FtT Judge have expected the appellant  to  be  able  to
    produce "in circumstances where he is not in  contact  with  anyone  in
    Albania".

7.   I find this ground equally unmeritorious.  In  paras  27-28  the  judge
    very properly considered whether the appellant's  past  persecution  at
    the hands of his father and the two shepherds was a serious  indication
    that he would suffer a repetition. In formulating the question in  this
    way the  judge  was  very  properly  following  the  approach  to  past
    persecution enjoined by Article 4(4) of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    Further, in relying on an absence of significant evidence she  was  not
    confining herself to that which he might be able to produce but to  the
    evidence more generally. In considering whether there was a  real  risk
    of repetition the judge attached very considerable weight to  the  fact
    that the appellant on return would be 18, and so much  less  vulnerable
    to assault than  when  he  was  15.   The  judge's  findings  on  these
    paragraphs are entirely within the range of reasonable responses.

8.    Turning  to  ground  4,  which  attacks  the  judge's  assessment   of
    sufficiency of protection, in my judgement it comes to no more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.  It  is  true,  as  the
    skeleton argument prepared for the FtT hearing and the  grounds  before
    me state, that the background materials include sources which  identify
    ineffective police investigations into  domestic  violence  complaints,
    effective impunity for the perpetrators and corruption  in the form  of
    complicity between local officials and police with traffickers.

9.   However, the task before the judge  was  to  assess  and  evaluate  the
    background evidence  as  a  whole,  including  sources  taking  a  more
    sanguine view of the protective abilities of the  Albania  authorities.
    This included sources relied upon by the respondent in her reasons  for
    refusal letter, including the 2015 US State  Department Trafficking  in
    Persons  Report  which  identified,  inter  alia,  that  the   Albanian
    government had put in place  several  anti-trafficking  measures,  that
    there was an increased rate or persecution of trafficking offences,  an
    increase in funding for the assistance of victims, including a rise  in
    child protection units and legal aid.

10.  It was also integral to the task  of  the  judge  to  ensure  that  his
    assessment attached weight to any relevant Tribunal  country  guidance.
    Although the judge only made reference to one such  case,   AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80  (IAC),  Miss  Heller  was
    unable to point me to any current country guidance case that considered
    that in Albania there was  a general insufficiency  of  protection  for
    victims of trafficking or domestic abuse. Indeed, as  Miss  Brocklesby-
    Weller noted, the more recent CG case of TD & AD (Trafficked women)  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00092 expressly  states  in  its  head  note  that  against
    victims of  trafficking  "[t]here  is  in  general  a  Horvath-standard
    sufficiency of protection ...". Clearly in reaching that view the Upper
    Tribunal panel in that case  took  into  account  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Chenincer on the extent of police corruption.

11.  This section of the guidance adds that this  protection  "will  not  be
    effective  in  every  case"  and   that   an   applicant's   particular
    circumstances must be considered" (the focus in TD &  AD  being  women)
    but individual consideration is decidedly what the FtT judge also  gave
    to  the  appellant's  case,  noting,  inter  alia,   the   respondent's
    observation that there were  nine  Gorani  populated  towns  where  the
    appellant could approach the police.  It was entirely open to the judge
     in this regard to attach very significant weight to the fact that  the
    appellant, as a person seeking to return when no longer a minor,  would
    be far less likely to  be vulnerable to attack from his father and  the
    two  shepherds; to the fact that it  had not been established  that  he
    would be pursued by the father and the two shepherds if  he  relocated;
    and to the fact that  even if he did have to relocate,  he  would  have
    available protection from the authorities.

12.  Miss Heller submitted that the judge should  have  taken  into  account
    that even though the appellant would only be returned when he  was  18,
    there was no bright line between 17  and  18  and  that  the  appellant
    should still be considered a young person who  had  been  a  victim  of
    slavery. However, it is clear  first  of  all  that  in  assessing  his
    evidence the judge took into account his status as a  minor  (see  para
    26) and that, in any event, even if he would still require  assistance,
    there were shelters available.  In light  of  the  background  evidence
    considered  as  a  whole,  these  findings  were  ones  the  judge  was
    reasonably entitled to come to.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law and her  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  is
    upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.

             [pic]
Signed                                  Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
