
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/00528/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London        |Determination Sent                 |
|On 11 June 2014                     |On 12 June 2014                    |
|                                    |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               BLERINA SAMURRI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant: Mr P Bonavera instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision by the respondent dated  7  January  2014  to
   remove her from the UK following  the  refusal  of  her  application  for
   asylum. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal MJH Wilson dismissed the appeal.
   The appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The background to the appellant's claim for asylum is  that  in  February
   2008 she moved out of her family home to marry, her family  were  opposed
   to the marriage and she has not spoken to them since she moved  out.  She
   married in February 2009 and she and her husband went to Greece  to  work
   and subsequently separated and divorced. She met an  Albania  man  called
   Bashkim in Greece in June 2010 and they began a relationship. However she
   was 'sold' by Bashkim to another Albanian man called Emilio and his Greek
   wife and she was forced into prostitution. She made one failed attempt to
   escape and was threatened by Emilio. She managed to escape  in  September
   2013. She had kept some money hidden and  used  this  to  pay  the  lorry
   driver who took her to the UK. The respondent  accepted  the  appellant's
   account in full. The respondent considered the  background  evidence  and
   the country guidance case of AM and  BM  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
   [2010] UKUT 80 and decided that the appellant is not at risk on return to
   Albania and considered that  she  could  access  the  assistance  of  the
   Albanian authorities and the support available from NGOs there.

3. The Judge found that the appellant's claim that she feared  the  men  who
   trafficked her was not credible and that her belief that the two men were
   involved in a criminal network or had powerful connections in Albania was
   speculative. The Judge found that there was no credible evidence that the
   two men maintained any interest in the appellant. He found  that  if  the
   two men were involved in a criminal gang they  had  no  influence  beyond
   Greece or their own localities.

4. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appellant  challenges
   the Judge's findings on the basis that the Judge,  in  finding  that  the
   appellant's evidence was not enough to satisfy  the  standard  of  proof,
   seemed to require corroboration. It is contended that such a  requirement
   is unlawful and asks what evidence  the  appellant  could  possibly  have
   provided to satisfy the Judge.

5. In advance of the  hearing  the  appellant's  representative  applied  to
   amend the grounds of appeal. At the hearing Mr Mills  indicated  that  he
   had no objection to the proposed amendment and I  granted  permission  to
   amend the grounds.

6. The further ground of appeal contended that the  Judge  made  a  material
   error in his finding that  there  was  a  discrepancy  between  what  the
   appellant said at 4.2 of her screening interview and what she said  later
   in her asylum  interview.  The  Judge  considered  that  the  appellant's
   credibility was damaged because in her screening interview she said  that
   she feared Bashkim but made no mention of  Emilio.  However  the  grounds
   point out that the appellant did in fact mention Emilio at 4.1 and 4.2 of
   the screening interview, immediately before the section relied on by  the
   Judge where she mentioned Bashkim.

Error of law

7. I have firstly considered the new ground of appeal. At  paragraph  10  of
   the  determination  the  Judge  states  that  the  appellant  has   given
   'inconsistent and speculative accounts of  her  alleged  fears'.   As  an
   example he sets out the  appellant's  answer  at  4.2  of  the  screening
   interview where she said that Bashkim is well-known in Albania  and  that
   he knows police and that he has influence with  police.  The  Judge  said
   that he found this answer  significant  because  the  appellant  made  no
   mention of Emilio who she later claimed that she feared most and that the
   statement at her screening  interview  that  she  feared  Bashkim  was  a
   'reversal' of the appellant's later position. The Judge noted that Emilio
   first emerged as the main source  of  the  appellant's  alleged  fear  of
   returning to Albania at question 36 of her asylum interview when she said
   that she needed protection from Emilio and his wife and made  no  mention
   of Bashkim. The Judge concluded;

"I find that without in any way detracting from the respondent's  concession
that she  was  trafficked,  this  part  of  her  claim  represents  a  major
inconsistency that undermines her  claim  to  be  in  danger  of  being  re-
trafficked in Albania; specifically I find that  it  casts  doubt  upon  her
claim that she is in danger from either or both of these men in Albania."

8. At paragraph 21 the Judge again referred  to  the  inconsistency  in  the
   screening interview and again highlighted that in the answer to  question
   4.2 the appellant made no mention of the person  she  later  claimed  she
   feared most, namely Emilio. The Judge said;

"At the screening interview stage the apparent protagonist in her fears  was
Bashkim, not Emilio, representing what I find was a volte-face. I note  that
Emilio first emerged as the main  actor  in  her  stated  anxieties  in  her
asylum interview in answer to question 36, where she named both him and  his
wife. I find this to be a significant inconsistency that  casts  doubt  upon
her claim to fear either or both of these men in Albania. Further to this  I
find that she couched her alleged fears in  similar  language  to  that  she
used elsewhere in her account, namely in vagueness and  circumspection  that
distanced her from anything that was evidence based".

9. The record of the screening interview states at 4.1  that  the  appellant
   was asked why she came  to  the  UK  and  she  said;  "I  came  here  for
   protection from a person who used me for  prostitution  in  Greece".  She
   said that the person's name was Emilio and that his wife was working with
   him. At 4.2 when asked why she could not return to her  own  country  she
   said; "I am in danger from Emilio and a person who sold me to him".  When
   asked for the name of the person who sol her she gave Bashkim's name. She
   went on to say;

"They are from Albania and they know everything about  me,  where  I  lived.
Bashkim is well known in Albania, he  got  me  the  passport  and  he  knows
police so what I understand he has influence with police"

10. The Judge quoted the above passage at  paragraphs  10  and  21.  However
   read in context it is clear that the passage refers to  both  Emilio  and
   Bashkim  ('they').  The  Judge's  conclusion  that  this   represents   a
   'reversal', a 'major inconsistency' or a 'volte-face' in her evidence  is
   based on a mistake as  to  what  the  appellant  said  in  her  screening
   interview.

11. Mr Mills submitted that this is  not  a  material  error  as  the  other
   findings were open to the Judge. However I am satisfied that  this  is  a
   material error. The Judge made significant adverse  findings  as  to  the
   credibility of the appellant's subjective fears. The Judge did not accept
   the appellant's account as to what she had been  told  by  another  woman
   being held by Emilio or the appellant's account of her  own  observations
   and beliefs as to Emilio and Bashkim's criminal connections. It is  clear
   that the Judge's adverse credibility findings  flowed  from  the  mistake
   about the  screening  interview.  The  Judge  dealt  with  it  first,  at
   paragraph 10 and refereed to it again at paragraph 21 when  reaching  his
   final  conclusions  as  to  the   appellant's   credibility.   In   these
   circumstances the mistake went to the heart of the  credibility  findings
   and amounts to a material error of law.

12. I have also considered the original grounds of appeal.  The  appellant's
   evidence was that Emilio and Bashkim were part of a  criminal  gang  with
   connections and influence in Albania. She based this opinion on what  the
   men said, what she observed and on what another woman, who was also being
   held,  told  her.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  evidence   as
   speculation, conjecture and hearsay and that it was not based on 'fact or
   hard information' [11]. The Judge concluded that there was 'not  a  shred
   of credible evidence' that Emilio had connections with  anyone  of  power
   and influence in Albania and that there was no credible evidence that the
   appellant was at risk from criminals connected to Emilio and  Bashkim  or
   that they had any influence with the authorities in Greece or Albania.

13. Mr Mills accepted  that  it  was  unusual  that  the  Judge  looked  for
   credibility issues when  the  respondent  had  accepted  the  appellant's
   account in its entirety. He accepted that it  did  not  appear  that  the
   presenting officer had raised credibility issues.  However  he  submitted
   that the Judge did need to assess whether the appellant's subjective fear
   was made out and that the Judge had done so properly.

14. I am satisfied that the Judge did apply the wrong standard of  proof  in
   assessing the appellant's account of her subjective fear. The  respondent
   had already accepted that the appellant was persecuted in the  past.  The
   appellant's own evidence, even  if  speculative  or  hearsay,  does  have
   weight and should be assessed in the light of the background evidence and
   the case law in deciding whether the appellant  faces  a   real  risk  of
   persecution upon her return to Albania. The issue  to  be  determined  in
   this appeal is whether the appellant's subjective  fear  is  well-founded
   and whether she is a risk of persecution upon her return to Albania.

15. For these reasons I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   erred in his consideration of this appeal.  The  Judge  made  a  material
   mistake of fact and applied the wrong standard of proof to the assessment
   of the appellant's evidence. I  cannot  therefore  preserve  any  of  the
   findings made.

16. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  her  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed
       Date:  11 June 2014



A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


































