
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/00680/2015
                                                               AA/00681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    ASAA
                                    MWAJ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwaycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellants who claim asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellants.  Any disclosure and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Iraq who were born  respectively  on  15
    October 1986 and 22 July 1992.  They are married.  They arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 25 September 2014.  They claimed asylum based upon  a
    fear from Sunni and Shia armed militia in Iraq.   The  first  appellant
    claimed that his sister's brother-in-law, who  was  his  employer,  had
    been murdered by militia on 11 April 2015.  He had experienced physical
    violence at the hands of  the  militia,  their  family  home  had  been
    attacked and he feared the militia on return.

 3. On 11 December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellants'
    applications for asylum.  The Secretary of State refused  each  of  the
    appellants leave to enter and proposed to remove them to Iraq.

 4. The appellants appealed against  those  immigration  decisions  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place on 19 June  2015.
    The appellants were not  represented.   Following  the  hearing,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 1 July 2015 Judge Coaster  dismissed  each
    of the  appellants'  appeals  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 6. In reaching her decision, the judge made an adverse credibility finding
    against the appellants.  In addition,  she  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellants  could  succeed  under  Art  15(c)  of   the   Qualification
    Directive.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on two
    grounds.  First, it was argued that the proceedings before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal were unfair  as  the  judge  should  have  adjourned  the
    hearing in order to allow the appellants to be represented and in order
    to allow the appellants to obtain translations and  have  authenticated
    two documents submitted at the hearing, namely a death  certificate  in
    relation  to  the  first  appellant's  sister's  brother-in-law  and  a
    threatening letter from a militant Shia group.  Secondly, the judge had
    wrongly failed to give no weight to the death certificate  despite  the
    judge accepting that it was genuine.

 8. On 29 July 2015, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kelly)  granted  the
    appellants permission on both grounds.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

10. Mr Simmonds, on behalf of the appellant relied on the  two  grounds  of
    appeal.  As regards ground 1, he submitted that the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was unfair as the appellants' legal representatives
    had withdrawn nine days before the  hearing  and  the  appellants  were
    unable properly to prepare for the appeal hearing including  submitting
    appropriate background  evidence.   Secondly,  it  was  unfair  not  to
    adjourn the hearing in order  to  allow  the  appellants  to  obtain  a
    certified translation and authentication of the death  certificate  and
    threatening letter.

11. As regards the second ground, Mr Simmonds submitted that in para 42 the
    judge had been wrong to give the death certificate "no weight" when she
    accepted that it was authentic and that it  showed,  consistently  with
    the first appellant's account, that  his  sister's  brother-in-law  had
    died as a result of a bullet wound to the head.

12. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Diwaycz  did  not  accept  that  the
    proceedings  were  unfair  as  a  result  of  the  absence   of   legal
    representation.  He submitted that there was  no  reason  to  conclude,
    reading the determination as a whole, that the judge did not assist the
    appellants in presenting their appeals.  However, he indicated that  he
    was troubled by the judge's approach to the documents and the fact that
    the appellants were not given an opportunity to obtain translations and
    to authenticate the documents.  He drew my attention to para 22 of  the
    judge's determination where the contents of the threatening  letter  is
    set out and said to be the "interpreter's translation of  the  letter".
    Mr Diwaycz accepted that it was  not  clear  whether  the  interpreter,
    whose function was to interpret and not  translate  written  documents,
    had interpreted the letter as read out by the first  appellant  or  had
    given a translation of the written document.  Having heard Mr Simmonds'
    submissions, Mr Diwaycz indicated that he accepted that the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision could not stand because of the judge's treatment of
    the documents.

13. I entirely agree with Mr Diwaycz's position.  The appellants  had  made
    an application shortly before the hearing to adjourn  it  on  the  dual
    grounds  of  seeking  legal  representation  and  in  order  to  obtain
    translations of the documents.  That application was refused  on  paper
    on 16 June 2015.

14. Although no new application was made at  the  hearing,  the  appellants
    were legally unrepresented and it was a continuing  obligation  of  the
    judge to consider whether the proceedings should be  adjourned  on  any
    basis that would otherwise lead to the proceedings being unfair.  Here,
    the appellants were relying  upon  two  documents  which  were  not  in
    translation but which were obviously relevant to their claims.  To form
    part of the appellants' case at the hearing, those documents had to  be
    provided in English translation (see the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2004,
    Rule 12(5)(b)).  As Mr Diwaycz acknowledged, it is not  clear  how  any
    English translation was before the judge.  It appears, however, that it
    was in some way derived from the interpreter who was present (see  para
    38 of the determination).  It is not clear whether that interpreter was
    qualified to translate documents rather than interpret  evidence  given
    at the hearing.  In any event, given the relevance of these  documents,
    the appellants were entitled to the opportunity to have them translated
    and authenticated (if that were possible) and submitted to the Tribunal
    as part of their case.  Both the  respondent's  representative  at  the
    hearing and the judge in her determination  called  into  question  the
    authenticity of the threatening letter.  Although  the  judge  accepted
    the authenticity of the death certificate, like the threatening letter,
    it was not submitted in translation and the only source of its contents
    could have come from the interpreter.

15. As Mr Diwaycz  acknowledged,  there  are  serious  concerns  about  the
    process by which translations of these documents were before the judge.
     The proper procedure was to allow the  appellants  an  opportunity  to
    have the documents translated  and  (if  possible)  authenticated.   In
    failing  to  provide  the  appellants  with  that  opportunity,  albeit
    inadvertently, the proceedings  were  unfair  as  the  appellants  were
    denied an opportunity to present relevant evidence to their claims.

16. I agree with Mr Diwaycz's concession  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision cannot, as a result, stand.

17. In the light of that I need say no more about Mr  Simmonds'  submission
    based upon the absence of legal representation.

Decision

18. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellants' appeals involved the making of an error of law.
     The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

19. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required and having  regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, these appeals
    are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing before
    a judge other than Judge Coaster.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

