
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00486/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 May 2017                        |On 24 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                  mr m A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  His date of birth is [  ]  1997.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 June 2014 and claimed
    asylum.  The respondent refused the  appellant's  asylum  claim  on  22
    March 2016.  The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal Before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 19 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    NMK Lawrence dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge rejected the appellant's claim in its entirety finding  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness.  The appeal was  dismissed  under
    Articles 2, 3, 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    appeal  was  also  dismissed  under  Article  8.   The  basis  of   the
    appellant's claim was that he feared persecution from the family  of  a
    neighbour.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The grounds of appeal in essence argue  that  the
    judge failed to take account of relevant evidence and made  a  material
    mistake of fact.  It is also asserted that the  judge  failed  to  give
    proper reasons in support of the credibility assessment, failed to take
    into account that the appellant was a minor when he claimed asylum  and
    failed to consider the case under Article 3 ECHR.   On  29  March  2017
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal as amplified by Ms Moffatt  at  the  hearing  are
    essentially separated into four grounds, however, there is a degree  of
    overlap.  Ground 1 asserts that the judge made a  material  mistake  of
    fact which infected the entirety of the  credibility  assessment.   The
    central reason given by the judge for finding the  appellant's  account
    to be incredible  was  that  it  is  inherently  implausible  that  the
    appellant does not know where his father and sister are and that he has
    not been in touch with them since leaving Egypt.  It is  asserted  that
    the judge erred in finding that the appellant is from Cairo.  Reference
    is made to the appellant's witness statement which describes  his  home
    area as a small traditional village and that his home was made  of  mud
    and traditional materials.  He explained in his witness statement  that
    his father was a farmer and that he is illiterate  and  that  he  never
    went to school in Egypt.  Ms Moffatt referred me to the expert's report
    at page 45 of the appellant's bundle where  the  expert  describes  the
    appellant's home as a small village in the Nile Delta.   It  is  argued
    that the judge's finding that the appellant is not concerned about  his
    family's welfare fails to take into account the  appellant's  evidence.
    In his witness statement the appellant set  out  that  he  has  trouble
    sleeping because he suffers from  flashbacks  about  what  happened  in
    Egypt and  that  he  gets  very  stressed  when  he  thinks  about  the
    incidents.  The judge fails to take this into account  when  concluding
    that the appellant has  not  shown  concern  for  his  family.   It  is
    asserted that  in  drawing  adverse  inferences  from  the  appellant's
    inability to contact his family the judge failed to take  into  account
    the appellant's statement that he would like the Home Office to attempt
    to contact his father.  The Home Office has made no attempt to seek  to
    trace the appellant's family despite an obligation upon them to do  so.
    The judge has  not  addressed  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account
    focusing instead on peripheral matters.

 6. Ground 2 asserts that the judge has failed to give proper  reasons  for
    reaching conclusions on credibility.   The  judge  does  not  give  any
    reasons or explain how the visit from the appellant's father and sister
    three days after the incident demonstrates that the appellant  was  not
    concerned about his sister or that it was unlikely that she was  raped.
    The findings insufficiently reasons and fails to give adequate  anxious
    scrutiny to the appellant's claim.

 7. Ground 3 sets out that the judge failed to take into account  that  the
    appellant was a  minor  when  he  claimed  asylum  when  assessing  his
    credibility.

 8. Ground 4 argues that the judge had failed to consider  the  case  under
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  It was submitted
    by Ms Moffatt that the judge did not discuss  the  objective  evidence,
    including an expert's report that was submitted with regard to  Article
    3.

 9. There was no appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision on Article
    8.

10. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge  was  correct  to  find  that  the
    appellant came from Cairo.  She  referred  to  paragraph  1.14  of  the
    appellant's screening interview where the appellant stated that he  was
    from Shintaina, Al Monofia, Cairo.  She submitted  therefore  that  the
    appellant came from a part of Cairo and that the judge set out that the
    appellant did not  hail  from  the  remotest  outback  of  Egypt.   She
    submitted that at question 1.11 the appellant indicated that he went to
    the local mosque school so it was incorrect to say that  the  appellant
    had never been to school.  The judge was entitled to consider that even
    if the appellant lived in a village there would be an expectation  that
    there would be a telephone service.  She submitted that the point  that
    the judge was making with regard to the lack of contact  was  that  the
    appellant himself had made no effort at all to contact his family.   He
    had not, for example, approached the Red Cross.  The appellant did  not
    give any reasons as to why he had not contacted them and therefore  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that this was not credible or that  this
    did not demonstrate any concern for his sister or father.  It  has  not
    been made clear why the appellant had not contacted the Red Cross if he
    wanted to make contact with his  family.   She  referred  to  the  Home
    Office guidance on family tracing and  indicated  that  the  obligation
    ceases when a child turns 18 and the appellant is  now  over  18.   She
    referred to paragraph 73  of  the  case  of  TN  and  MA  (Afghanistan)
    (Appellants) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  UKSC
    40.  She submitted that it is clear from TN and MA that there can be no
    presumption that the appellant's account is  credible  where  the  Home
    Office has not  undertaken  tracing  of  the  family.   The  judge  had
    considered all the evidence  before  concluding  that  the  appellant's
    account was not credible.  With regard to  Ground  2  she  referred  to
    paragraph 17 of the First-tier decision and submitted  that  the  judge
    was considering that the appellant had  done  nothing  for  three  days
    after what he alleged to be a serious  incident  when  his  sister  and
    father had to visit him.  She submitted that the judge simply does  not
    believe the appellant's account.  With regard to Ground 4 Article 3 the
    ECHR she submitted that the judge had considered this but as the  judge
    did not accept the appellant's account no issues under Article 3  would
    arise.

11. In reply Ms Moffatt submitted that with regard to where  the  appellant
    had stated he came from in his second witness  statement  he  explained
    that Monofia is a city but he lived in a small village outside the city
    area.  She submitted that it was never an issue that the appellant came
    from a small village in the region, that there was no cross-examination
    on  this  issue  either.   Therefore  the  appellant  has  not  had  an
    opportunity to respond to the judge's concerns which are set  out  only
    in the decision.  She submitted that the appellant had  indicated  that
    when at the mosque school all he did was recite the  Quran  which  does
    not involve literacy.  Again there was no cross-examination with regard
    to the appellant's level of  literacy.   With  regard  to  the  adverse
    inferences that the judge had drawn because the appellant  did  nothing
    for three days after the incident  as  submitted  by  Ms  Fijiwala  she
    asserted that if that is what the judge says in that paragraph then  as
    the appellant on his account had killed somebody and had been  told  to
    stay where he was because he was in  danger  then  it  cannot  be  held
    against him that he did not attempt to contact his sister or father and
    it cannot be inferred that he was not concerned.

Discussion

12. With regard to the assertion that the judge erred in finding  that  the
    appellant came from Cairo the judge set out:

    "14. The appellant claims he does not have the telephone number of  his
         father or sister.  This is not credible.  This is the 21st  century
         and mobile phone technology is widespread.  The appellant does  not
         hail from the remotest outback of Egypt.  He comes from the city of
         Cairo.  I do not find it credible that hailing  from  such  a  city
         neither his father nor his sister have no access to a mobile phone.
          This does not accord with reality."

13. The appellant has never asserted that he came from the city  of  Cairo.
    I do not  accept  Ms  Fijiwala's  submission  that  the  judge  made  a
    distinction between the remotest outback of Egypt and the small village
    that the appellant asserted that he lived in.  It  is  clear  that  the
    judge considered that the appellant came from the city of Cairo itself.
     This error goes to the heart of the  judge's  findings  regarding  the
    credibility of the appellant.  This links to the judge's findings  with
    regard to the appellant's lack of attempts to contact his  family.   At
    paragraph 15 the judge set out:

    "15. ... It is reasonable to expect him to make every effort, either by
         letter or telephonic or other electronic means  of  contacting  his
         sister and father.  The appellant's evidence is  that  he  has  not
         made any effort to trace them.  I find the appellant claims he  has
         not made any attempts to ascertain  his  sister's  welfare  or  her
         whereabouts does not ring true.

    16.  ...  He was born on 1st May 1997.  He was 16  when  he  claims  he
         left Egypt.  Familiarity with the usage of the phone,  landline  or
         mobile, or letter writing is not beyond the experience of a 16 year
         old boy."

14. It is clear from the above extracts that the  judge  had  not  accepted
    that the appellant was illiterate and no reasons have been given as  to
    why that was not  accepted.   Further,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge
    expected a level of familiarity with modern forms of communication that
    may or may not have been accessible in a small village in  Egypt.   The
    appellant had described his home as made of mud and wood  and  that  it
    contained shelter  for  both  the  family  and  animals.  No  objective
    evidence as to the availability of modern technology was  available  in
    the bundle of evidence and no questions had been put to  the  appellant
    as to what  level  of  modern  communications  were  available  in  the
    village.

15. The judge also appears  to  have  drawn  adverse  inferences  from  the
    appellant's evidence that his father and sister visited him three  days
    after the alleged rape.  The judge found at paragraph 17:

    "17. The second matter which renders the appellant's claim  implausible
         is that his father and sister visited  him  three  days  after  the
         alleged  rape.   The  evidence  before  the   Tribunal   does   not
         demonstrate the appellant was concerned for her safety or  welfare.
         This is contra-indicative of rape."

16. There is no reasoning in this paragraph, or elsewhere in the  decision,
    to explain how the judge arrived at this  conclusion.   As  Ms  Moffatt
    submitted there was a perfectly plausible explanation which is that the
    appellant on his account had  murdered  the  perpetrator  of  the  rape
    against his sister and had been taken by  his  father  to  a  place  of
    safety and told that he was in danger and that he must stay there.   In
    those circumstances it is unlikely that an  inference  could  be  drawn
    that the appellant  was  not  concerned  for  his  sister's  safety  or
    welfare.  In the absence of any reasoning to support this finding it is
    difficult for the appellant to understand why the  judge  has  made  an
    adverse finding.

17. With regard to the grounds in relation to Article 3 as  the  judge  had
    not found any of the appellant's claim to be credible there was no need
    for the judge to consider in any detail Article 3.  However as accepted
    by Ms Moffatt that would be an issue only  if  there  were  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

18. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The judge has proceeded on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  comes  from  a  modern  city  in  which  modern  methods  of
    communication, the use of technology and the use of mobile phones would
    be widespread and commonplace.  I cannot see any  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to whether or not  such  technological  advances
    exist in small villages in Egypt.  It was never put  to  the  appellant
    that he came from the city of Cairo.  His evidence was consistent  that
    he came from a small village.  That was also supported by the  expert's
    evidence.  Although there were other findings  made  by  the  judge  on
    credibility this was not a minor element of the judge's  assessment  of
    credibility.  This finding seems to be part of the core as the  reasons
    why the judge found the appellant not to be a credible witness and  his
    account to be inherently implausible.  I need not address in any detail
    the other aspects of the grounds of appeal as  it  is  clear  that  the
    findings of the judge cannot be extricated from each other.

19. The First-tier Tribunal decision contained a material error of  law  in
    respect of the asylum/protection claim.   I  set  that  decision  aside
    pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 ('TCEA').   There  was  no  appeal  against  the  findings  in
    relation to Article 8. That part of the decision therefore stands.

20. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. This case is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing on the asylum/protection claim before a judge other than  Judge
    NMK Lawrence to be heard at Hatton Cross on the next available date.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 23 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

