
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/00141/2012
     aa/00143/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Field House       |Determination Sent           |
|On 11 October 2013                            |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     n p
                                     n h
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Lemer, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an oral determination.  On 15 March this year I heard  an  error  of
law application and in  determining  it  I  found  that  there  had  been  a
material error of law in the determination of Judge Hague.  I therefore  set
aside his decision.  In my decision I set out the history of these   appeals
and indeed of the previous appeals   which  had  taken  place  before  Judge
Malone  as  well  as,  in  paragraph  2,   setting  out  the  basis  of  the
appellants' claim. This is my determination of the  substantive  issues.  In
paragraphs 1-12 I repeat my decision on the  issue  of  error  of  law.   In
paragraphs 1-5 I set out the history of  the  appellants'  applications  and
appeals. I then, in paragraphs  13  onwards  set  out  my  decision  and  my
reasons for allowing the  appeals.  I  have  considered  it  appropriate  to
anonymise this determination.



1.   The appellants appeal  with  permission,  against  a  determination  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hague  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 1 June 2012 dismissed the appellants' appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 December 2011  to  refuse
    to grant asylum.

2.   The appellants' applications were based on the fact that  Ms  H  was  a
    Christian and that her husband, N P, whose birth name was  H  H  was  a
    Muslim, from a family of  practising  Muslims,  who  had  converted  to
    Christianity in Pakistan.  They claimed that they had  worked  together
    for a company called Warid Telecom and after their relationship  began,
    although Ms H's family disapproved of  the  relationship  because  they
    were Christian, Mr P, having become interested in Ms H's faith had been
    coached in the tenets of Christianity by her  father  and  had  started
    attending church in Pakistan about January 2010.  He had been  baptised
    in Pakistan in March that year and had attended some services but  only
    secretly when his family were asleep.  N P did not tell his parents  of
    his conversation because he believed that his uncles might have  killed
    him and Ms H.  They were married in Holy Trinity Cathedral  in  Karachi
    August 2010.  Mr P's parents were unaware of this but  a  supporter  at
    the wedding had informed them.

3.   In August 2010 both appellants came to Britain as Tier 4 students.   In
    June 2011 they claimed asylum.

4.   Their applications were refused and Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Malone dismissed their appeal.

5.   However, a fresh application was then made and that  was  refused.   It
    was accepted that there should be a further right of appeal.  In  these
    circumstances the appeal came before Judge Hague.

6.   Judge Hague heard evidence from both appellants and from  the  Reverend
    Canon Dr Arun John of St. James Church Blackburn  and  also  considered
    two reports from the Asian Legal Advice Centre, the first  from  a  Mrs
    Uzma Moeen and the second from Professor Werner Menski.  They  set  out
    the background evidence of the position of converts in Pakistan.

7.   Judge Hague gave detailed reasons for  finding  that  N  P  was  not  a
    genuine convert concluding that, on return to Pakistan he would use his
    birth name and would  not  practise  Christianity.   What  he  did  not
    consider was whether or not Mr P  would  face  persecution  because  it
    would be  considered  that  he  had  converted  and  was  therefore  an
    apostate.

8.   The report of Ms Usma Moeen makes it clear that for someone such as  Mr
    P who had been married in a church the implication would be that he had
    converted and would therefore suffer persecution and moreover  that  he
    would not be able to hide the fact that he had been married, given  the
    circumstances  in  which  a  marriage  certificate  would  have  to  be
    produced.

9.   Ms Everett, who appeared for  the  respondent  at  the  hearing  on  15
    March, accepted that this was an issue which had not been considered by
    the Judge and  therefore  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  She argued however that the  findings  of  Judge  Hague
    that the appellant's conversion was not genuine should be preserved.  I
    have considered those findings  which  were  based,  in  part,  on  the
    findings of Judge  Malone  who  had  dismissed  the  appellant's  first
    appeal.  While Judge Hague was correct to take into account what  Judge
    Malone  had  stated  in  the  determination  under  the  principles  of
    Devaseelan the reality is that some considerable  time  had  gone  past
    during which, the appellant claimed, his church  attendance  had  grown
    and his faith had deepened.  While it is the case that the evidence  of
    Canon Arun John was considered by Judge Hague to  have  been  given  in
    good faith, Judge Hague considered that as Canon John did not have  the
    "full evidential  picture"  and  that  "as  a  clergyman  he  would  be
    predisposed to accept  protestations  of  belief  as  sincere"  he  was
    entitled to doubt whether or not  weight  should  be  placed  on  Canon
    John's assessment of the first appellant's faith.  He went on to  state
    in paragraph 11:

         "The Canon's selection of who to assist amongst the asylum  seekers
         appears primarily to distinguish between strangers who phone up and
         those who attend his church regularly.  I do not view Canon John as
         being reliably able  to  distinguish  between  sincere  belief  and
         outward show."


10.  The reality is that that is not an accurate assessment  of  what  Canon
    John wrote, what he was stating was there were those  whom  he  decided
    not to support.  Clearly he considered that he could reach  conclusions
    on the sincerity of those whom he decided to support and that that  was
    his criteria for not supporting  them  rather  than  that  he  did  not
    support those who merely phoned up.

11.  It is the evidence of Canon John that  both  appellants  are  committed
    Christians and hold sincerely  to  the  belief  and  teachings  of  the
    Christian faith and he did attend the  hearing.   I  consider  that  it
    might well be the case that Judge Hague erred in the  weight  which  he
    placed on the testimony of Canon  John.   I  therefore  consider  that,
    given the passage of time it would be appropriate for this appeal to be
    considered afresh.  I therefore did not direct that any of the findings
    of Judge Hague were preserved although, of  course,  stated  that   the
    judge hearing the appeal would, on the principles set out in Devaseelan
    take into account the findings of Judge Malone and the  evidence  given
    before Judge Hague.

12.  For the above reasons I set aside the determination of Judge Hague  and
    directed that this appeal proceed to a hearing afresh  on  all  issues.
    Further directions are set out below.

13.  As is evident from what I have written above  Judge  Malone  heard  the
    appeal of the appellants when they had made their first application for
    asylum. Under the provisions of the determination  in  Devaseelan   his
    decision is the starting point in any further determination.   What  is
    relevant in his decision is that he accepted that the  first  appellant
    had gone through a ceremony of baptism in Pakistan although he did  not
    accept that the first appellant had converted.  He also,  in  paragraph
    59 of the determination, determined that the appellants were exercising
    family life here as husband and wife.   He  dismissed  the  appeal  and
    permission was refused to appeal  further  to  the  Tribunal.   However
    there were then judicial review proceedings and  a  further  letter  of
    refusal which is dated 13 December 2012.  That  again  focused  on  the
    genuineness of the conversion of the first appellant and  did  consider
    an expert report by Mrs Uzma Moeen and concluded that  the  appellants'
    application could not succeed.  It was indeed thought by the respondent
    that Mrs Moeen's report was of limited use.

14.  There are a number of issues in this appeal but the central issue,  and
    on this Mr Saunders agreed, is whether or not the first appellant is  a
    genuine convert.  Indeed Mr Saunders indicated that should I find  that
    Mr P was a genuine convert then there was a likelihood that his  appeal
    should succeed. However, he submitted that NP was not a genuine convert
    but that in any event the fact that he  had  married  in  a  church  in
    Pakistan would not be of note if the appellants were  returned  because
    they could easily get married in a civil ceremony here and use that  as
    the basis on which they would live in Pakistan.

15.   In  considering  the  genuineness  of  the  conversion  of  the  first
    appellant I have taken into account and placed weight  on  the  answers
    given by the appellant at interview which it is correct to say  do  not
    show a particularly thorough knowledge of Christianity but I have  also
    placed weight on the considerable documentary evidence which  has  been
    produced.  That starts  off  with  evidence  from  the  Rev.  Sabir  in
    Pakistan who talked about the conversion of the first appellant and how
    he gave him a Bible to read.  This was the evidence which was  accepted
    by Judge Malone that the appellant had been baptised in Pakistan.

16.  There is considerable evidence from Ministers of Religion here.   These
    include Bill Muncey and Canon Arun John, who gave evidence before Judge
    Hague.  Dr John in his witness statement refers at some length  to  his
    knowledge of the first appellant and stated that he considered  him  to
    be a very devoted Christian who was enthusiastic and inspired to  learn
    more about Christianity, not just from his wife who had been brought up
    in a Christian family but also from him.  He stated that he  found  the
    first appellant to be receptive to help and to have a strong desire  to
    participate within the church.  It  was  his  strong  belief  that  the
    appellant was a genuine convert.

17.  The appellants have had to move  from  place  to  place  as  they  were
    receiving accommodation it appears from NASS.  I note that at least one
    of the churches  which  they  attended,  St.  James  in  Amhurst,  held
    services in Urdu.

18.  At the hearing before me a Pastor, Haile T Emiru,  gave  evidence.   He
    is a member of the pastoral team of the Metropolitan Tabernacle Baptist
    Church in Elephant and Castle which the appellants now attends although
    it appears that the first appellant attends rather more than  his  wife
    as their journey to get there takes some  considerable  time.   He  was
    adamant that the appellant was a genuine Christian.  It was put to  him
    by Mr Saunders that he might be mistaken or there might be  an  attempt
    as it were to pull the wool over his eyes.  He stated that although  he
    could not be certain that was not the case he was pretty sure  that  it
    was not and he took the  view  that  the  appellant  was  definitely  a
    genuine Christian.

19.  I have to weigh up all the evidence relating to the  first  appellant's
    conversion.  The standard of proof is that of a reasonable  likelihood.
    It is clear that  the  appellant  who  was  baptised  in  Pakistan  has
    attended many churches here and indeed has been regular  in  attendance
    and indeed that his knowledge of the Christian religion has grown.   He
    was questioned by Mr Saunders on that and gave a detailed answer to the
    question of who had betrayed Jesus Christ.

20.  Taking all the evidence I have heard into account it is  my  conclusion
    that the first appellant is a genuine Christian.

21.   Going on from that finding I have  to  consider  whether  or  not,  on
    return to  Pakistan,  the  appellants  would  face  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason that is because of  their religion.  They  were  both
    questioned at very considerable length by Mr Saunders on what knowledge
    those they knew in Pakistan, that is their workmates, had of the  first
    appellant's conversion.  It appeared that because a photograph had been
    taken at the wedding by a woman who had indeed also attended the  first
    appellant's baptism but was a Muslim, people at the  first  appellant's
    workplace were aware that he had married and indeed that he had married
    a Christian.  One of them had placed a message on the first appellant's
    Facebook page which indicated that he thought the appellant would be in
    danger on his return.  It is not clear exactly whether or not it was  a
    direct threat from that individual or that that individual  was  saying
    that that would be likely to happen.


22.  Be that as it may, in considering what would happen to the  appellants,
    I must consider the  evidence  in  the  various  expert's  reports  and
    consider, as a starting point, the relevant country guidance case of AJ
    (Risk Christian Converts) Pakistan CG [2003] UKAIT 00040.  The reality,
    however, is that AJ (Pakistan) is now ten years old.  The treatment  of
    religious minorities in Pakistan has changed dramatically in that time.
     I need only look at the UNHCR Report to see  the  far  more  difficult
    circumstances in which Christians  now  find  themselves  in  Pakistan.
    Moreover jurisprudence has developed in that time, most notably in  the
    Supreme Court's decision in HJ (Iran)  2010  UKSC  31.   That  decision
    makes it clear that a claimant for asylum could not be expected to hide
    a basic characteristic such as their religion if they were returned  to
    the country where  they  fear  persecution.   It  cannot  therefore  be
    expected of the first appellant that as a committed Christian he  would
    be expected to hide his conversion or hide the fact that he was married
    to a Christian woman in Pakistan.  Therefore, the first appellant would
    be returning as a convert who had married a Christian in  Pakistan  and
    was living with her.  Taking  all  these  factors  together  I  do  not
    consider that I am bound to follow the ratio in AJ (Pakistan).

23.  Leaving to one  side  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  NP  might  fear
    persecution from his family - and there is no indication,  I  consider,
    that that might happen, the reality  is  that  there  are  the  various
    provisions of the Pakistani law which not  only  discriminates  against
    but set out severe penalties for those who convert.   I  consider  that
    there is a real risk that the  appellants  would  face  persecution  in
    Pakistan.

24.   I reach that conclusion having considered  the  reports  of  Mrs  Uzma
    Moeen and that of Professor Wenski.  There is  also  a  further  report
    which endorses the difficulties  which  might  well  be  faced  by  the
    appellants from a Roger Ballard.

25.    Professor  Wenski  refers to the treatment of those who  are  thought
    to be disloyal  to the Islamic republic of Pakistan   by  not  being  a
    "normal" Muslim  and by explicitly  rejecting Islam.   He  states  that
    the First appellant would be likely to face an extremely  serious  risk
    of being killed by those who felt called  on  to  protect  the  Islamic
    republic of Pakistan.

26.   Mrs Moeen refers to the fact that the appellants'  marriage  would  be
    treated as unlawful  which could lead to prosecution   and  she  points
    out that if the second  appellant   became  pregnant    she   would  be
    committing  an  act  of  Zina   -  involving   extra  marital    sexual
    relations.

27.  The legal provisions in the Hudood ordinances and  the  Zina  ordinance
    could well lead to the appellants suffering  ill-treatment  and  indeed
    those legal provisions in Pakistan make it very clear that  should  the
    appellants suffer at the hands of any religious body there would not in
    any event be any protection for  them  from  the  state.   I  therefore
    consider that there is a real risk  that  on  return  to  Pakistan  the
    appellants would suffer persecution for a Convention reason.

28.  I have already set aside the determination of Judge Hague.  I  now  re-
    make the decision and  allow  these  appeals  on  asylum  grounds.   It
    follows from that of course that the appeals are also allowed on  human
    rights grounds under Article 3 of the ECHR.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

