
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00612/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  miss L S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patya (Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is  12  May  1982  is  a  citizen  of
    Albania.  She appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Devittie) ("FTT") promulgated on 9 October 2016  dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of her asylum and human  rights
    claim.  The appellant's claim  was  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking in Albania.  She was kidnapped and taken to Greece  at  the
    age of 17 years and  raped  and  forced  into  prostitution.   She  was
    detained against her will by a man named Isrof and forced to work as  a
    prostitute until 2014.  She suffered from health problems which led  to
    her returning to Albania where she used the opportunity to escape.  She
    travelled to the UK on 10 November 2014 and thereafter  claimed  asylum
    on 6 January 2015.  The appellant further relied on Article  8  on  the
    grounds that she could not return to her  family  in  Albania  who  had
    disowned her, she would be at risk of destitution in Albania because of
    her mental health, lack of support and low-level of education  and  she
    was in a committed relationship with a  partner  in  the  UK.  She  was
    seeking fertility treatment as they wished to start a family,  she  was
    financially supported  by  her  partner  and  she  was  psychologically
    vulnerable, having been diagnosed with PSTD.

2.    The  FTT  considered  the  appellant's  claim  having  regard  to  the
    background evidence on the prevalence of  trafficking  in  Albania  and
    with reference to the country guidance case of TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKAIT 92 (IAC), of which the head note is set  out  at
    [6] of the decision.  The FTT also  considered  the  appellant's  claim
    against the background of a medical report by Dr Helen quoted at [7] of
    the decision.  The FTT then listed features of the appellant's evidence
    that it found to be unsatisfactory at [8(i) to (iv)].  In  summary  the
    FTT identified aspects of the appellant's claim that it  considered  to
    be implausible or improbable and which were described as unsatisfactory
    features of her claim and dismissed the appeal.

Application for Permission to Appeal

3.   The appellant asserted in ground 1 that the FTT  was  wrong  to  reject
    the asylum claim on "common sense"  and  innate  plausibility  grounds.
    The FTT failed to follow the guidance of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  HK
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 which cautioned against the dismissal of an asylum
    claim on the basis of finding it "inherently  unlikely".   Further,  in
    rejecting the claim the FTT failed to consider  the  objective  country
    information that was relevant to the innate plausibility of the  claim,
    and secondly, failed to consider those parts of medical  evidence  that
    went to the plausibility of the claim.  Alternatively, the decision was
    inadequately reasoned.

4.   In ground 2 the appellant argued that the  FTT  failed  to  assess  the
    strength of the appellant's relationship with her partner which was  an
    exceptional feature and failed to give adequate reasons for conclusions
    as regards proportionality.

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  11
    November 2016 in terms that it was  arguable  that  the  assessment  of
    credibility did seem to have largely focused on the plausibility of the
    account to the exclusion of other factors such as consistency  and  the
    appellant's mental health problems.  It was further arguable  that  the
    failure to consider the appellant's mental health issues, her fertility
    treatment attempts and the British nationality of her partner, and  the
    examination of proportionality may have been inadequate.



Error of Law Hearing

6.   At the hearing Ms Patya produced a Note and provided the Tribunal  with
    a copy of the objective material relied on at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Ms  Patya  relied  on  the  detailed  grounds  of
    appeal.  The main ground was the FTT's flawed approach to  credibility.
    Ms Patya submitted that the FTT had effectively conducted an assessment
    of plausibility rather than an assessment of  credibility  informed  by
    the relevant objective material.  The FTT had in effect reproduced  the
    respondent's reasons for refusing the claim and placed weight on  those
    aspects of her claim that it found to be implausible.  The FTT made  no
    reference to internal or external  consistency  and  the  decision  was
    flawed  by  failing  to  follow  the  principles  in  HK  and  Y.   The
    appellant's  account  was  entirely  consistent  with  the   background
    material in Albania and whilst the FTT had set out the head note in  TD
    and AD, there had been no meaningful engagement with the issues.

7.   Mr Kotas responded that there  was  no  merit  in  the  argument  under
    Article 8 which the FTT properly considered following Nagre.

8.   Mr  Kotas  argued  that  the  grounds  were  essentially  an  elaborate
    disagreement with the FTT's assessment in a case which it found  to  be
    inherently implausible. The FTT was entitled to reach that  finding  on
    the evidence given by the appellant.  There  was  nothing  perverse  or
    irrational.  HK emphasised that the Tribunal should  consider  evidence
    in the context of the country from which an applicant  came.   The  FTT
    was entitled to find the account implausible.

9.   Ms Patya responded that the challenge was not a  perversity  challenge,
    rather a criticism of the role of the  FTT  in  assessing  credibility.
    The Tribunal's role is inquisitorial and all of the  evidence  must  be
    assessed as to its internal/external consistency.  It was  crucial  for
    the FTT to have understood how trafficking works in Albania in order to
    assess the credibility of the appellant's claim and further have proper
    regard to the medical evidence.

Decision and Discussion

10.  I have decided that there are material errors of law  in  the  decision
    which shall be set aside.

11.  I am satisfied that ground 1 is made out and the FT erred  by  reaching
    findings based on an assessment of the plausibility of the  appellant's
    account without proper  consideration  of  the  internal  and  external
    consistency of her claim.  This is contrary to the approach  encouraged
    in HK v SSHD cited above.  At [28] the Court of Appeal states:-

         "Further, in many asylum cases, some, even most, of the appellant's
         story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it
         is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story as a  whole,
         have to be considered against the available  country  evidence  and
         reliable expert evidence,  and  other  familiar  factors,  such  as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any)."

    I also draw attention to paragraph [30]  where  reference  is  made  to
    Awala v SSHD [2005] CSOH 73 where at paragraph [24]  Lord  Brodie  said
    that rejection of a story on grounds of implausibility must be done "on
    reasonably  drawn  inferences  and  not   simply   on   conjecture   or
    speculation".  I do not accept  the  respondent's  submission  that  HK
    limits the assessment  only  to  an  applicant's  country  or  cultural
    background.

13.  Although the FTT set out the head note factors in AM and BM and  quoted
    aspects of the medical report in its decision, I  am  nevertheless  not
    satisfied that it engaged in any meaningful way with that material.  In
    particular the background material concludes that it is not possible to
    set out  a  typical  profile  of  trafficked  women  from  Albania  and
    discusses the issues such as the control exerted by  traffickers.   The
    FTT failed to assess the consistency of the appellant's  account,  both
    internally and externally.  There were no specific aspects of  evidence
    which  contradicted   the   appellant's   account   and   no   positive
    inconsistencies in her account.  The reasons given by the FTT are based
    solely on the FTT's views rather than justified  by  any  reference  to
    other evidence that would inform  its  assessment  and  lead  on  to  a
    consideration made in the round of all  aspects  of  the  appeal.   The
    wording used in the decision reflects the narrow  approach  adopted  by
    the FTT in making its findings of fact and conclusions.   For  example,
    at [8(i)], "Common sense seems to dictate that ..." "in my  view  makes
    no sense and is palpably false" ... Paragraph  [8(ii)]  "It  is  hardly
    probable that ..." "Her account that she escaped from him in  that  way
    simply does not ring true".

    In view of my decision that the first ground of appeal is made out,   I
    do not propose to consider further  the  second  ground  of  appeal  as
    regards Article 8.



Notice of Decision

14.  There is a material error of law in the decision and  reasons  which  I
    set aside.

15.  The matter will be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (excluding
    Judge Devittie) for hearing afresh at Taylor House on a date  and  time
    to be fixed.

16.  None of the findings of fact are preserved.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
