
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00430/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 08 January 2018                       |On 13 February 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel, instructed by Hammersmith and Fulham
                    Community Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties.  Failure to comply with this order could lead to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department is  the  appellant,  but
    for ease I refer to the parties as they were known  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT").

The appellant and proceedings

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born in 1988 whose appeal against
    the respondent's decision of 05 Feb 2015 and 01 March  2016  dismissing
    his international protection claim.  The Ft-T (Judge C Greasley), in  a
    decision promulgated on 18th July 2017, allowed the appellant's  appeal
    based on his fear of his father and the general populace  arising  from
    the fact that he was gay.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The respondent appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shimmin), granted on 9th October 2017.

 5. There were two distinct challenges:

      a) At paragraph 44 the Ft-T notes that he has "treated  the  appellant
         as a vulnerable witness...  and  have  considered  the  appellant's
         application as a child  sensitive  application".  This  amounts  to
         material misdirection because  "the  judge  has  viewed  the  whole
         appeal  as  that  of  a  child,  giving  the  appellant  additional
         allowances, which infects the entire of his  argument.  (Reproduced
         as written in the grounds).

      b) Before me Mr Wilding moved away from  this  formulation  to  argue,
         more attractively, that  whilst  it  was  no  error  to  treat  the
         appellant as a vulnerable witness on the basis of his sexuality and
         the finding that he previously suffered violence at  the  hands  of
         his father, and the judge had reached conclusions which  were  open
         to him on the basis of the  evidence  before  him,  the  judge  had
         wrongly treated the vulnerable witness statement of  the  appellant
         as the basis for reducing the already low standard of proof so that
         the findings were unsustainable. In particular he pointed out  that
         the judge states he "makes important and additional allowances when
         assessing the appellant's account as a whole".

      c) Ms Capel relied on her rule 24  response  to  the  point  that  the
         approach revealed no error. As submitted in the  skeleton  argument
         of the FtT hearing, in KS (benefit of the doubt)  [2014]  UKUT  552
         (IAC) the Upper Tribunal accepted at [99] that  a  child  sensitive
         application of the lower standard of proof may need to be given  to
         persons, even if now adult, if they are recounting relevant  events
         that took place at a time  when  they  were  minors  or  were  even
         younger minors.

      d) The appellant's account of the events  which  caused  him  to  flee
         Albania, given in his SEF and Asylum Statement  dated  9  September
         2014, Screening Interview dated 21 August 2014 and Asylum Interview
         dated 20 November 2014, were all provided when the appellant was  a
         child, aged 16 years old.  The  FtT  was  plainly  aware  that  the
         appellant was an adult  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  (see,  for
         example, [15]).  The events he was recounting took  place  when  he
         was an even younger minor, and the child sensitive  application  of
         the lower standard of proof was clearly founded on  that  position,
         and revealed no error.

 6. I find no merit in this ground. The judge reached sustainable  findings
    of fact on the evidence before him. The appellant's account was of  the
    historical position i.e. to matters which concerned the appellant  when
    he was a minor, and provided to the respondent when  he  was  a  minor.
    There is no  basis  to  suggest  as  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge
    mistakenly thought the appellant was still a minor as at  the  date  of
    hearing and the assessment of risk on return.  The  gloss  put  on  the
    grounds by Mr Wilding takes the matter no further.  When  referring  to
    the appellant's account as a whole the judge is clearly referencing the
    historical position. The challenge to the phrase used by the  judge  is
    no more than a forensic nit-pick, barely more than  a  suggestion  that
    the phrase could give rise to the inference that the findings  are  not
    properly rooted in the evidence, had a correct standard  been  applied.
    The challenge is not borne out, given the  accepted  sustainability  of
    the findings on the evidence on a correct application of  the  standard
    and burden and the absence of any misdirection.

 7. The 2nd ground  of  appeal  challenges  the  approach  to  the  country
    background information  and  relies  on  the  latest  Albanian  country
    guidance case of IM (risk - objective evidence -  homosexuals)  Albania
    CG [2003]'s UK  IAT  00067  (8  September  2003),  where  the  tribunal
    concluded that

         "... There is no  country  background  evidence  which  supports  a
         reasonable likelihood that  homosexuals  as  such  in  Albania  are
         subject to any action on the part either of the  populous  all  the
         authorities which would amount to persecution for the  purposes  of
         the Refugee Convention or would be in  breach  of  their  protected
         human rights."

 8. The respondent asserts that the latest Albania country guidance and the
    respondent's policy information note continues to show that Albania  is
    a conservative society  where  homophobic  attitudes  persist,  but  in
    general  the  level  of  discrimination  is   not   such   to   warrant
    international protection.

 9. Ms Caple asserted that there was no need for the judge to deal directly
    with country guidance case.  The findings that the appellant could  not
    return to his home area on account of a real risk of persecution by his
    family and community and a lack of sufficiency of protection  were  not
    specifically challenged,  and  the  judge's  conclusion  that  internal
    relocation was not reasonable because of the limited  capacity  of  the
    shelter for LGBT persons and the difficulties the appellant would  have
    finding accommodation and employment,  was  sufficient  to  defend  the
    decision.

10. Ms Capel did not seek to persuade me that  the  failure  to  deal  with
    country guidance case was not an error  but  instead  argued  that  the
    error is immaterial in the context of the findings  on  the  historical
    account and that internal relocation would  not  be  reasonable.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge fell into legal error in failing to deal  with
    the country guidance case. The conclusion reached runs contrary to  the
    country guidance decision.

11. The judge found it credible that the  appellant  had  as  a  result  of
    persecutory threats from his father initially suppressed expressions of
    his sexuality so as to appear not to be gay, and then having decided to
    engage in a sexual relationship, agreed  with  his  partner  that  they
    would hold hands in public and take the consequences.  Further that  in
    the event the consequences were that  he  received  verbal  and  on  an
    occasion physical abuse from neighbours, who then told his father,  who
    then beat him, and threatened him should he  continue  such  behaviour,
    and ordered him not to see his partner. The appellant felt compelled to
    comply with the strictures for fear of further abuse.

12. The factual matrix determined by Judge Greasley falls far short of  the
    examination required in  the  context  of  the  country  guidance  case
    concerning  the  treatment  of  gays  in  Albania  to  assess  risk  of
    persecutory or ill-treatment on return to the home  area,  and  whether
    there is a sufficiency of protection there as well as safety elsewhere,
    again in  terms  of  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  and  sufficiency  of
    protection in those other areas, before  turning  to  the  question  of
    reasonableness  of  relocation  for  the   appellant.   There   is   no
    consideration, informed  by  the  country  guidance  case  or  reasoned
    disagreement with  it,  of  the  background  material  as  to  how  the
    experience of past persecution and absence of sufficiency of protection
    as a minor living in his parents' home transfers to the position of the
    appellant as an adult with the possibility of living  independently  of
    his father. At [50] to [53] the judge  refers  to  country  information
    which supports the historical  account  but  fails  to  deal  with  the
    thresholds for persecutory or ill-treatment warranting protection.

13. I am satisfied that the error cannot  be  said  to  be  immaterial.  It
    cannot be said that no other outcome could have followed.  The  failure
    to take account of the country guidance case, for all the same reasons,
    infects the assessment of whether there is  any  place  of  safety  for
    relocation and whether it is reasonable to require  it.  I  cannot  say
    with any clarity what the outcome would  have  been  on  the  evidence,
    including the  country  information,  had  the  judge  correctly  self-
    directed as to the approach to be taken to the country guidance case.

14. Ms Capel suggested in her Rule 24 notice that as  the  grounds  do  not
    bring a specific challenge to the Judges decision that the private life
    rules are met on the grounds of  insurmountable  obstacles  facing  the
    appellant on return to Albania, because he is a young man still needing
    the input of adults, that  part  of  the  decision  should  stand.  The
    argument is without merit because the claims  were  made  on  the  same
    matrix, i.e. the position of return as a gay man, so that  the  private
    life decisions are infected by the error even  on  the  lower  standard
    applicable to the international protection arguments. The  decision  is
    predicated on an inadequate consideration of the position on return and
    it is not possible to gauge what the outcome would have  been  had  the
    position on return been correctly assessed.

15. I find that the legal errors are material and that the decision of  the
    Ft-T allowing the appeal on International  Protection  grounds  and  on
    Human Rights grounds must be set aside.

16. I have concluded that because an extensive part of the  factual  matrix
    has not been resolved the matter should be remitted to the Ft-T.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds reveals a material error of law and I  set  it  aside  and  the
    matter is remitted to be heard in the Ft-T by a judge other than  Judge
    C Greasley.



Signed                                  Date 03 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


