
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00320/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2017                           |On 25th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A Z
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Gaisford of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer  to
    the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that
    is Mr Z as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the  respondent.
    The respondent appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Herlihy who allowed the appellant's appeal against the refusal
    of the Secretary of State to grant  him  international  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  3rd  December  1984  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st October  2006.   He  submitted  a
    false claim for asylum on 7th August 2007 in a false name and  he  then
    revealed his identity and changed his claim and the whole basis of  his
    claim.  On 13th July 2010 the respondent made a decision to remove  him
    as an illegal entrant under Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999  and  this  appeal  against  that  decision  was  rejected  by
    Immigration Judge Mitchell on  2nd  September  2010  who  made  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant.

 3. As cited above the appellant made a fresh application for asylum  which
    was that he had converted to Christianity  and  was  baptised  on  19th
    October 2013 at the Living Stones Baptist  Church  in  Plymouth.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 11th February 2016
    and the appellant  appealed  against  the  refusal  of  his  claim  for
    international protection  and  on  human  rights  grounds.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herlihy allowed the appeal and I set out her findings at
    paragraphs 32 to 37:

         "32.     In examining the totality of the evidence submitted by the
             Appellant, I am satisfied that he has  been  baptised  in  the
             Christian faith and I see no reason to doubt the  authenticity
             of the Baptismal Certificate or the letter  from  Pastor  H  M
             dated the 26th July 2016.  I note that there  was  a  previous
             letter submitted by Pastor  M  attesting  to  the  Appellant's
             conversion to the Christian faith.

         33.      I have considered the Appellant's overall credibility  and
             find that he is undoubtedly somebody who is  prepared  to  use
             almost any means to procure the grant of  asylum.   I  do  not
             find that he is likely to be a serious convert to Christianity
             and I am struck by  the  complete  paucity  of  evidence  from
             church  officials  other  than   Pastor   M   confirming   the
             Appellant's regular attendance at Christian  church  services.
             Pastor M last saw the Appellant in October/November 2013  just
             after his baptism.  The Appellant  has  claimed  that  he  has
             evangelised and has referred to 6 people to whom he has spoken
             and attempted to teach them about Christianity.  Again,  there
             was no evidence in support of the Appellant's claims and I did
             not find them credible as I note that the Appellant is clearly
             someone who has made a number of claims for asylum on  various
             grounds and to  (sic)  has  deployed  deception  in  initially
             claiming asylum in a false identity.  I  therefore  find  that
             the  Appellant  has  not  openly  demonstrated  that  he   has
             evangelised as claimed and I find that his claim to have  done
             so has been made to enhance his asylum claim.

         34.      Having accepted that the Appellant has been  baptised  and
             has converted from Islam to Christianity I  need  to  consider
             whether he would be at risk due to that fact  if  he  were  to
             return to Iran.  I do not find that the Appellant is a serious
             convert Christian given the lack of evidence  of  his  regular
             attendance at church from the Iranian church.   The  Appellant
             explained the absence of any witnesses due to their attendance
             at  a  conference,  but  I  did  not  find  this  a   credible
             explanation as if the Appellant was  a  regular  attendee  the
             church would have indicated this in their  letter  dated  10th
             July 2016  and  they  refer  to  him  only  as  an  occasional
             attendee.  I find that if the Appellant was a committed church
             member that he could have produced evidence  of  this  from  a
             member of the Iranian Christian Fellowship and the absence  of
             any evidence attesting to his commitment to his  faith,  given
             his previous immigration history, I find it likely that he has
             undertaken the conversion for the sole purposes  of  obtaining
             or seeking asylum in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  says
             he is not in touch with any members  of  his  family  in  Iran
             although he then appeared to contradict himself by saying that
             they had no problems with his conversion when he explained  to
             them that it had brought him peace.

         35.      I have given consideration to the decision of the  Supreme
             Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD (2010) UKSC31  and
             the findings that it is unreasonable to  expect  a  person  to
             hide their faith  to  avoid  persecution.   I  also  note  the
             Country Information Guidance at paragraph 3.1.4 which provides
             that the right of Muslims to  change  their  religion  is  not
             accepted under Sharia law  and  the  religious  conversion  of
             Muslims is illegal  in  Iran  and  that  Christians  who  have
             converted from Islam are at real risk of persecution  in  Iran
             and a grant of asylum is likely to be appropriate.

         36.      I do find that the  Appellant  has  produced  satisfactory
             evidence that he has practiced (sic) of his  faith  openly  in
             the United Kingdom which could place him in danger on  return;
             albeit this is demonstrated only by the occasional  attendance
             at Church in London and previously in Portsmouth where he  was
             baptised.  However from the background material it is  evident
             that conversion is illegal and I find that the  (sic)  if  the
             fact of his conversion is admitted  to  by  the  Appellant  or
             otherwise becomes known to the authorities  in  Iran  that  he
             would be at risk of serious persecution and that the reason he
             would conceal his conversion is solely due  to  this  fear  of
             persecution.  Although I find  that  the  Appellant  has  been
             baptised and has attended Church I am not  satisfied  that  he
             would openly demonstrate his conversion in Iran,  but  I  find
             that he is unlikely to do so because of fear of persecution.

         37.      Given the conclusions as outlined above, I find  that  the
             Appellant has discharged the burden of proof to establish that
             she is entitled to  the  grant  of  asylum.   I  come  to  the
             conclusion that the Appellant's removal would cause the United
             Kingdom  to  be  in  breach  of  its  obligations  under   the
             Qualification Regulations."

 4. The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal  on
    the basis that there had been a material misdirection of law, there was
    perversity, there were inconsistent findings  and  a  failure  to  give
    adequate reasoning.

 5. It was submitted that at paragraphs 32  to  34  the  judge  found  that
    whilst the appellant had been baptised his claim was not  credible  and
    that he was prepared to use almost any means to procure  the  grant  of
    asylum.  Despite the adverse credibility findings that demonstrated the
    substance of his claim was a  sham,  the  judge  went  on  to  find  at
    paragraph 36 that the mere fact that the appellant pursued a sham claim
    openly in the UK was sufficient to warrant protection under the Refugee
    Convention and engaged Article 3 of the Convention on Human Rights.

 6. It was submitted that the judge failed properly to  apply  the  Supreme
    Court's reasoning in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 or to have regard to  the
    country guidance in respect of failed asylum seekers  pursuant  to  SSH
    and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  00308
    (IAC).

 7. It was submitted that having found the appellant's claim incredible the
    judge had failed to identify any evidence at all  that  would  indicate
    the authorities were aware or would become  aware  of  the  appellant's
    sham conversion, or indeed perceive the conversion as genuine.

 8. The  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  36  were  pure  speculation  and
    contradictory to the findings at paragraphs  33  to  34,  perverse  and
    inadequately reasoned.   The  judge  failed  to  explain  that  if  the
    conversion itself was a sham why the appellant would see  to  something
    that was not true.

 9. Equally, the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the  country  guidance
    caselaw.

10. In his  submissions  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Gaisford
    submitted that it was clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    accepted that the appellant had converted and there was  no  reason  to
    doubt that authenticity.  The case of RT Zimbabwe [2010] EWCA Civ  1285
    was applicable as to whether the appellant should rely on his return to
    Iran.  There was a finding  that  he  converted  and  attended  church,
    albeit that it was not regular, that there was no  doubt  that  he  had
    been to a number  of  churches.   The  judge  had  found  that  he  had
    practised his faith openly and that forms the premise for the  finding.
    There was a risk on return finding in paragraph 36.  The appellant  had
    practised in the Iranian community in  London.   Mr  Gaisford  in  turn
    criticised the judge's findings in that it was not for the Tribunal  to
    judge the extent to which the appellant had become a convert and it was
    not open to the judge to be an inquisitor in that respect.  The  extent
    of his belief was not relevant.  There was a  further  important  point
    that it was clear that the appellant had distanced  himself  from  both
    the Muslim faith and therefore rejected Islam, but  also  rejected  the
    Iranian theocracy of Islam and that  was  covered  by  Article  9.   He
    accepted that there were difficulties in the wording,  but  nonetheless
    the determination had done enough.

11. Mr Nath in his response argued that the findings  in  relation  to  the
    theocracy of Iran and the appellant's rejection therein were  not  made
    out  by  the  judge.   There  was  no  engagement  with  the  objective
    background information and no finding  on  the  objective  point.   The
    determination  lacked  detail,  was  disjointed  and  disorganised  and
    undertook a turnabout midway.  There was simply not the detail required
    and an inadequacy in relation to the findings.

12. Despite Mr Gaisford's valiant attempts to uphold  the  determination  I
    find that there are contradictions in the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and these can be seen from the second  sentence  of
    paragraph 33 where the judge finds that

         "I do not find that he  is  likely  to  be  a  serious  convert  to
         Christianity"

    and the opening sentence of paragraph 34 where the judge states

         "Having accepted that the  Appellant  has  been  baptised  and  has
         converted from Islam to Christianity I need to consider whether  he
         would be at risk due to that fact if he were to return to Iran".

    There is a further contradiction with the opening sentence of paragraph
    33 and  the  finding  at  paragraph  35  in  relation  to  the  Country
    Information Guidance at paragraph 3.1.4.  It is not clear on an overall
    reading whether the judge does accept that he has converted or not, and
    the effect of a 'sham baptism'.  This is at the heart of the  decision.



13.  In addition, there was an inadequate engagement  with  the  background
    material; and although the judge does refer to the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report she does  not  explain  how  this  applies  to  this
    particular appellant, in respect of whose adherence to Christianity she
    is ambivalent.  Indeed the judge does not cite the country guidance  of
    FS and others (Iran - Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004]  UKIAT  00303,
    specifically paragraphs 163 to 165 and the country guidance of  SZ  and
    JM (Christians - FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00082.   This
    confirmed FS which in turn was rather more nuanced.

14. On the one hand the judge appears to reject the appellant's  conversion
    to Christianity and yet on the other hand proceeds on the basis that he
    has indeed converted. On the one hand the judge appears  to  find  that
    the appellant is not a serious convert, but on the other  hand  appears
    to find that it is unlikely that  he  will  express  his  faith  openly
    because of  fear  of  persecution.   These  would  also  appear  to  be
    contradictory findings.

15. Although the judge finds  from  the  background  material,  citing  the
    latest Country Information and Guidance Iran: Christians and  Christian
    Converts December 2015 and 2nd December 2015, conversion is illegal and
    that if his conversion was admitted to by the appellant  or  otherwise,
    he would be at risk of serious persecution, there was no finding as  to
    why he would he admit to something when he is not  a  genuine  convert.
    The judge states at paragraph 36 that having practised his faith openly
    in the United Kingdom that could place him in  danger  on  return,  but
    does not support this with adequate reasoning when finding he  will  be
    at risk and makes no findings in relation to any religious surveillance
    by the Iranians in the  UK.  The  real  question  is  how  he  will  be
    perceived in Iran on return. Even if the appellant  is  not  a  serious
    convert and Mr Gaisford  himself,  rightly  so,  took  issue  with  the
    credibility findings of the judge, the question is  how  the  appellant
    will be perceived on his return because of sur place activity  sham  or
    otherwise? - see YB Eritrea v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360.  I  note  in
    passing there was a wealth of  material  supplied  by  the  appellant's
    representatives, none of which was engaged with by the judge

16. The respondent is entitled to understand why she has lost the case  and
    it is not clear from this decision why that is so.

17. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I find there are errors of  law
    and set aside the determination and return the matter to the First-tier
    Tribunal because of the nature and extent of the findings to be made.

Notice of Decision


The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                             Date 25 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
