
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00666/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2017                         |On 14th December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Row  made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 20th February 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1983.  He has been in
    the UK illegally for many years, having  entered  the  UK  in  November
    2002.  In 2008 he served a ten month prison sentence  for  affray.   He
    was arrested for working illegally  on  2nd  August  2014  and  claimed
    asylum.  He was refused and his appeal dismissed by  Immigration  Judge
    Dearden.  He made a fresh claim on 22nd  March  2016  which  was  again
    refused and it was that refusal which was the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before Judge Row.

 3. The appellant's claim is that he would be at risk on return to  Nigeria
    because he is homosexual and likely  to  be  harmed  in  Nigeria  where
    homosexual acts are criminal.  He has had a number of affairs with  men
    in the UK, both gay men and with men who identify  as  women.   One  of
    those, T, gave oral evidence before Judge Row.

 4. The judge took as his starting point the decision of Judge Dearden  and
    concluded that there was no truth whatsoever in the  appellant's  claim
    and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on multiple grounds  and  was
    granted permission to argue them by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey
    on 14th August 2017.

 6. Mrs Pettersen accepted that if the judge had erred in law  in  relation
    to his approach to witness T, the appeal  would  have  to  be  reheard,
    although she correctly pointed out  that  the  judge  did  analyse  T's
    evidence in some detail.

 7. Not surprisingly the judge was very unimpressed  with  the  appellant's
    immigration history. He took as his starting point the determination of
    Judge Dearden who had found the  appellant  to  be  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility.

 8. However the judge had cogent evidence from witness  T.   He  criticised
    that evidence on the basis that the appellant was a  person,  with  his
    history, who had shown a persistent disregard for the laws  of  the  UK
    and who was unlikely to balk at lying, fabricating evidence in  support
    of his claim or asking others to do so on his behalf.

 9. However, there was no apparent motive for T to lie.   The  relationship
    which he had with the appellant had ended sometime ago.  The  criticism
    which the judge made of the multiple emails which he  produced,  namely
    that they appear to be out of sequence, make no allowance for the  fact
    that some are labelled Pacific Standard Time, accounting for  the  time
    difference.  Moreover,  the  judge  criticised  T  for  describing  the
    appellant as Somalian in October 2009 but fails to take account of  the
    explanation which he gave for that error.

10. T did not appear before Judge Dearden because at that time he  was  not
    willing to expose the double life which  he  led  both  as  a  male  in
    society and as a transgendered female.  He is not out to her family and
    most of his acquaintances. By the time of this hearing, he was prepared
    not only to give evidence but to provide his identity documents to  the
    Tribunal.

11. The judge erred in law in his assessment of the evidence because:

      a) he did not consider all of the evidence when reaching  his  adverse
         conclusions, for example T's explanation as to the time  zone  when
         the emails were sent and  for  her  wrong  description  of  him  as
         Somali;

      b) his conclusion that the appellant had asked T to lie on his  behalf
         is not supported by the evidence which T has  produced,  including,
         at some risk to himself, of producing his true identity documents;

      c) appearing to treat the very late claim for asylum as determinative,
         which is problematic in the context of a late disclosure of  sexual
         preference and  inconsistent  with  the  decision  in  A,  B,  C  v
         Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie [2014] ECR 1  when  the
         Grand Chamber noted that:

             "Having regard to the sensitive nature of  questions  relating
             to  a  person's  personal  identity  and  in  particular   his
             sexuality, it cannot be concluded that the declared  sexuality
             lacks credibility simply because,  due  to  his  reticence  in
             revealing intimate aspects of his life, that  person  did  not
             declare his homosexuality at the outset".

12. Accordingly, the decision of Judge Row is set aside and will have to be
    re-made by a judge other than Judge Row at a hearing before a different
    First-tier Tribunal Judge at  Bradford.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed[pic]                             Date 14 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
