
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 May 2014                              |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                           |                           |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr G Jack a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr E Waheed of counsel instructed by Soma &
Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondent is a Tamil
      citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 5 July 1983. I will refer to  him
      as the claimant. The Secretary of State has been given  permission  to
      appeal the determination of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  ("the
      FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision of 7 January 2014 to give directions for his  removal
      from the UK following the refusal of asylum.


   2. The claimant is a Tamil from Colombo who is in this country  with  his
      wife and two children. They are his dependants for the purpose of this
      appeal. He used to work with  his  father  in  the  family  stationary
      business. A friend worked with  him  and  that  friend  asked  him  to
      photocopy documents relating to the LTTE which  included  instructions
      on how to assemble and use  weapons.  In  January  2007  the  claimant
      accompanied his friend when they delivered the documents to an address
      in Colombo. Soon after the claimant received a telephone call from the
      police who said that his name had been given to them by his friend. He
      had to attend a police  station.  He  did  so  and  was  arrested  and
      detained. In custody he was interrogated, beaten and accused of  being
      involved with the LTTE, which he denied. He suffered  serious  torture
      and abuse.


   3. The claimant was held  for  three  months  and  subjected  to  a  mock
      execution. After that he was held for  another  10  months,  suffering
      regular abuse. Eventually, his father was able to bribe an officer  to
      assist him to escape. He went to  a  rehabilitation  centre  where  he
      remained, keeping a low profile and contacting his family  only  about
      once a month. During that period the  authorities  repeatedly  visited
      the family home looking for him.


   4. In July 2009 the appellant and the woman who  later  became  his  wife
      applied for student visas. Hers was granted but his was not. She  came
      to the UK in September 2009. She returned to Sri Lanka  in  July  2010
      and they were married in August 2010. In October 2010, when his mother
      became ill, the claimant took the risk of returning home to  see  her.
      Whilst he was there the police came to their home and arrested him. He
      was held for six days and tortured each day. He was released later  in
      October 2011 after a bribe was paid. He returned to the rehabilitation
      centre while arrangements were made for his departure. He applied  for
      entry clearance in November 2010 and was able to leave  Sri  Lanka  in
      December 2010. The claimant said that the authorities had continued to
      look for him since he left Sri Lanka, going to his father's office and
      the family home. He claimed that if he returned he would be  subjected
      to further detention and ill-treatment as a suspected LTTE member.


   5. The Secretary of State accepted the claimant's account  of  events  in
      Sri Lanka including both periods of detention and the very serious ill-
      treatment he had suffered. Whilst the refusal letter referred  to  his
      failure to claim asylum at the earliest opportunity the FTTJ concluded
      from an overall reading of the letter that the claimant's account  was
      nevertheless found credible.


   6. Whilst  accepting  his  account  of  events  the  Secretary  of  State
      concluded that the claimant would not be of any adverse  interest  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka were he to return.


   7. The FTTJ heard the appeal on  14  February  2014.  Both  parties  were
      represented, the claimant by Mr Waheed who appears before me.  Because
      the Secretary of State had accepted the claimant's credibility he  was
      not called to give evidence. The FTTJ addressed the  country  guidance
      case of GJ and others (Sri Lanka) [2013]  UKUT  00319.  She  concluded
      that the claimant would be at risk on return and allowed the appeal on
      Refugee Convention grounds.


   8. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal arguing that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to give  adequate
      reasons,  making  material  factual  errors  and  departing  from  the
      guidance contained in GJ. It is submitted  that,  notwithstanding  the
      appeal to the Court of Appeal and the directions given by the Court of
      Appeal the FTTJ was still bound to follow GJ. The factual errors  were
      in relation to whether the claimant escaped or was released  following
      a bribe and whether he had played a significant role in  post-conflict
      Tamil separatism in the UK.


   9. The claimant's representatives have lodged a Rule 24 response  to  the
      Secretary of State's grounds of appeal and I have a skeleton  argument
      from Mr Waheed.


  10. Mr Jack relied on the grounds of appeal and said that the Secretary of
      State had accepted the claimant's account of events. The  FTTJ  should
      have followed the  guidance  contained  in  GJ  but  in  a  number  of
      important respects had not done so. In effect she was criticising  the
      findings of the Tribunal in GJ without any evidence to  support  this.
      Notwithstanding the directions given by the Court of Appeal  the  FTTJ
      should have followed GJ. Paragraph  266  of  GJ  made  it  clear  that
      attending protests in the UK was not enough to put  an  individual  at
      risk. The claimant had played no part in separatist activities in  the
      UK. Past involvement with the LTTE was not on its own  enough  to  put
      him at risk.


  11. Mr Jack directed my attention to  the  findings  in  relation  to  the
      individual appellants in GJ  and  submitted  that  the  facts  of  the
      claimant's case were very similar to those of the second appellant  in
      GJ whose appeal had been dismissed. He asked me to find that the  FTTJ
      had erred in law and to set aside her decision which could  be  remade
      without the need to  hear  further  evidence.  However,  it  might  be
      prudent to await the judgement of the Court of Appeal.


  12. In reply to my question Mr Jack  said  that  the  Secretary  of  State
      continued to rely  on  all  the  grounds  of  appeal,  including  that
      relating to the question of whether the appellant had been released on
      payment of a bribe or had escaped from custody.


  13. Mr Waheed relied on the Rule 24 response and his skeleton argument. He
      emphasised the FTTJ's findings  in  paragraph  15  which,  he  argued,
      properly applied paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules. The claimant
      was a person who had been subjected to persecution  and  serious  harm
      which was a serious indication of his well-founded fear of persecution
      or real risk of suffering serious harm. The FTTJ had proper regard  to
      the directions given by the Court of Appeal and the caveat which these
      contained.


  14. Mr Waheed submitted that the claimant  fell  squarely  within  the  GJ
      guidance as to those who would be at  risk.  The  relevant  categories
      were those set out by the FTTJ in paragraph 18 of  the  determination.
      He fell within 7 (a) as an individual who would be  perceived  by  the
      authorities to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single
      state and he had a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
      separatism because of his pre-conflict activities and the  authorities
      perception of  these  activities  when  they  arrested,  detained  and
      seriously ill treated him after the end of the conflict.


  15. He also fell within paragraph 7 (d) because there was likely to be  an
      outstanding warrant for his arrest because, although he  was  released
      on payment of a bribe, he was told that the records would show that he
      had escaped. In these circumstances his name was likely to be  on  the
      computerised stop list at the airport which would result in his  being
      stopped and handed over to the authorities.


  16. Mr Waheed also submitted that if there were any errors these were  not
      material. The reasons for refusal letter did not raise  any  point  in
      relation to the question of whether the claimant would be regarded  as
      having escaped except in paragraph 42, which said no  more  than  that
      there had been an inconsistency in his evidence which he had not  been
      given the opportunity to  explain  during  his  asylum  interview.  In
      paragraph 47 the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  claimant  had
      been released on both occasions through payment of a bribe.


  17. Mr Waheed submitted that there was no error of law and invited  me  to
      uphold the determination. If I was against him on this he asked that I
      adjourn the  redetermination  of  the  appeal  until  the  forthcoming
      judgement of the Court of Appeal.


  18. In his reply Mr Jack drew my attention to paragraph 66 of the  refusal
      letter in which the Secretary of State had concluded that the claimant
      would not appear on any  stop  list  and  would  not  be  at  risk  of
      detention  at  the  airport.  He  made  further   reference   to   the
      circumstances of the second appellant in GJ and  emphasised  that  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka now acted on high-quality intelligence. There
      was no evidence to show that an arrest warrant had been issued for the
      arrest of the claimant. Whilst  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  applying
      paragraph 339K the effect  of  this  was  diminished  by  the  changed
      situation in Sri Lanka.


  19. I reserved my determination.  In  this  jurisdiction  Tribunal  judges
      should as a general rule follow country guidance cases unless there is
      evidence to  show  that  conditions  in  that  country  have  changed.
      However, country guidance is  not  a  precision  tool  to  be  applied
      inflexibly. Lists of factors relevant  to  the  question  of  risk  on
      return are more than a checklist to be ticked or not.


  20. I can find no merit in the ground of appeal  which  submits  that  the
      FTTJ made a factual error when she concluded that the appellant was re-
      arrested in October 2010 because the authorities  considered  that  he
      had escaped from the first period of detention. The Secretary of State
      accepted the claimant's account of events and this  ground  of  appeal
      ignores the passage in his witness statement  dated  9  July  2012  in
      which he said that although he was released on payment of a  bribe  he
      was told that the records would show him as having escaped.

  21. I find that on the evidence it was open to the FTTJ to find  that  the
      claimant's profile was likely to place him  at  risk  on  return.  The
      factors which she set out in paragraph 23 of the determination are not
      precisely those contained in paragraphs 7 (a) and (d) of  the  summary
      to GJ but include  sufficient  significant  elements  to  justify  the
      conclusion. The second occasion on which the claimant was arrested was
      after the end of the conflict and he was still of  sufficient  adverse
      interest for them to arrest,  detain  and  torture  him.  This  is  an
      indication that he was still regarded as  a  threat.  I  do  not  read
      paragraph 7 (a) as limited to  individuals  who  pose  a  threat  only
      because of activities outside  Sri  Lanka.  If  the  claimant  was  of
      sufficient adverse interest for the authorities to want to arrest  him
      in 2010 this provides support for the view that he would be of similar
      adverse interest were he to return now. Whilst I accept that there  is
      no documentary or independent evidence of the existence of an  warrant
      for the claimant's arrest his evidence, which has not been  contested,
      that the authorities continue to  visit  his  home  and  his  father's
      business looking for him, combined with the advance notice which  they
      are likely to receive of his return from the documentation process  at
      the High Commission in this country and the fact that they were  still
      looking for him in 2010 after the end  of  the  conflict  support  the
      FTTJ's conclusion that they are likely to still wish to detain him and
      that he will be on a stop list at the airport or a "watch"  list.  The
      significance of the claimant to the authorities does not  depend  upon
      the true extent of his activities but their perception of them.


  22. I have found little help from comparing the  claimant's  circumstances
      with those of any of the appellants in GJ. It is more  instructive  to
      address the criteria rather  than  similarities  with  or  differences
      between the circumstances of individuals.


  23. I find that it was open to the FTTJ to conclude that the claimant  had
      established a risk profile which brought him within the guidance of GJ
      and that he would be at risk of persecution on return.


  24. The directions given by the Court of Appeal in granting permission  to
      appeal in GJ, set out by the FTTJ in paragraph 19,  that  "individuals
      who fall outside the said risk categories should not for  that  reason
      alone have their claims for asylum rejected, whether by the Respondent
      or on appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal" lead me
      to the conclusion that even if I had concluded that it was not open to
      the FTTJ to find that the claimant  had  established  a  risk  profile
      which brought him within the guidance of GJ the Tribunal would  be  in
      no position to re-determine the appeal without awaiting the  judgement
      of the Court of Appeal.


  25. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction which will continue in force.


  26.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.







      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 2 May
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

