










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00090/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 19 December 2016                  |On: 23 January 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                 Mr A K A A
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, counsel (instructed by JCWI)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 30 October 1977.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his asylum appeal  as  well  as  his
      appeal in respect of his family life, finding that there was no breach
      of his Article 8 rights under the Rules. In considering  the  question
      of proportionality, the Judge had regard to "the  overall  conduct  of
      the appellant in the UK." He was in agreement with the finding  of  an
      earlier (2011) determination that the appellant has failed to show any
      motivation to return to either of his habitual residences. He has used
      every means to further his stay [40].


   3. On 17 November 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson granted the appellant
      permission to appeal. The findings of the Judge  in  relation  to  the
      Article 8 assessment at paragraphs [39-40] are  arguably  infected  by
      legal error as asserted in the grounds of appeal.


   4. In the grounds of appeal, which were prepared by Mr  Jacobs,  who  did
      not however appear for the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      it was contended that the Judge erred  in  his  consideration  of  the
      Article 8 appeal through failing to take 'significant  evidence'  into
      account. He asserted that the  Article  8  findings  are  cursory  and
      inadequate, amounting to two paragraphs in the  determination,  namely
      at [39-40].


   5. At [39] the Judge found that the contact between the  father  and  the
      children had been insignificant  and  is  likely  to  continue  to  be
      fraught with difficulty. The Judge stated "....what  kind  of  a  role
      model he would be likely to be is open to  question,  considering  the
      disrespect he has shown for  immigration  law  and  while  he  remains
      unable to work." The Judge could find no support for the suggestion at
      one point that his wife may have mental health problems.


   6. With regard to his private life, the  appellant  has  not  shown  that
      there would be very significant obstacles to his integration to either
      Egypt or the UAR if his entry could be secured.


   7. The Judge stated at [40] that he accordingly saw no reason to  find  a
      breach of his Article 8 rights under  the  Rules  "and  no  reason  to
      warrant wider consideration  under  the  Razgar  tests."  Were  he  to
      consider the question of proportionality, he would bear  in  mind  the
      overall conduct of the appellant in the UK. He is  in  agreement  with
      the findings in the 2011 determination that the appellant  has  failed
      to show any motivation to return to either of his habitual residences.


   8. In reliance on the grounds of appeal  Mr  Jacobs  submitted  that  the
      appellant has two British daughters, Faiza Ayad,  born  on  21  August
      2012, and Sara, born on 15 November 2013, who are accordingly four and
      three years old respectively. The marriage between the  appellant  and
      his wife is no longer subsisting.


   9. He noted that the appellant's former wife supports contact between the
      appellant and his children in principle. He  referred  to  the  letter
      dated 4 January 2013 from the children's mother at  page  126  of  the
      appellant's bundle, which was placed before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      There she "confirmed" that the appellant is the father  of  Faiza  and
      that he visits her on a regular basis.  v


  10. There was also a document at page 125 dated 18 January 2015 signed  by
      the children's  mother,  Ms  Magdolen  Tellesy,  confirming  that  the
      appellant is in regular contact with "our daughters." He comes to  see
      the children "about two times a week." He also fed the babies, dressed
      them, changed their nappies, took  them  for  walks  and  to  doctor's
      appointments and looked after them when she was busy.


  11. Mr Jacobs referred to page 108 containing an email  from  Ms  Tellesey
      dated 24 November 2014 referring to the fact  that  Safia  was  crying
      that day. She had never seen her cry like that. She  is  going  to  do
      what is best for her. She "honestly thinks she needs  a  routine  with
      you, she has a big problem with goodbye when it comes to you."


  12. Mr Jacobs submitted that there was significant  evidence  produced  at
      page 49, namely, a report 19 June 2016 on the first session of contact
      between the appellant and the children at the Harrow  Contact  Centre.
      The contact was supervised. The appellant saw his daughters there.  It
      is noted that the appellant was friendly and approachable. The  mother
      was upset because the father did not come there in time to pay for the
      cab. He had however phoned to say that he was ten minutes away on  the
      Tube.


  13. At page 24 of that report it is noted that the father was  pleased  to
      see his daughters and they were pleased to see him. It is  noted  that
      the appellant interacted well with his daughters and  that  there  was
      lots of laughing. There was one hour of contact.


  14. The supervisor informed the children's mother that contact went  well.
      Their mother stated that she would like the  father  to  have  another
      contact near the girls.


  15. The appellant informed her after the  session  that  he  has  met  his
      children in the community twice. The reason it was back in the  centre
      is that he and their mother argued.


  16. Mr Jacobs referred to paragraph 47 of  the  respondent's  reasons  for
      refusal where it was stated that the appellant submitted  that  he  is
      waiting on an agreement to have contact with his children. As  at  the
      date of the letter, no agreement had been signed  or  confirmed.  This
      evidence was requested in September 2015. The respondent  stated  that
      ,there were therefore no other relevant reasons which would justify  a
      grant of leave to remain in the UK. The appellant had however seen the
      children in March and April. There were three occasions of contact  in
      2016.


  17. The Judge failed to consider the evidence before him from  the  Harrow
      Contact Centre. The report which was dated 27 June 2016 confirmed  the
      position just two weeks prior to the hearing.


  18. The appellant also stated to the contact officer that he had  met  the
      children in the community twice but was required to  go  back  to  the
      contact centre because of arguments with the mother of the children.


  19. Mr Jacobs referred to various photographs produced before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal showing the appellant's interaction between himself  and
      the children - at pages 56-59.


  20. There was also a letter from their mother dated 6 July 2016 confirming
      that the appellant is a good father to the children. They love him and
      are always happy to see him (page 59A).


  21. Mr Jacobs referred to [39] of the determination where the Judge stated
      that the contact with their  father  has  been  insignificant  and  is
      likely to continue to be fraught with difficulty.


  22. He submitted that that constitutes an unexplained finding. It is  also
      unsafe following Beoku-Betts: the Judge  should  have  considered  the
      children's rights to have contact with  their  father.  He  failed  to
      undertake any consideration of their best interests as a factor  which
      must 'rank higher than any other'.


  23. The finding that the contact is likely to be fraught  with  difficulty
      also conflicts with the evidence from Ms Tellesy at 59A of the bundle.
      That also constitutes an unexplained finding and it  would  appear  to
      relate to matrimonial problems between the appellant and the mother of
      the children.


  24. However, the matrimonial difficulties between their parents, does  not
      constitute a factor that can reasonably determine the  best  interests
      of the children or proportionality in Article 8 cases. He  accordingly
      submitted that the approach taken by the Judge was erroneous  in  that
      respect as well.


  25. Moreover, the fact that  the  appellant  was  not  in  a  position  to
      regularise his status had no bearing as to whether or not he is fit to
      be a parent. That was not the issue.


  26. Mr Jacobs referred to paragraph [14] of the decision of  Lord  Justice
      Pitchford  in  the  decision  of  AA  (Palestinian  Territories)   and
      Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ where it was stated that it  seemed
      that the sole basis for the present application is the assertion  that
      notwithstanding  his  habitual  residence   elsewhere,   statelessness
      somehow entitles the applicant to choose the UK as the country  within
      which to exercise his right to a private life. That, the Judge did not
      consider to be an arguable proposition. The least the applicant  would
      reasonably  be  expected  to  do  is  to  cooperate  with  a   genuine
      application for travel documents to  Egypt  or  the  UAR  pending  the
      course which the  secretary  of  state  chooses  to  take.  Should  it
      transpire that the applicant cannot be returned, the position will  be
      different and a fresh application will be open for him  for  leave  to
      remain. Mr Jacobs  represented  the  appellant  before  the  Court  of
      Appeal. He submitted that it did transpire that the  appellant  cannot
      be  returned.  Accordingly,  the  appellant  has  made   the   current
      application.


  27. The actions of the respondent in seeking to remove the appellant,  who
      cannot be removed, are not  proportionate  and  run  contrary  to  his
      Article 8 rights and those of the children.  Alternatively,  they  are
      disproportionate.


  28. The Judge erred at [39] in finding that the  appellant's  presence  in
      the UK is  detrimental  to  the  best  interests  on  account  of  his
      immigration status. As a stateless man, the appellant's  inability  to
      regularise his status or depart from the UK can have no bearing on his
      relationship with his children or their best interests.


  29. Moreover, the finding at [40] that he has failed to show motivation to
      return to  either  habitual  residences  and  that  he  has  used  his
      predicament as a  means  to  further  his  stay  is  unreasonable  and
      conflicts with the evidence of the expert  witnesses,  whose  evidence
      was not disputed.


  30. Accordingly, he submitted  that  the  appellant's  perceived  lack  of
      motivation to do that  which  the  domestic  law  in  those  countries
      prevents him from doing renders his removal disproportionate.


  31. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Singh very fairly accepted that  there
      had been no reference by the Judge at all to  the  contact  which  had
      taken place between the children, evidence of which was before him.


  32. The documents produced at pages 59 A, C and  D  were  not  taken  into
      account. Accordingly, a s.55 assessment was not undertaken.


  33. In the circumstances, Mr Singh accepted that the decision relating  to
      Article 8 and private life should  be  set  aside  and  that  a  fresh
      decision should be made.  Mr  Jacobs  himself  adopted  that  proposal
      subject to the preservation of  the  finding  as  to  the  appellant's
      statelessness.


Assessment


  34. The appellant had referred in his witness statement to his attempts to
      establish contact with the children. This  included  various  meetings
      that he had with  the  team  manager  of  the  Children  and  Families
      Department at Brent Council to discuss the children.  He  was  put  in
      touch with the Harrow Contact Centre. He attached  his  correspondence
      with that centre. He also produced a copy of the contract  which  both
      he and the children's mother signed.


  35. He also stated that he saw the children in April through  an  informal
      agreement with their mother  They  met  at  the  shopping  centre.  He
      referred to text messages and photographs taken. He also  referred  to
      the contact session at the Harrow Contact Centre on 19 June 2016.


  36. He had also provided evidence of his attempts to  renew  his  Egyptian
      travel documents which had expired in 2006 and as well as going to the
      UAE embassy in April 2015.


  37. The evidence of the appellant's contact with his children, which  took
      place shortly before the date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  was  in  the
      appellant's bundle.


  38. Mr Singh has accepted that there was  an  insufficiency  of  reasoning
      relating to  the  consideration  of  the  children's  best  interests,
      including contact with their father.


  39. Nor is the finding that the contact  is  likely  to  be  fraught  with
      difficulty sustainable in the light of the evidence from Ms Tellesy at
      page 59A of  the  bundle.  Finally,  it  was  not  disputed  that  the
      appellant is stateless. The evidence to that effect from  the  experts
      that neither Egypt  or  nor  the  UAE  will  have  him  back  was  not
      challenged.


  40. In the event, the reference  to  the  disrespect  that  the  appellant
      showed for immigration law and that he was not a proper role model for
      the children was a comment made without proper regard to the fact that
      the appellant is stateless and is unable to regularise his  status  or
      depart from the  UK.  In  any  event,  that  had  no  bearing  on  his
      relationship with his children or their best interests.


  41. In the circumstances, I accept the submissions of the  representatives
      that the decision did involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of
      law. I accordingly set aside the decision and in accordance  with  the
      joint submissions, I remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made.  The  instructions  to
      the administration for remitted cases has been  prepared.   Mr  Jacobs
      stated that no interpreter was required. There would be two witnesses.
      There would be a time estimate of one and a half to two hours.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law. The decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a  fresh  decision  to  be
      made, before another Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R  Mailer            20  January
      2017





