
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/00467/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   MR K N
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel (instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Cox on 2 June 2015 against the  decision  of  First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wright  made  in  a  decision  and   reasons
         promulgated on  8  May  2015  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  14  October
         1969.  He had appealed against his removal from the United Kingdom,
         a decision taken by  the  Respondent  on  22  December  2014.   The
         Appellant was detected with a false passport while  in  transit  to
         Canada on 4 March 2012, having previously been  refused  visas  for
         the United Kingdom twice in 2009.  He claimed asylum the same  day.
         He stated that he feared to return to Sri Lanka because of his LTTE
         involvement and connections.

    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Cox considered that it was arguable that Judge Wright had failed to
         engage with the Appellant's case including the background  evidence
         and country guidance applicable.  It was arguable  that  the  judge
         had erred when reaching his adverse credibility findings by failing
         to consider materially relevant supporting evidence.  (There was no
         challenge to the judges' dismissal of the Article  8  ECHR  private
         life claim.)

    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
         appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made by the  tribunal
         and the appeal was listed for adjudication of whether or not  there
         was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    5.     Ms Radford for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal earlier submitted, together with the grant of permission  to
         appeal.  Counsel submitted that the judge had erred by  failing  to
         take into account the Appellant's involvement in the British  Tamil
         Forum ("BTF") which would lead to his being on the "stop" list, the
         evidence given to the UNHCR enquiry and his  family  history  which
         included the commemoration of his late brother as an  LTTE  martyr.
         The credibility findings  were  defective  because  the  judge  had
         failed to put the Appellant's claims into their proper context.

    6.     Ms Radford developed those  submissions  in  dialogue  with  the
         tribunal.  Her submission was that the judge had either overlooked,
         or accepted but found disingenuous, the Appellant's  membership  of
         the BTF.  Either way his findings  were  unclear.   The  issue  was
         whether the Appellant was a member of the BTF as he had claimed  to
         be and so was on a "stop" list.  That was not to be confused with a
         "watch" list.  There had been no finding about  evidence  given  to
         the UNHCR, although this had been part  of  the  Appellant's  case.
         The fact that it was to the UN did not eliminate risk.  The profile
         of the Appellant's late brother was  important  and  had  not  been
         disputed.  The judge failed to apply GJ and Others (post-civil war:
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) to that fact.   The
         judge's credibility assessment had contained misunderstandings  and
         errors, with undue weight being  given  to  minor  or  non-existent
         discrepancies.  The decision and reasons should be  set  aside  and
         the appeal reheard by another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

    7.     Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
         notice.  He submitted that the decision and  reasons  disclosed  no
         error of law.  The current objective evidence did not  support  the
         claimed error of law  in  relation  to  the  "stop"  list  for  BTF
         members, irrespective of the Appellant's disputed membership claim.
          There was no evidence that any submission made by the Appellant to
         the UNHCR had ever been sent to Sri Lanka, let alone  had  come  to
         the attention of the authorities  there.   The  Appellant's  family
         history had been sufficiently covered, as the chronology at [3]  of
         the decision and reasons showed.  There was no  obligation  on  the
         judge to set out each and every reason he had for disbelieving  the
         Appellant.  The judge's credibility findings had been thorough  and
         included  careful  consideration  of  the  medical  evidence.   The
         Appellant's complaints at most were just a  disagreement  with  the
         judge.

    8.     In reply, Ms Radford reiterated her client's  case.   There  was
         support in the objective evidence for the BTF risk factor which the
         judge had missed.  The adverse credibility findings were unsound.

    No material error of law

    9.      The  tribunal  accepts  Mr  Bramble's  submissions.    In   the
         tribunal's view, the grant of permission to  appeal  was  generous.
         As always, the judge's decision and reasons needed to be read as  a
         whole,  which  Ms  Radford's  grounds  of  appeal  and   subsequent
         submissions conspicuously failed to do.   Indeed,  her  submissions
         seemed premised on the basis that the judge had set out to  dismiss
         the appeal, which no fair reading of his decision can support.   On
         the contrary, there was a meticulous examination of what was a case
         with numerous documents from both sides, to which the judge devoted
         ample hearing time and subsequent consideration.   The  experienced
         judge set out the Appellant's case and his evidence, including that
         of his expert medical witness, in considerable and accurate detail:
         see, e.g., [3], [26] and [41] of the decision.   There  can  be  no
         sensible doubt that the judge fully understood the context  of  the
         claim and had the current country background firmly in mind at  all
         times.

    10.    The judge similarly gave detailed reasons for finding  that  the
         Appellant had not given a credible account of his claimed fears  of
         return to Sri Lanka: see [39] to [43].   The judge  explained  that
         these were a summary of his concerns.  The judge  was  required  to
         explain how he saw the case  and  did  so.   Plainly  some  of  his
         concerns were of more substantial significance than others,  as  he
         recognised, but the judge was obliged to consider the evidence as a
         whole (with anxious scrutiny) and to bring all matters  to  account
         when applying the lower standard.  Ms Radford seized on  a  few  of
         those numerous concerns, and argued that they were  mistaken.   The
         judge found that the Appellant's claimed connection  with  the  BTF
         was false: see [45], which it is important  to  read  as  a  whole,
         alongside the earlier adverse credibility findings.  The  Appellant
         was not believed and there was thus no risk from that source and no
         question of the Appellant's being on a "stop" list for that  reason
         on  the  judge's  finding  of  fact.   The  Home   Office   Country
         Information and Guidance, 28 August 2014, which was  noted  by  the
         judge, provides inadequate  support  for  Ms  Radford's  assertions
         about the BTF: see CIG paragraphs 1.3.9ff  and  2.36:  "There  have
         been no known arrests based on  membership  of  one  of  the  newly
         proscribed groups". The judge dealt adequately with the Appellant's
         hearsay evidence said to have been provided through the BTF to  the
         UNHCR at [45].  There was no evidence before the  judge  that  such
         weak evidence was ever used by any commission of enquiry  anywhere,
         let alone that the Sri Lankan authorities were or even  might  have
         been aware of it.

    11.    The alleged profile of the Appellant's late brother was noted by
         the judge (see, e.g., [39]) and found not to be a  source  of  real
         risk.  The judge reviewed all of his findings against  GJ  (above):
         see [44] and [49].   He  also  reviewed  the  Appellant's  case  on
         several alternative bases, demonstrating abundant anxious scrutiny:
         see, e.g., [51].

    12.     In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the   multi   layered   adverse
         credibility assessment which the judge reached was open to him  and
         is sustainable.  His decision was a  comprehensive  and  thoughtful
         reflection on the various issues raised in the appeal.   There  was
         no error of law.  There  is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
         judge's decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal, which dismissal
         must stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


