
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
aa/00277/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2017                     |   On 11 October 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O James instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made in my decision  dated
    30  May  2017   preventing   whether   directly   or   indirectly   the
    identification of the respondent (KA).

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State for convenience  I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Azerbaijan who was born  on  2  September
    1982.  She entered the United Kingdom with her son  ("A")  in  November
    2009 and claimed asylum on 22  November  2009.   She  was  subsequently
    granted temporary admission.  Her claims were refused on 11 March  2010
    and her subsequent appeal was dismissed and she  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 25 July 2010.

 4. In 2011, the  appellant  married  a  British  citizen  ("JA")  who  had
    previously been granted asylum.  He originates from Iraq and he  became
    a British citizen in 2009.

 5. Further representations were made on behalf of the appellant in  August
    2011 and May 2012 which were refused on 25 November  2011  and  16  May
    2012 respectively.

 6. On 15 December 2014 and 25 February 2015, further representations  were
    again made.  On 7 April  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under  the
    ECHR but, that decision  was  withdrawn  on  3  October  2015  and  the
    decision to refuse leave was again made on 3 February 2016.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 November 2016, Judge Povey dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on international protection grounds but allowed the appeal under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 6 January 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B Grant)
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 9. That appeal was heard by me on 16 May 2017.  In a decision  promulgated
    on 6 June 2017, I allowed the Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal and set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appeal under Art 8.  I directed that the  appeal  be  relisted  in  the
    Upper Tribunal in order that the decision can be remade in  respect  of
    the appellant's Art 8 claim outside the Rules.

The Hearing

10. At the resumed hearing, the appellant and her  husband,  JA  both  gave
    oral evidence before me.  Both adopted  their  earlier  statements  and
    their statements prepared for these proceedings dated 7 September 2017.
     In addition, although  the  appellant's  son,  A  did  not  give  oral
    evidence, a letter from him was submitted in evidence.



The Submissions

11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  James  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    claim was under Art 8 outside the Rules.  He  submitted  that  the  key
    issue was whether it was reasonable for "A" to relocate to  Azerbaijan.
    He placed reliance upon s.117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") and submitted that,  applying  the
    terms of that provision,  the  public  interest  did  not  require  the
    appellant's removal because she had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with A who was a qualifying child (having lived in the  UK
    for over seven years) and it would not be reasonable to expect  him  to
    leave the UK.

12. Mr James relied upon the fact that A had spent his formative  years  in
    the UK between the ages of  7  and  15  when  he  was  at  school.   He
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had, in effect, accepted that  A
    was doing well both academically and socially in school.  He  submitted
    that relocation would affect A, because he spoke little Azeri,  he  had
    not had any contact with the culture or society in Azerbaijan since  he
    was  7.   Studies  would  be  conducted  in  Azeri.   He   would   have
    difficulties obtaining work and he would  be  returning  to  Azerbaijan
    without a father figure, namely JA whose  evidence  was  he  would  not
    leave the UK.

13. Mr James referred to the medical evidence from Dr Caglar concerning the
    appellant's mental health.  He accepted that this was  now  over  three
    years old when it stated that the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD  and
    severe depression.  Mr James  submitted  that  her  mental  health  was
    managed by her being with her husband and son.  He submitted that their
    return  to  Azerbaijan  was  likely  to  affect  A  and  it  would   be
    unreasonable to expect him to do so.  In relation to  her  husband,  Mr
    James relied on the fact that he is a British citizen  and  had  family
    life both with the appellant and A.  He submitted that it had not  been
    questioned it was a genuine marriage or that he was other than a father
    figure to A.  It would be unreasonable to expect A to leave the UK  and
    in  those  circumstances  the  public  interest  did  not  require  the
    appellant's removal applying s.117B(6).

14. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the appellant's
    removal was proportionate despite the evidence of  private  and  family
    life in the UK.  He submitted that, applying s.117B(1), maintenance  of
    effective immigration control was in the public interest.  He submitted
    that the Secretary of State had been attempting over a number of  years
    to remove the appellant but had been frustrated doing so by a number of
    court cases  brought  by  the  appellant.   He  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant's private and family life in the UK  (and  there  was  little
    evidence of the latter)  had  been  established  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant's position  had  been  precarious.   He  submitted  that  the
    evidence of both the appellant and JA was that  they  were  aware  that
    their marriage had been  entered  into  at  a  time  when  she  had  no
    expectation of remaining in the UK.  Mr Richards submitted that he  was
    entitled to little weight.

15. Mr Richards accepted that JA's evidence was that he had no intention of
    joining the appellant in Azerbaijan.  However,  Mr  Richards  submitted
    that he had given no reason why he could not live there and, if he  did
    not return with the appellant that would be his choice.

16. In relation to A, Mr Richards accepted that he had been in the  UK  for
    over seven years, nevertheless it would be reasonable to expect him  to
    return with his mother and it was clearly  in  his  best  interests  to
    remain with his mother.  Mr Richards pointed out that  he  had  clearly
    adapted well to life in the UK and, although he no longer  had  command
    of the Azeri language, he would be  able  to  quickly  pick  it  up  on
    return.

17. In relation to the appellant's mental  health,  Mr  Richards  submitted
    that there was no up-to-date evidence and little or no weight could  be
    placed on evidence that was nearly three years old.

18. Mr Richards submitted that when the  rights  of  the  individuals  were
    balanced against the public interest, the removal of the appellant  was
    proportionate.

Discussion

19. As regards Art 8, I apply the five-stage test  in  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 [20].

20. As regards Art 8.1, I accept that it is engaged.  Mr Richards  did  not
    challenge the evidence that there was a  genuine  relationship  between
    the appellant and her husband and between the appellant's  husband  and
    A.  Further, I accept that the appellant has established a private life
    in the UK but, more significantly, A has done so not least through  his
    education and attendance at school between the ages of 7 and  15  since
    he arrived in the UK in 2009.  I accept that  the  appellant's  removal
    (together with A) will interfere with both  her  and  A's  private  and
    family life sufficiently seriously to engage Art 8.1.  Mr Richards  did
    not seek to make any submissions to the contrary.

21. As regards Art 8.2, the Secretary of State's  decision  is  clearly  in
    accordance with the law, namely the  Immigration  Rules.   Judge  Povey
    found that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    whether in Appendix  FM  or  para  276ADE  and  that  finding  was  not
    challenged by the appellant in these proceedings.

22. Further, I accept that the appellant's removal is  in  pursuance  of  a
    legitimate aim, namely effective immigration control as  spelt  out  in
    s.117B(1) of the NIA Act 2002.

23. The crucial issue in this appeal  is  that  of  proportionality.   Both
    representatives' submissions focussed exclusively upon that issue.

24. The issue of proportionality requires  a  fair  balance  to  be  struck
    between the public  interest  and  the  rights  and  interests  of  the
    appellant and others protected by Art 8.1 (see Razgar  at  [20]).   Not
    only the rights of the appellant, but also  the  rights  of  JA  and  A
    protected under Art 8.1 must be considered (Beoku-Betts v  SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 39).

25. In R (MM) (Lebanon) and Others v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  10  at  [42]  the
    Supreme Court reminded us that the central issue was:

         "whether a fair  balance  has  been  struck  between  the  personal
         interests of all the members of the  family  in  maintaining  their
         family life... and the public interest in controlling immigration".

26. In carrying out that balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, I must "have regard" to the consideration set  out  in
    s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

27. The public interest, including that reflected  in  the  fact  that  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules,  is  entitled  to
    "considerable weight" (see MM at [75];  and  also  Hesham  Ali  v  SSHD
    [2016] UKSC 6 at [46] et seq and R (Agyarko and Another) v SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 at [46] - [48]).  The search is for  "sufficiently  compelling"
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest because  the  refusal  of
    leave would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"  (see  Agyarko
    at [48]).

28. In determining proportionality, the best interests of A are a  primary,
    though not determinative, factor (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC
    4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74).  A child's best interests may  be
    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations  (see,  for
    example Zoumbas at [10(3)]).

29. I accept the genuineness of the relationship between the appellant  and
    her husband and between the appellant's husband and A whom he treats as
    his own son.  He has known A since A was 8 years of age.  I accept JA's
    evidence that he does not intend to leave the UK and live in Azerbaijan
    with the appellant and JA if the appellant is removed.   However,  that
    will be his choice although I acknowledge that he is a British citizen.
     Nevertheless, the dilemma of whether to live in  Azerbaijan  with  the
    appellant and A remains a factor that I must take into account (see  VW
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5).  Further, Judge  Povey  found  that
    there were no  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the  appellant  and  JA
    continuing their family life in Azerbaijan  and  that  finding  is  now
    unchallenged.

30. It was the evidence of both the appellant and JA that when they entered
    into their relationship they were well aware that the appellant had  no
    right or expectation to remain in the UK.  I accept that evidence  and,
    as Mr Richards submitted, in those circumstances both the  private  and
    family life of the appellant is entitled to be  given  "little  weight"
    (see s.117B(4) and (5) of the NIA Act 2002 and Jeunesse  v  Netherlands
    [2015] 60 EHRR 17 and Rajendran (s.117B - family life) [2016] UKUT  138
    (IAC).

31. No submissions were made in respect of the appellant's ability to speak
    English or her financial independence  for  the  purposes  of  applying
    s.117B(2) and (3).  The appellant, however, gave  evidence  in  English
    without an interpreter and I accept that the public interest recognised
    in s.117B(2) does not apply.  I am unable, on the matters  to  which  I
    was referred  able  to  conclude,  one  way  or  another,  whether  the
    appellant is "financially independent".  This was not a point taken  by
    Mr Richards before me and it does not seem to have  been  taken  before
    Judge Povey.  I  am  content,  therefore,  in  those  circumstances  to
    determine the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State does  not
    seek to rely upon the public interest in s.117B(3).

32. I was not taken to the evidence of Dr Caglar concerning the appellant's
    mental health.  That was dealt with in some detail by  Judge  Povey  at
    paras 39 - 44 of his decision.  I, of course, accept that the  evidence
    dates back to 9 December 2014.  There is no up-to-date evidence.  Judge
    Povey, dealing with the appeal in  November  2016,  accepted  that  the
    appellant had "significant mental health issues" although  he  did  not
    accept that she was at risk of committing suicide  (and  that  was  not
    suggested before me by Mr James) and, as regards  Dr  Caglar's  opinion
    that the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD  and  severe  depression  and
    anxiety, Judge Povey remarked that he had  "a  number  of  reservations
    regarding the weight to be attached" to that report.

33. As I have indicated, no specific submissions were made in  relation  to
    this evidence other than by Mr Richards to point out that it should  be
    given little or no weight because  of  its  age  and  Mr  James  simply
    submitted that the appellant's condition was managed by the  fact  that
    she lived with her husband and son.  In the light of this, I am  unable
    to place any significant weight upon Dr Caglar's evidence which should,
    if it was to be relied  upon,  have  been  supplemented  by  up-to-date
    evidence and supported by positive submissions as to  its  implications
    for the appellant.  Neither was the case before me.

34. If this appeal turns simply upon the proportionality  of  removing  the
    appellant and the impact upon her private  and  family  life  with  her
    husband, I would have no doubt that the public interest would  outweigh
    her circumstances.  She cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules  and
    there are no "compelling circumstances" (seen from her perspective)  to
    outweigh the public interest.  However,  that,  as  I  understood  both
    representatives' submissions,  was  not  the  crucial  aspect  of  this
    appeal.  Rather, it is the application  of  s.117B(6)  and  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect A, aged 15 to leave  the  UK.   Mr  James
    submitted that it was not given A's time in the UK  between  7  and  15
    years of age, doing well at school, who spoke little Azeri and had  not
    been involved with the culture and society in Azerbaijan since  he  was
    7.  He would also, at  least  potentially,  be  returning  without  the
    father figure of JA.

35. In determining the issue of "reasonableness", I must first consider A's
    best interests.  Then, in determining the  issue  of  reasonableness  I
    must not only look at the impact upon A but I must also balance against
    that the public interest (albeit that it focuses upon  the  appellant's
    position) (see R (MA) (Pakistan) and Others v UTIAC and  Others  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705).  As the Court of Appeal  identified  in  MA  (Pakistan),
    there must be "strong" or "powerful" reason to justify a  finding  that
    the "qualifying child" (namely one who is a British citizen or who  has
    lived in the UK for seven years) could reasonably be expected to  leave
    the UK.

36. Turning first to A's best interests, in one sense it is  in  his  "best
    interests" to remain with his mother  whether  she  is  in  the  UK  or
    Azerbaijan.  It would not, for example, be in  his  best  interests  to
    remain in the UK if she is removed to Azerbaijan.   That,  however,  is
    not a sufficient consideration of his "best interests".  There is clear
    material before me in the bundle supporting the integration  of  A  for
    the last eight years since he came to the UK aged 7.  He  has  attended
    school during that time and I accept on the material, indeed it was not
    suggested otherwise by Mr Richards, that he  has  been  successful  and
    flourished in his school endeavours.

37. I accept the evidence that at present he speaks little Azeri but,  when
    he came to the UK in 2009, he did not speak English but only Azeri.  He
    could, no doubt, re-learn  his  first  language.   However,  that  will
    undoubtedly present difficulties in the short  or,  even  perhaps,  the
    medium term.  What will undoubtedly occur is that he will  be  uprooted
    from the continuous schooling he has enjoyed in the UK since the age of
    7.  He is now, of course, because of his age at a time in his schooling
    when he is studying for, and due to take, public examinations.

38. Taking all those matters into account, I find that it would be  in  his
    best interests to remain in the UK at  least  until  he  has  completed
    those studies.

39. However, that finding is not determinative of the  "reasonableness"  of
    requiring him to leave.  Viewed, not through the lens of  the  approach
    set out in MA (Pakistan), his removal would, for the very same reasons,
    be unreasonable.  However,  in  determining  that  issue  appropriately
    under s.117B(6) I must balance against the impact upon him  the  public
    interest.  The appellant had never had leave to remain in the UK and it
    a failed asylum seeker.  The public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control, set out in s.117B(1) of the NIA Act 2002, applies.
     Whilst I accept that attempts have been made by the Secretary of State
    to remove the appellant,  those  have  been  unsuccessful  because  the
    appellant has sought to  bring  legal  challenges  before  the  courts.
    That, of course, was her right.  There  is  no  other  public  interest
    engaged in this case.  There is no  suggestion  of  any  misconduct  or
    criminality on the appellant's part.  Of course, A has  never  had  any
    leave to remain in the UK but he is a child and it is difficult, if not
    impossible, to regard that as a significant factor when considering the
    weight to be given to his private life in the UK.

40. In my judgment, there  are  neither  "strong"  nor  "powerful"  reasons
    sufficient to outweigh the impact upon A and the thwarting of his  best
    interests by the  removal  of  the  appellant.   He  will,  of  course,
    inevitably follow her.  There is at least a serious possibility that JA
    will not accompany them to Azerbaijan.  There is, therefore, a  serious
    possibility that he will lose the "father figure" whom the  appellant's
    husband represents.  His formative years have been in the  UK  and  are
    significant factors in assessing the reasonableness of his removal (see
    on the importance of this stage in A's  life:  Azimi-Moayed  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC)).

41. Carrying out the balancing exercise mandated by MA (Pakistan),  I  find
    that the public interest does not outweigh the impact upon A such  that
    it is not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK and s.117B(6) of the
    NIA Act 2002 applies.  In those circumstances, the public interest does
    not require the removal of the appellant.   Consequently,  her  removal
    from the UK would be disproportionate and a breach  of  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.

42. For those reasons, I allow the appellant's appeal under Art  8  outside
    the Rules.

Decision

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR involved the making of an error of law and  was
    set aside in my decision promulgated on 6 June 2017.

44. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

45. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of the  ECHR
    was not challenged by the appellant and stands.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             11 October 2017





