
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00651/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2016 and 28 April 2016|On 3 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel (11 February 2016)
     Ms J Smeaton, Counsel (28 April 2016)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer (11
February 2016)    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer (28 April
2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Walker) issued on 9 September 2015 dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's decision refusing leave  to  enter  and
    proposing to give directions for her removal  to  Eritrea  or  Ethiopia
    following the refusal of her claim for asylum.

Background

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 13 December 2013.  She claimed  that
    she had left Eritrea and travelled to Sudan on 15 November 2013.   From
    there she travelled through an intermediate country before arriving  in
    the  UK.   She  claimed  asylum  on  arrival   and   was   subsequently
    interviewed.  Her application was refused for the reasons  set  out  in
    the decision letter dated 6  January  2014.   The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was an Eritrean citizen  and  in  reaching
    this decision she  took  into  account  a  linguistic  analysis  report
    prepared by Sprakab.

3.   The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    on 3 March 2014 and dismissed.  The judge took into account the Sprakab
    report and found that the appellant had failed to  prove  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that she was an Eritrean  citizen.  She  was  granted
    permission to appeal and at a hearing before UTJ Grubb on 10 July  2014
    it was conceded that the  judge  may  have  misunderstood  the  Sprakab
    report or at least not given sufficient consideration to it to  explain
    and justify his conclusion that it established that the  appellant  was
    an Ethiopian rather than an Eritrean national.

4.   In his decision UTJ Grubb said at [13]:

         "In my view Mr Richards' concession is entirely  properly  made  in
         this case.  Putting it at its lowest the Sprakab report is  unclear
         as to precisely what is the appellant's nationality.  Putting it at
         its highest it is mostly consistent with the appellant's  claim  to
         have been an Eritrean who lived amongst Ethiopians as  she  claimed
         to do between the ages of  2  and  9  when  one  might  assume  her
         linguistic abilities and skills  developed  before  being  deported
         back to [Eritrea].  It is clear to me that the judge may have over-
         read  or  misread  the  report  so  as  in  paragraph  65  of   his
         determination to conclude, on the basis of the Sprakab report, that
         the appellant was likely to be a national of  Ethiopia  and  not  a
         national of Eritrea."

5.   Accordingly the appeal was  allowed  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing by a different judge.  That hearing took place
    on 7 July 2015 before Judge Walker.   This  was  a  very  comprehensive
    determination.  However, at [30] the  judge  referred  to  the  Sprakab
    report saying that it concluded that the appellant was highly likely to
    be an Ethiopian among Eritreans and was unlikely  to  be  an  Eritrean.
    The judge considered the jurisprudence about how  an  assessment  of  a
    Sprakab report should be carried out: [57]-[58].  He then said at [59]:

         "The Sprakab report dated 03.1.2014 concludes to a high  degree  of
         certainty that the appellant is highly likely to  be  an  Ethiopian
         among Eritreans and is unlikely to be an Eritrean ..."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

6.   Unsurprisingly perhaps, the first ground in the appellant's  notice  of
    appeal is a challenge to  the  conclusions  the  judge  drew  from  the
    Sprakab report.  The grounds argue that the judge should have concluded
    that it in fact provided strong support  for  the  appellant's  claimed
    nationality as it found that the appellant's linguistic background  was
    assessed to be "Ethiopia among Eritreans" whereas  it  found  that  the
    speaker's claimed linguistic background as "Eritrea" was unlikely.   In
    the Summary of Findings it is concluded that the appellant has mastered
    Tigrinya on a native speaker level  and  that  her  language  used  was
    congruent with the language used among Eritreans in Ethiopia.   Further
    grounds argue that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons for his
    decision and also challenge his findings in relation to the appellant's
    claimed membership of a Pentecostal church.

7.   Mr Nicholson adopted his grounds whereas Mr Avery sought to argue  that
    if the judge had erred as the first ground suggested, the error was not
    material to the outcome of the appeal in the light of the judge's other
    findings on credibility.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

8.   I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.   He  fell  into  the  same
    error identified by UTJ Grubb when setting aside  the  previous  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.   The  judge  misread  the  linguistic
    analysis report by drawing from the findings on  linguistic  background
    that the Sprakab report concluded to a high degree  of  certainty  that
    the appellant was  likely  to  be  an  Ethiopian  among  Eritreans  and
    unlikely to be Eritrean.  In fact the appellant's linguistic background
    was assessed to be "Ethiopia among Eritreans" whereas she had described
    it as "Eritrea."  It is correct that the report said that the appellant
    displayed very limited knowledge of her stated area  of  origin.   This
    was evidence properly to be taken into account but, even taken with the
    other credibility factors  identified  by  the  judge,  this  does  not
    satisfy me that the error of approach to the conclusions  to  be  drawn
    from the Sprakab report can be regarded as either immaterial to or  not
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

9.   Accordingly, I am satisfied that the proper course is to set aside  the
    decision.  It is unfortunate that this appeal has  already  been  heard
    twice by the First-tier Tribunal.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  proper
    course is for it to be retained in and for the decision to  be  re-made
    by the Upper Tribunal.

10.  The appellant submitted for the resumed hearing  on  28  April  2016  a
    bundle of documents indexed and  paginated  1-158.   I  also  have  the
    documents which were relied on by both the appellant and the respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Evidence of the Appellant

11.  The appellant gave oral evidence through a Tigrinya  interpreter.   She
    adopted her witness statement of 6 April 2016  (A2-8)  subject  to  one
    minor correction in paragraph 2.  The chronology of events set  out  in
    that statement can briefly be summarised as follows.  The appellant was
    born on [ ] 1990 in Eritrea in Dekemhara City.  She is  a  national  of
    Eritrea.  Both her parents were born in Eritrea.  She claimed to  be  a
    Pentecostal Christian, the religion of both her parents.  In  1992  she
    moved with her mother and father to Addis  Ababa  in  Ethiopia  as  her
    father decided to open his own  garage  there.   In  1995  her  parents
    separated and her mother returned to Eritrea.  From 1996  to  2000  she
    attended an elementary school in Ethiopia but could not  continue  with
    her education due to the war between Eritrea and Ethiopia.  She and her
    father were later deported from Ethiopia in February  2000  because  of
    their nationality.  After  they  crossed  the  border  her  father  was
    required to show  his  identity  to  prove  that  he  was  an  Eritrean
    national.  Based on that assessment and his ties with the  brother  who
    resided in Assab, he was issued with a resettlement and household grant
    and they were collected by the  appellant's  paternal  uncle  and  they
    settled in Assab.

12.  In December 2002 her father secured a job in Khartoum as a mechanic  in
    a garage.  He obtained an Eritrean passport which had her picture in it
    and this was used to travel to Sudan.  As a child she was  not  allowed
    to have her own passport.  They lived in Sudan for about six years with
    her father's sister.  In 2006 her father was injured and he had serious
    back problems and his health  deteriorated.   They  had  to  return  to
    Eritrea at the end of September 2008 as they were no longer eligible to
    stay because of her father's illness.

13.  In Sudan, when her father had time, he would take  her  to  church  and
    sometimes his friends would  come  over  and  they  would  have  prayer
    sessions.  On returning to Eritrea they would pray at least once a week
    as a group but on most days she and her father would pray  together  in
    their home.  On 27 September 2009 she was baptised in  Assab  at  their
    house.  This was because the Pentecostal religion had  been  banned  in
    May 2002 and the church was closed.  In 2009 she was introduced to  her
    husband and told that he was  a  Pentecostal  Christian  and  that  the
    family wanted her to marry him.  The relationship developed and  on  17
    January  2010  she  duly  married.   The  local   administration   sent
    conscription letters saying that the appellant must attend Sawa but her
    uncle explained that she was married and as  she  spent  all  her  time
    looking after her father because of his illness, she  was  exempt  from
    national service.

14.  On 10 November 2013 there  was  a  religious  session  at  one  of  her
    friend's house where there were six worshippers.  She  and  her  friend
    went to use the bathroom facilities.   Her  friend  then  saw  Eritrean
    soldiers raiding the house.  They were very frightened and  decided  to
    run before the soldiers saw them.  They went  to  her  friend's  aunt's
    house and hid.  She asked  the  aunt  to  inform  her  uncle  what  had
    happened and he came to the  house  and  told  her  that  he  had  been
    approached by Eritrean soldiers asking about her whereabouts.  He  said
    that her life was in danger and he organised an agent to  take  her  to
    Sudan on 15 November 2013 as  her  aunt  was  there.   She  arrived  in
    Khartoum on 18 November 2013.  She was provided with a  passport  in  a
    false name.  She boarded a plane which landed in an unknown destination
    for two or three hours transit and was then placed on a plane to the UK
    arriving on 8 December 2013.  The appellant was stopped by  Immigration
    Officers, provided with a translator and screened.  She claimed  asylum
    at the airport.

15.  In her statement the appellant says that she  has  been  a  Pentecostal
    Christian since birth and that religion  has  been  banned  in  Eritrea
    since May 2002.  Pentecostal followers have been arrested and  detained
    and all their churches have been closed down.  She maintained that  she
    had a well-founded fear of persecution for this  reason  and  she  also
    feared that she would be arrested because she would be perceived  as  a
    draft evader.  She had not done military service and she had also  left
    the country illegally.  She had lived in the UK  since  December  2013.
    After she was dispersed to Cardiff she had attended a church there from
    December 2013 to January 2014 and after being relocated to Bristol  had
    attended church there.  She had provided a copy of  the  identification
    cards of both her father and her uncle.  She spoke Tigrinya and did not
    understand why the respondent disputed the fact that she was Eritrean.

16.  In cross-examination she said that her cousin who was due to give  oral
    evidence was her father's sister's son.  He had  one  sister  and  five
    brothers and was an Orthodox Christian.  She  was  referred  to  a  DHL
    envelope which had been  sent  to  her  from  Eritrea  saying  that  it
    contained a letter personal to her  and  the  identity  cards  for  her
    father and uncle.  She accepted that the envelope  from  DHL  had  come
    from Asmara rather than Assab.  She explained that  there  was  only  a
    very small Post Office in Assab and no facilities for sending  post  by
    DHL.  She was not aware of how the envelope  had  gone  from  Assab  to
    Asmara but had been told that it would be sent from  Asmara.   She  did
    not have an Eritrean identity card as it had been  lost  and  for  this
    reason she had produced the identity cards of  her  father  and  uncle.
    She had gone to school in Ethiopia but not in  Eritrea.   She  had  not
    worked in Eritrea.  In Ethiopia she had lived in  an  area  near  Addis
    Ababa where they mainly spoke Amharic.

17.  Her main reason for leaving Eritrea was because  she  was  deprived  of
    her right to worship.  Her father was  still  there  but  he  had  been
    forced to renounce his faith as he did not have the right to worship or
    pray.  He had to be very secretive and hide from the  government.   She
    was asked about the events of 10 November 2013 and said  that  she  had
    been in the bathroom when the house was raided.  Her  friend  had  been
    able to look through a hole in one of the walls to  see  the  soldiers.
    She drew a rough plan of the house.  She accepted that the worship  had
    finished and that she had gone with her friend to  the  bathroom.   She
    had told her that she  had  seen  the  soldiers.   There  was  a  small
    corridor and she had been able to see them through a hole in the  wall.
    The walls were made of a mix of wood and brick.  She had not known what
    had happened to her friend after they had been to her aunt's house.

18.  She confirmed  that  she  attended  a  Pentecostal  Church  in  the  UK
    referring to the letters written by the church leaders.  She  was  only
    able to identify them as Pastor Peter and Pastor Simon.  She could  not
    remember their surnames as she called them by their first names.   They
    had not attended the hearing as they had busy schedules  but  they  had
    written in her support.  She referred  to  the  photographs  at  A37-39
    showing her taking part in  a  conference  for  older  members  of  the
    congregation who had come from Eritrea.

19.  In re-examination she explained that she had not been  able  to  go  to
    school in Eritrea between 2000 and 2002 because there was a shortage of
    school places.  In answer to questions I asked, she said that  she  had
    lost contact with her husband.  She last saw him  in  2011  and  feared
    that he may have been detained by the authorities when in worship.  She
    had not heard from him since.

The Evidence of MB

20.  The witness statement of MB  appears  at  A9-10.   He  is  an  Eritrean
    national from the Tigrinya ethnic group and an Orthodox Christian.   In
    his witness statement he says that the appellant is his  first  cousin,
    his mother and her father being siblings.  He fled Eritrea in  November
    2008 to avoid persecution arriving in the UK  in  June  2011.   He  was
    later granted asylum.  In 2000 when the appellant and  her  father  had
    been deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea his mother decided to visit them
    in Assab but he was too young to go and he  stayed  at  home  with  his
    father.  In 2002 his mother had told him that  the  appellant  and  her
    father had travelled to Sudan.

21.  In September 2008 he had a call from his mother telling  him  that  her
    brother had returned to Assab because he was ill.  At that stage he was
    carrying out his military service.  He obtained leave  for  three  days
    and travelled to Assab to visit his sick uncle.   That  was  the  first
    time he had met the appellant.  Later, he learned from  his  mother  in
    May 2014 that she had travelled to Assab to visit her brother who  told
    her that the appellant had left Eritrea and travelled to the  UK.   His
    mother gave him the appellant's number and he had contacted and met her
    in London.  He confirmed that the appellant was an Eritrean national.

22.  In cross-examination he said that he had one sister and five  brothers.
     He had met the appellant once in Eritrea.  He did not  know  that  she
    was coming to the UK but had learnt this from his mother and  she  gave
    him her number.  The appellant's  father  was  still  in  Eritrea.   In
    answer to questions from me he said that his  brothers  were  still  in
    Eritrea.  He had left because of the harsh conditions in the  army  and
    had been able to take an opportunity to escape from that situation.

The Sprakab Report

23.  The  referral  for  a  Sprakab  Report  at  C1-2  of  the  respondent's
    documents identifies the appellant as coming from Asmara with a claimed
    nationality of Eritrean.  The reason for referral is given as,  "speaks
    Tigrinyan as mother tongue but requested  Amharic."   This  appears  to
    reflect the fact that at the screening interview the appellant spoke in
    Tigrinyan but requested an Amharic  interpreter  for  the  full  asylum
    interview.  The Sprakrab Report is dated 7 January  2014  and  box  1.1
    sets out the assessment  of  the  speaker's  linguistic  background  as
    "Ethiopia, among Eritreans," a decision reached with a high  degree  of
    certainty.  Box 1.2 sets out the likelihood assessment of the speaker's
    stated linguistic background identified as Eritrea.  This  is  assessed
    to the following  degree  of  likelihood;  "unlikely."   Box  1.3,  the
    summary of findings, sets out the brief summary of where the  appellant
    has lived.  This is consistent with her witness statements and her oral
    evidence.  It then says:

         "The speaker has mastered Tigrinya on a native speaker level.   Her
         language use was not congruent with that of  a  native  speaker  in
         Eritrea.  Her language use was  congruent  with  the  language  use
         among Eritreans  in  Ethiopia.   The  speaker's  stated  linguistic
         background is assessed to be unlikely."

24.  Section 2 of the report records that the appellant speaks  Tigrinya  at
    native  level.   Her  language  displayed  phonological  features   not
    congruent with Tigrinya as spoken in Eritrea but  typical  of  Tigrinya
    speakers in Ethiopia and disclosed  grammatical  features  and  lexical
    features congruent with Tigrinya as spoken among Eritreans in Ethiopia.
     Section 3 deals with knowledge assessment and says  that  the  speaker
    displayed a very limited knowledge, naming Assab Keber and Campo  Sudan
    as districts of Assab but, apart from this, she was not  able  to  give
    detailed knowledge of Eritrea.

Further Evidence on Nationality

25.  The appellant also relies on a letter from the  Eritrean  community  in
    Lambeth dated 29 June 2015 which sets out the methodology the community
    use to establish a claim to  be  Eritrean.   This  included  using  the
    knowledge of elders in the community  who  are  indigenous  members  of
    particular towns and communities and ascertaining nationality by seeing
    if a person speaks one of  the  Eritrean  languages  with  an  Eritrean
    accent and dialect.  The letter says that the community has established
    and confirmed via all this methodology and concluded that the appellant
    is an Eritrean national and is a true witness of what she claims to be.



26.  There is also evidence at A29 and 30 of  an  application  made  by  the
    appellant for a passport from the  Ethiopian  Embassy  which  has  been
    endorsed with the following:

         "The applicant has not attached any supportive documents  with  her
         application for an Ethiopian passport.  Therefore there is no valid
         reason for the embassy to issue her with an Ethiopian passport."

Background Evidence

27.  The most recent background evidence is set  out  in  the  Human  Rights
    Watch January 2016 Report  at  A47-52  and  the  Amnesty  International
    annual report 2015 2016 at A53-56.  These confirm the very grave  human
    rights situation in Eritrea as set out  in  previous  country  guidance
    determinations.  The  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  confirms  that  the
    government persecutes citizens who practise religions  other  than  the
    four recognised, Sunni Islam, Eritrean  Orthodox,  Roman  Catholic  and
    Lutheran.  Prayer meetings of unrecognised religions are disrupted  and
    participants are arrested.  The United Nations report of  4  June  2015
    A83-110  confirms  that  the  religious  gatherings  of  non-authorised
    denominations  are   prohibited,   religious   materials   confiscated,
    adherents arbitrarily arrested, ill-treated  or  subjected  to  torture
    during their detention and prisoners coerced  to  recant  their  faith.
    Many religious followers have been killed or have disappeared.

28.   There  is  a  further  article,  "In  between  nations  Ethiopian-born
    Eritreans, Liminality and war", prepared by Jennifer Riggan of  Arcadia
    University exploring the problems faced by Eritreans born  in  Ethiopia
    following the creation of  rigid  borders  between  the  two  countries
    following Eritrea's war of independence.  This confirms  that  many  of
    those expelled from  Ethiopia  found  their  way  to  Assab  which  for
    historical reasons had a much more  Ethiopian  feel  to  it  and  where
    Amharic was used as a lingua  franca.   However,  speaking  Amharic  in
    public was subject to official disapproval.  The vestiges of  what  was
    regarded as Ethiopian identity were seen as undesirable.  The  Eritrean
    authorities introduced policies to incorporate those who had come  from
    Ethiopia into the Eritrean national body.

Submissions

29.  Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant had failed to show that  she  was
    an Eritrean as claimed.  There was very limited  documentary  evidence,
    the appellant relying  on  photocopies  of  identity  cards  of  people
    claiming to be her father and uncle.  The evidence from the cousin  was
    not unbiased and the likelihood was that he was  simply  attempting  to
    help her.  His very short statement did not take matters much  further.
    There were concerns about the DHL envelope sent from Asmara.  There was
    no adequate explanation why the appellant's father who  was  ill  would
    have sent this from Asmara or why documents could not have been  simply
    sent by post.  The appellant had been to the Ethiopian Embassy  but  as
    she had produced no documents to support  an  assertion  that  she  was
    Ethiopian, it was not surprising that her application had been refused.
     The Sprakab  Report  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  could  be
    disregarded as it did not really  help  either  way.   So  far  as  the
    appellant's faith was concerned the fact remained that her  father  who
    was said to be Pentecostal still lived  in  Eritrea  and  was  able  to
    practise his religion at home.  The account given by the  appellant  of
    the raid on the friend's house was simply not credible.  She had  given
    inadequate details about the layout of the property  and  none  of  the
    details given about viewing soldiers through a hole in the wall had any
    ring of truth.  The appellant had produced documents  from  pastors  at
    her church but it was not clear why they had not attended  the  hearing
    or why the appellant could not remember their surnames.  In summary  he
    submitted that the appellant had failed to establish her nationality or
    that she was a Pentecostal Christian.

30.  Ms Smeaton submitted that the appellant's  claim  to  be  Eritrean  was
    supported by the documentary evidence she had  produced  and  the  oral
    evidence of her cousin.  She had produced identity cards from her uncle
    and father.  These had now been translated  and  were  at  least  prima
    facie evidence that they were Eritrean.  The appellant  had  been  told
    that they would be sent by DHL but she was unable to  explain  how  the
    documents got to Assab but that should not, without  more,  affect  the
    credibility of her evidence.

31.  Her nationality was supported by the Sprakab  Report.   Her  linguistic
    background was described as Ethiopia among Eritreans and she  had  been
    in Ethiopia from 1992 to 2000.  Her schooling had been in  Amharic  but
    she had spoken Tigrinya at home.  This was consistent with a linguistic
    background of Ethiopia amongst Eritreans.  Such questions  as  she  was
    asked about Eritrea  at  interview  had  been  answered  and  were  not
    questioned.  Matters originally relied on  by  the  respondent  in  the
    decision letter were now accepted as relating to another applicant.  So
    far as the appellant's religion was concerned, no issue had been  taken
    in the decision letter that she would not be at risk as  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.  Her evidence on this issue was supported by her  attendance
    at Pentecostal Churches in  this  country  and  the  letters  from  the
    pastors.  Her evidence about the raid on her friend's home in  November
    2013 was consistent with the background evidence.  She  submitted  that
    the appellant had shown to the lower standard of  proof  that  she  was
    Eritrean and a Pentecostal  Christian  and  for  that  reason  she  was
    entitled to asylum.

Assessment of the Issues

32.  The first issue I must assess is whether the appellant is  Eritrean  as
    she claims.  She must establish this to the lower standard of proof,  a
    reasonable degree of  likelihood,  that  this  is  the  case.   In  the
    decision letter when  assessing  credibility  the  respondent  drew  an
    adverse inference from the fact that the appellant was  asked  to  name
    the national days of Eritrea and of the 23 national holidays she  named
    four, two of which were incorrect.  She also  could  not  describe  the
    Eritrean identity card other than say it was blue and yellow: paragraph
    7.  However, it is now accepted that this information did not relate to
    the appellant and was included in error as was the claim  at  paragraph
    16 that she had not provided a reasonable explanation about her failure
    to apply for asylum in France.  The questions the appellant  was  asked
    at interview about Assab at Q167 and 168 to name four hotels and  areas
    where they were in Assab were answered by her and  there  has  been  no
    challenge to those answers.

33.  The appellant has relied on identity cards  obtained  from  her  father
    and  uncle  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    No
    translations were provided at that stage but this omission has now been
    rectified.  The card from the appellant's father sets out his name, his
    date of birth as 1950 and place  of  birth  as  Sesah.   He  gives  his
    occupation as driver.  The date of issue is given  as  Addis  Ababa  28
    November 1992.  On her uncle's card his date of birth is given as  1945
    in Sesah.  He is described as a garage owner and the place and date  of
    issue is Addis Ababa 29 November 1992.  This could provide confirmation
    of the appellant's evidence in that the place of birth of her father as
    such is given as Sesah and in her statement she refers to being born in
    Dekemhara City, a specific area called Sesah.  Her uncle  is  described
    as a garage owner and it is the appellant's  account  that  her  father
    went to work to open a garage in Addis Ababa, and his cards were issued
    in Addis Ababa in November 1992.

34.  The appellant's evidence is confirmed by her cousin, assuming  that  he
    is who he claims to be.  His statement is  consistent  with  hers.   He
    only claims to have met her once in Eritrea and he was able  to  resume
    contact when he heard from his mother that she had come to the UK.

35.  The appellant's  nationality  is  supported  by  the  letter  from  the
    Eritrean community in Lambeth but this  evidence  is  of  very  limited
    probative value as it fails to give any reasons why  it  is  considered
    that the appellant is an Eritrean  national.   The  evidence  from  the
    Ethiopian Embassy also takes the matter no  further  as  it  is  hardly
    surprising that she was not accepted as an Ethiopian  national  as  she
    produced no documents to support her claim and in any event  it  is  on
    her account a claim she does not seek to make.

36.  The Sprakab Report  formed  the  primary  reason  in  the  respondent's
    decision for the conclusion that the appellant was  not  Eritrean.   Mr
    Tufan has submitted that this report  does  not  take  the  matter  any
    further.  However, I am satisfied that this  report  is,  if  anything,
    consistent with the appellant's evidence rather than inconsistent.  Her
    linguistic background is assessed to be Ethiopia among  Eritreans.   It
    is to be noted that the assessment is not the  appellant's  nationality
    as such but of her linguistic background.  On her account the appellant
    lived near Addis Ababa between 1992 and 2000 and she went to school  in
    Ethiopia where she was taught in Amharic.  Nonetheless, on her  account
    she was living amongst Eritreans and was speaking Tigrinyan. The report
    concedes that  she  mastered  Tigrinyan  on  a  native  speaker  level.
    However, at the time when she was learning both languages, from the age
    of 2 to 10 her linguistic background could  properly  be  described  as
    "Ethiopia among Eritreans" and not as "Eritrea."

37.  It is not clear why the speaker's  stated  linguistic  background  from
    1.2 is said to be Eritrea although this may have been inferred from the
    details on the referral describing her  as  from  Asmara  and  speaking
    Tigrinya as a mother tongue.  In any event the report says that  it  is
    unlikely that her linguistic background is Eritrea, which in any  event
    would not be consistent with the appellant's own evidence.   There  are
    further indications  that  her  language  use  is  congruent  with  the
    language use amongst Eritreans in Ethiopia, the report setting out that
    she displayed phonological, grammatical and lexical features  congruent
    with Tigrinya as spoken amongst Eritreans in Ethiopia.  In summary, the
    Sprakab Report tends to support  what  the  appellant  says  about  her
    linguistic background.

38.  There are concerns about the credibility of the appellant's account  of
    events and in particular her account of the incident in  November  2013
    leading her to leave Eritrea for Sudan.  Her account on its face is not
    without its difficulties and in particular her evidence that her friend
    with whom she had gone to the bathroom had been  able  to  see  from  a
    corridor and through a hole in the  wall  that  Eritrean  soldiers  had
    raided the house.  Despite this both she and her friend  were  able  to
    escape and make their way to her friend's aunt's house.  Her uncle  was
    then able to arrange for an agent to take her to Sudan on  15  November
    2013.

39.  However, I must set against this the fact that the appellant's  account
    has been internally consistent in that she has given a similar  account
    when interviewed and when giving oral evidence. It is supported by  her
    cousin. It is also externally consistent with the  background  evidence
    about when Eritrean nationals were deported  from  Ethiopia,  the  fact
    that many ethnic Eritreans from Ethiopia  moved  to  Assad  where  both
    Amharic and Tigrinya were used and, so  far  as  the  incident  of  the
    authorities raiding her friend's home,  that  is  consistent  with  the
    behaviour of the Eritrean authorities  towards  unauthorised  religious
    gatherings.  Therefore, whilst there are doubts about some  aspects  of
    the appellant's evidence, looking at the evidence as  a  whole  and  in
    particular the Sprakab Report, I am satisfied that she  does  establish
    to the lower standard of proof that she is Eritrean and not  Ethiopian.



40.  I must now consider whether she also establishes to the  same  standard
    of proof that she is a Pentecostal Christian and would be  at  risk  on
    return.  On this issue it is argued that her evidence is undermined  by
    the fact that the pastors from her church have not  attended  but  have
    simply written letters.  On the  other  hand  the  appellant  has  been
    consistent in her assertion that she is a Pentecostal  Christian.   The
    letters taken with the photographs she has produced,  assessed  in  the
    light of my findings on her general credibility, satisfy me at least to
    the lower standard of proof that she is indeed a Pentecostal  Christian
    as she claims.

41.  It is correct as Ms Smeaton points out that the  decision  letter  does
    not expressly take issue with  the  fact  that  Pentecostal  Christians
    would be at risk on return to Eritrea but in any event  the  background
    evidence makes it clear that Pentecostal Christians would  be  at  real
    risk of persecution on return to Eritrea.  Her  fear  arises  from  the
    state authorities and in these circumstances no  question  of  internal
    relocation arises.  It was further argued that if the appellant was not
    at risk as a Pentecostal Christian she would be at risk  on  return  as
    someone who had made an illegal exit from Eritrea.  If the  outcome  of
    the appeal had turned on that point I would have awaited  the  decision
    in a pending country guidance case dealing with that  issue.   However,
    as the appellant succeeds on the grounds of religion,  I  can  properly
    determine this appeal without awaiting the  outcome  of  that  hearing.



Decision

42.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  An anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.   No
    application has been  made  to  vary  or  discharge  that  order  which
    therefore remains in force.


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 1 June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
