
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00097/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 December 2014                   |On 12 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                     b k
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a
    determination promulgated on 22 April 2014.  The appellant  claimed  to
    be at risk by reason of his involvement in a blood feud in Albania.  In
    due course, the Upper Tribunal found that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law  and  set  it  aside  in  a
    determination promulgated on 22 April 2014.

2.   In setting aside the decision, certain findings of  fact  made  by  the
    judge were preserved.  These included his finding  that  a  blood  feud
    between the appellant's family and the S family  existed  and  that  it
    caused the appellant's father, paternal uncle and elder brother to flee
    from Albania.  The blood feud caused the appellant to become  a  target
    and he ceased schooling and attempted internal  flight  within  Albania
    with relatives.  The judge also found that  it  was  reasonably  likely
    that the appellant received  indirect  threats  in  the  place  of  his
    relocation, that the police came looking for  his  paternal  uncle  but
    were unable to locate this  relative  and  that,  thereafter,  when  an
    attempt to have the appellant excluded from the  feud  failed,  he  was
    sent to Montenegro and then on to the United Kingdom.

3.   The judge dismissed the appeal in the  absence  of  evidence  that  the
    feud continued after the date of the last contact between the appellant
    and his mother in Albania, in either November or early  December  2012.
    As at the date of hearing, the judge was not satisfied that  an  active
    blood feud existed.  As he put it in paragraph 87 of the determination:

         "The Tribunal is satisfied that the reasonable degree of likelihood
         is that there was an active blood feud in the past but, because  of
         a lack of up-to-date information, the  Tribunal  is  not  satisfied
         that the reasonable degree of likelihood is that there remained  an
         active blood feud up to and including 3 February 2014."

     The judge went on to find that even if  this  part  of  the  assessment
    were wrong, a sufficiency of protection from the authorities in Albania
    was available to the appellant, as at February 2014.

4.   In seeking to set aside the judge's decision and in advancing his  case
    before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant relied upon  country  guidance
    given in EH [2012] UKUT 00348 and, in particular, on paragraphs  70  to
    74 of the judgment in that case.

5.   In addition to the documentary evidence which  was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the appellant provided a witness  statement  made  on  9
    December 2014, in which he described his recent success in establishing
    contact with his mother and the news from her that there  has  been  no
    reconciliation with the S family.  The appellant claimed in his  recent
    statement that his younger brother has experienced  problems  from  the
    children of members of that family who attend  the  same  school,  such
    that his mother has decided to remove his brother from education.

The Hearing

6.   The appellant gave evidence.  He adopted  his  witness  statement.   In
    answer to supplementary questions from Ms Wass, the appellant said that
    he re-established contact with his mother towards the end  of  November
    2014 and that contact continued.  He spoke to  her  nearly  every  day.
    The  previous  attempts  he  made  to  get  in  touch  with  her   were
    unsuccessful.  The number he used did not work.  Three weeks before  he
    made contact with her he met some people in Croydon from the same  town
    in Albania as he came from, [ ].  He asked  for  their  help  but  they
    could not assist.  Then he  met  a  man  from  [  ].   The  appellant's
    maternal uncles live there too, with some cousins and so he  asked  the
    man whether he knew any of them.  The man said that he knew one of  the
    cousins and mentioned a name.  The appellant then  rang  and  asked  if
    this person could find his mother's new number.

7.   Although he had tried this method before, he was  unsuccessful  in  the
    past.

8.   In paragraph  2  of  his  statement,  the  appellant  referred  to  his
    mother's news that reconciliation with the S family had failed.   There
    were three attempts, with the village elders being sent along but the S
    family did not agree.  The appellant said that his younger brother  was
    13 years old but would be 14 in May.  He had now left school but before
    he did so some of the children in the S family  were  beating  him  up.
    His mother decided to take him away from any school as he was nearly 14
    and she feared that the S family would kill him.  His  younger  brother
    no longer left the house and had not received any schooling this  year.
    Ms Wass asked whether the appellant's mother had provided him with  any
    evidence of what she had told him.  He replied that she had not done so
    but she was not the kind of person to go  to  the  city  and  knock  on
    doors.  He had asked her to write a letter but there was no post office
    in their village and so she could not send one.

9.   In cross-examination, the appellant said that his mother had  tried  to
    make contact with the appellant's father and elder brother but  without
    success.  She attempted to do so  recently.   The  appellant's  younger
    brother's problems were not reported to  the  police  as  they  had  no
    presence in the village.  The nearest post was about  two  hours  away.
    The teachers were unable to help or do anything about the S family.  Ms
    Kenny asked whether the problems suffered by his younger  brother  were
    at the school or outside it.  The appellant replied that  the  problems
    occurred on the way home from school but not in  the  building  itself.
    The boys were causing trouble because of  the  blood  feud.   Ms  Kenny
    asked whether they had actually said that  and  the  appellant  replied
    that they would not say anything but his  family  knew  why  they  were
    doing these things.  His brother had  not  attended  the  school  since
    September 2014, the  beginning  of  the  academic  year.   He  had  not
    suffered problems since because he remained indoors at the family home.



10.  Ms Kenny asked  why  the  appellant  believed  he  could  not  relocate
    elsewhere in Albania.  The appellant said that he went to  [  ]  for  a
    year but the S family found him there.  The authorities would be unable
    to protect him and as far as they were concerned he  would  be  killed.
    The police could not guard him.  He did  try  to  seek  help  from  the
    authorities but this never materialised.  They did not  help  him.   Ms
    Kenny asked whether they  were  unwilling  to  do  so.   The  appellant
    replied that they told him "we cannot help you".

11.  There was no re-examination.

12.  In submissions Ms Kenny said  that  the  two  critical  questions  were
    these: was the appellant at present a target  in  the  blood  feud  and
    second, if he were, could he relocate within Albania?

13.  The appellant had recently re-established contact with his mother,  who
    told him that there was no reconciliation.  There was nothing from  his
    mother directly and nothing to show that  the  appellant  was  actually
    being looked for.  The problem  suffered  by  the  family  appeared  to
    concern his younger  brother.   This  relative  had  been  targeted  by
    children, said to be  S  family  members.   There  appeared  to  be  no
    problems from the older members of  that  family  and  the  appellant's
    brother was now at home.  There was an assumption by the appellant  and
    his mother that the problems were due to the blood feud but they  might
    have been caused by bullying or  similar.   There  appeared  to  be  no
    serious consequences to date in terms of harm to  the  younger  brother
    and no serious injuries.  There was nothing to show that the  appellant
    was still a target or that he was being looked for.

14.  Even if the appellant made out this part of his case, the Secretary  of
    State believed that he could relocate.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found, at paragraph 79 of the determination,  that  the  appellant  had
    received indirect threats but this did not suggest that  the  appellant
    was directly in danger.  At paragraph 79, perhaps the police might have
    taken the appellant away.  The appellant said that he had attempted  to
    seek protection from the authorities but it was not clear how they were
    unable to help him.

15.  Ms Wass said that the appellant fell within the country guidance  given
    in EH, particularly at paragraph 70 and 72.  Internal relocation  would
    only be a viable prospect where the  aggressor  clan's  reach  did  not
    extend beyond a person's local area.  The preserved  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Judge showed that the appellant  attempted  to  relocate
    300 kilometres from his home and yet he was found by the S family.   As
    was clear from paragraph 72 of EH, where self-confinement was the  only
    means of protecting a person, a claim would be likely to succeed.   The
    evidence before the Tribunal today showed an active blood feud.

16.  The appellant's evidence was not  challenged  in  submissions  and  the
    appellant had resumed contact with his mother and  was  told  that  the
    blood feud continued.  Attempts at  reconciliation  were  unsuccessful.
    All of this was consistent with the appellant's initial  account.   The
    First-tier Judge had found  that  the  appellant  was  a  target.   The
    attempt to exclude him from the  feud  failed  and  so  he  remained  a
    target.  His younger brother was not  14  yet  and  so  was  not  fully
    fledged, as a potential target.   The  difficulties  were  not  due  to
    bullying.   They  revealed  the  same  pattern  as  occurred  with  the
    appellant, who was withdrawn from school and then  self-confined.   The
    absence of serious threats to the younger brother was a consequence  of
    his age and self-confinement.

17.  The First-tier Judge  found  that  an  active  feud  existed  up  until
    fourteen or fifteen months prior to the appellant's last  contact  with
    his mother.  The evidence now before the Tribunal showed that the  feud
    continued.  To an extent, the appellant's mother was  isolated  in  her
    village and if a letter had come from her, it might have been  regarded
    by the Secretary of State as self-serving.  The appellant's case  could
    be distinguished from MF (Albania) [2014] EWCA Civ 902.  The thrust  in
    that case was  more  to  do  with  discredited  expert  evidence.   The
    appellant in MF had come abroad without self-confinement or an  attempt
    at relocation.  The issue of protection from the authorities  was  more
    to the fore in MF, whereas in the present appeal the preserved findings
    of fact had a bearing on the appellant's case.  The  lack  of  evidence
    from the appellant's mother was dealt with by his own evidence.  It was
    for the Tribunal to consider whether the requirements of paragraph 339L
    of the rules were met.  In MF, the absence of evidence from the  mother
    was essential to the relocation issue, whereas in the appellant's  case
    much of that terrain had been covered by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the preserved findings of fact.

Findings and Conclusions

18.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to show that  he  is
    at real risk of persecution on return to  Albania,  by  reason  of  his
    family's involvement in a blood feud.  If he is not a refugee,  he  may
    be entitled to  humanitarian  protection  under  the  rules.   In  this
    context, he must show that there are substantial grounds for  believing
    that he will suffer serious harm on return.  So far as Article 3 of the
    Human Rights Convention is concerned, the appellant must show  that  he
    is at real risk of ill-treatment on return.  The appellant's  case  was
    not advanced in reliance upon Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.



19.  The preserved findings  of  fact  have  an  important  bearing  on  the
    appellant's case.  The judge found that an active  blood  feud  existed
    between the appellant's family and the S family, up until  November  or
    December 2012.  That feud cause the appellant's father, paternal  uncle
    and elder brother to flee Albania and led to the appellant  becoming  a
    target.  This in turn  caused  him  to  cease  schooling  and  to  seek
    internal flight within Albania with relatives.

20.  Paragraphs 79 and 21 of the determination,  read  together,  show  that
    the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's  claim  that  having  moved   to
    relatives, two sets of people visited his place of hiding.   The  first
    consisted of members of the S family, who sent threats to the appellant
    and the second were the police, who came looking  for  the  appellant's
    paternal uncle. When an attempt made thereafter to  have  him  excluded
    from the blood feud failed, the appellant was then sent abroad.

21.  The appellant was carefully cross-examined.  Although there  is  little
    detail in the witness statement, I accept Ms Wass's submission that the
    account which emerged is consistent with earlier accounts given by him,
    at least in relation to the source of the threats and the  consequences
    for his family.  As happened to the appellant in the past,  his  mother
    decided to withdraw his brother from school,  and  to  confine  him  at
    home.  I also accept Ms Wass's submission that, taking into account the
    appellant's amplification  of  what  appeared  in  the  statement,  his
    evidence is sufficient to show that it is reasonably  likely  that  the
    blood feud continues and that attempts to effect a reconciliation  have
    failed.

22.  The next question is whether the  appellant's  case  falls  within  the
    country guidance given in EH [2012] UKUT 00348.  That guidance is still
    in place.  The Upper Tribunal found that although  the  Albanian  state
    has taken steps to improve state protection, in areas where  Kanun  law
    predominates, particularly in northern Albania where the  appellant  is
    from, those steps do not yet provide  sufficiency  of  protection  from
    Kanun-related blood taking if an active feud  exists  and  affects  the
    individual  claimant.   Internal  relocation  elsewhere   may   provide
    sufficient protection.  At paragraph 70 of EH, the Upper Tribunal  held
    that this will be effective only where the risk does not extend  beyond
    the appellant's local area and he is unlikely to be traced in the  rest
    of Albania by the aggressor clan.  Here, the appellant  may  rely  upon
    the preserved findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  set  out
    above.  The S family located him, in hiding  with  relatives  some  300
    kilometres away from his home area.  The Upper Tribunal went on to find
    in EH that where there is a genuine, active blood feud, whose reach  is
    wide enough to preclude internal relocation, such that self-confinement
    is the only protection, an appellant's claim will normally succeed.   I
    have accepted as reasonably likely to be true the claims that the blood
    feud continues and that a recent consequence is the  decision  made  by
    the appellant's mother to withdraw his younger brother from school  and
    confine him at home.  He will be 14 next year and the  relative  safety
    of being a child will reduce in the coming years.

23.  Turning to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF  (Albania)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 902, I find that the appellant's case  may  be  distinguished.
    The absence of evidence from the  appellant's  mother  in  MF  bore  on
    paragraph 339L(ii) of the rules as the only source of information about
    the reach of the aggressor family was this close  relative,  who  could
    have provided a statement setting out her understanding but did not  do
    so.  The appellant was asking the Tribunal to accept  as  a  fact,  his
    mother's understanding of the range  and  influence  of  the  aggressor
    clan, which was based on uncertain evidence and which he received  from
    her in uncertain terms.  In the present appeal, the preserved  findings
    of fact in this context, regarding the S family, were made by the judge
    following a careful assessment of the evidence before him.  The  recent
    news passed to the appellant by his mother is hearsay evidence  but  it
    is of course admissible and capable of having weight.  I have taken  it
    into account and have weighed it with all the evidence,  including  the
    appellant's earlier statement and the evidence  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

24.  The appellant has shown that  he  falls  within  the  country  guidance
    given in EH and that he is at real risk of persecution on  return.   He
    is also at real risk of ill-treatment in breach of  Article  3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

25.  For the reasons I have given, the appeal is allowed.

DECISION

26.  The appeal is allowed.


Signed        Date 9 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction.  I maintain  that
direction (now an Anonymity Order).


Signed        Date 9 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable in these proceedings, there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date 9 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


