
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/00571/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 17 December 2013                           |On 31 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   miss zs

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born on 1 October 1992.

2.   The appellant left Sierra Leone in April 2009, arriving in  the  United
    Kingdom five days later.  She claimed asylum on 20 April 2009.

3.   The application was refused on 13 October 2009 but  the  applicant  was
    granted discretionary leave until 31 March  2010  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor.  She submitted an application for further leave to remain on  30
    March 2010.

4.   By a decision of 8 January 2013 the respondent  refused  to  grant  the
    further leave to remain and gave directions for her removal.

5.   The basis of the appellant's claim was  to  the  effect  that  she  was
    entitled  to  be  granted   refugee   status,   alternatively   granted
    humanitarian protection. She further contended  that her removal  would
    be in breach of her fundamental human rights.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal against the refusal, which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy on 29 May 2013.

7.   The asylum appeal and that in respect of humanitarian  protection  were
    dismissed.  No findings were made in respect of Articles 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR as the decision to remove  the  appellant  was  withdrawn  by  the
    respondent.

8.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against the findings of the Judge.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted.  Thus the matter  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Clive Lane on 21 August 2013.  A note of his judgment is
    annexed to this determination.

10.  No error was found in the determination of  Judge  Herlihy  as  to  the
    findings which were made so far as asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    was concerned.

11.  Nevertheless it was found that the Judge had been in error  in  failing
    to consider and deal with Article 8 of the ECHR.

12.  Thus it was that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  was  set
    aside with the findings of  fact  preserved.   There  was  a  direction
    however that the Upper Tribunal, upon a resumed hearing, would only re-
    make the decision in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.  Thus the matter comes before me for that purpose.

14.  There was presented for my attention a detailed  bundle  of  statements
    and documents of 136 folios.

15.  The appellant gave evidence.  She adopted her witness statements  of  1
    April 2013 and 5 December 2013.  She gave further evidence.   She  also
    adopted that which she had set out in her interview with the respondent
    in making her claim for asylum.

16.  The nature of the claim which she had put forward initially  which  was
    considered by Judge Herlihy was to the effect that she  was  born  near
    Kono and lived with her mother, father and younger brother.   When  she
    was 4 years old she, her mother and grandmother moved to Freetown where
    she attended school while her father remained near Kono, working  as  a
    minor.

17.  In 1999 the family returned to the village near Kono, on holiday, at  a
    time when the rebels attacked Kono  and  the  village.   The  appellant
    escaped into the bush, learning subsequently that her father  had  been
    killed by the rebels and that her mother and brothers' whereabouts were
    unknown.  She continued to live with her grandmother for seven years in
    Freetown and attended school.  When her grandmother died  in  2006  she
    stayed with a Mr G in Freetown who was a friend of  her  father's.   It
    was he that made arrangements for her to leave in April 2009.  She  has
    not seen him since.

18.  In the first statement the appellant indicated that she  feared  return
    as a lone vulnerable female, returning to a country where  she  has  no
    contact with family members or other support.  She said  that  she  has
    made contact with the Red Cross and is  awaiting  an  appointment  with
    them to trace her family.  She suffers from  sickle  cell  disease  and
    requires tablets for that condition.  She has a maternal  aunt  in  the
    United Kingdom who provides her with financial and  emotional  support.
    She is in her final year at South Thomas College studying B.Tech  level
    3 in Health and Social Care.

19.  In her statement of December 2013 she  says  that  her  aunt  lives  in
    Reading and that they manage to see one another once or twice  a  month
    either in Reading or Croydon.  They speak to each  other  by  telephone
    two or three times a week. The aunt continues to provide financial  and
    emotional support.

20.  The appellant,  at  the  time  of  the  statement  was  nineteen  weeks
    pregnant, the father of her child being one born in Greece having Greek
    residency.  His family was originally from Sierra Leone but now legally
    reside in Greece.  She  met  IT  in  the  UK  during  May  2012  and  a
    relationship started.  He has returned to  the  UK  on  three  or  more
    occasions to see her.  He currently works and studies  in  Greece.   IT
    has made an application for Greek nationality and once he has  obtained
    that he plans to move to the UK.

21.  The appellant repeated in her  statement  that  she  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 17 April 2009 and has completed her B.Tech course.
     Because of her immigration  status  she  is  unable  to  register  for
    university.  It is her claim that her sickle cell disease is continuing
    and she is worried to  return  to  Sierra  Leone  because  of  lack  of
    healthcare facilities.  She speaks of many friends who  have  supported
    and encouraged her in the United Kingdom.  She has involved herself  in
    an organisation called "Brighter Futures Youth Group".   This  involves
    regular meetings and activities.  She has  also  been  involved  in  an
    organisation called "Drive Forward" which helps the development of care
    leaders.  She is also a regular church attender.

22.  The appellant was asked when it was that she contacted  the  Red  Cross
    and she said that she had made an application to them a week before the
    hearing.  They have yet to give her an appointment but she is on  their
    books.  Her aunt has tried to search for  her  mother  and  brother  by
    asking questions of people that she knows but currently has  not  found
    them.  As to the father of her child, he has indefinite leave to remain
    in Greece but is not a Greek citizen.  He applied two years ago  for  a
    Greek passport but is still waiting for the outcome.  He  was  studying
    in Greece and now works there.  They have met four or five times and he
    comes generally every four months and stays for a period of time with a
    cousin.  He studied  accountancy  at  university  although  that  study
    finished two years ago.  The dates of his visits are  stated  as  being
    May 2012, October 2012, December 2012, February  2013  and  July  2013.
    When he comes he visits her every day.  He  stays  with  an  uncle  and
    cousin but visits her during the day and sometimes stays over weekends.
     She is sharing accommodation and therefore it  is  not  very  easy  or
    convenient for them to be together.  They hope however that  they  will
    be together as a couple.  Without documentation she cannot travel to be
    with him.

23.  She indicated that she talks with him every day when he is  in  Greece,
    talking on Skype and on the mobile.  He has not  attended  the  hearing
    because he is due to arrive in the United Kingdom on  18  December,  he
    having booked his ticket to come before  notification  of  the  hearing
    date was given.

24.  The appellant says that she lives in a house  with  three  other  boys.
    The organisation "Brighter Future"  is to try and  help  lonely  asylum
    seekers progress their cases  and  meet  with  MPs.   They  meet  every
    Wednesday.  The other organisation "driving forward"  is  a  foundation
    for young people leaving care.  She helps with  others,  teaching  them
    how to find a job.

25.  Her aunt is her mother's sister whom she sees once or twice a month.

26.  Her pregnancy is known to the parents of "I".  She speaks to them.

27.  She spoke of her B.Tech in Health and Social level 3.   She  wishes  to
    study midwifery when she can.  She also acts as a volunteer with  older
    people, reading to them and is active in church  matters,  particularly
    at Sunday School.

28.  There are a number of letters enclosed with the documents  speaking  as
    to the appellant's situation and circumstances.  In  particular,  there
    is a letter from Trupti Patel dated 7 March  2013.  That  witness  also
    attended and gave evidence.

29.  She has been working with the appellant for four years at the  Brighter
    Futures Group.   She  says  that  the  appellant  is  a  committed  and
    motivated member of the  group,  demonstrating  initiative  in  leading
    activities for the group of young people.  Brighter Future was  created
    in 2011 to recognise the work of professionals supporting young people.
     She attends the  day-to-day  activities  of  the  group  by  attending
    regular Wednesday evening sessions.  She attended  a  presentation  for
    the Human Rights Select Committee who  are  interested  in  hearing  at
    first had about the experiences of members of the group.

30.  The appellant is described as a positive and  articulate  young  woman.
    The group finds formal and informal peer group  mentors  and  seeks  to
    promote the awareness of young refugees and of  their  needs.   It  was
    confirmed that the appellant spoke about her boyfriend in  affectionate
    terms.

31.   There  are  other  letters,  particularly  from  the  Baptist  Church,
    speaking of the appellant's work  with  children  on  Sunday  mornings.
    There is a letter from Mrs Sharma of the South Thames College as to her
    studies and pleasant character.

32.  There is a letter from a Mr Fullah, undated, but to be  found  at  page
    22 of the relevant bundle, speaking of the fact that he has  known  her
    since she was a girl  in  Sierra  Leone  and  that  she  is  active  in
    volunteering her time for charity and unpaid work.  The author  of  the
    letter says that he visited where she used to live in Sierra Leone  and
    then met people who did not know who she is and had no idea  where  her
    relatives were.

33.  The appellant indicated that she is seeking  assistance  from  the  Red
    Cross but as yet no enquiries by them have been made.

34.  I bear in mind, however, in relation to  potential  family  members  or
    personal support in Sierra Leone, the direction of Upper Tribunal Judge
    Clive Lane that the Tribunal will proceed  with  its  analysis  on  the
    basis that the appellant may have the assistance of friends  or  family
    in Sierra Leone who will assist her upon her return, as  Judge  Herlihy
    found to be the case.

35.  I bear in mind the written evidence as mentioned  above,  but  it  does
    not go into detail as to the  extent  of  the  questioning  as  to  the
    whereabouts of her family members or whether  it  extended  beyond  any
    narrow area.  It was perhaps significant that people were said  not  to
    have recalled the  appellant  herself.   There  is  also  the  question
    whether indeed the enquiries were being made in the correct area.

36.  It is to be noted that the hearing before Judge Herlihy took  place  on
    29 May 2013.  The appellant and her aunt gave evidence but I can detect
    little reference  to  the  relationship  with  IT  that  has  now  been
    described to me.  I note a witness statement from IT, dated 11 December
    2013.  Although he was born in Greece, his father is from Sierra  Leone
    and his mother from the Gambia.  He is  a  national  of  Sierra  Leone,
    awaiting for a decision as to his being granted Greek nationality.   He
    said he first met the appellant in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2012  and
    continued that relationship by telephone and on  the  internet  in  the
    course of the visits that have been described.  The  appellant  is  now
    pregnant.

37.  Her relationship with IT gives a further  dimension  to  the  potential
    situation in Sierra Leone, providing yet further potential support  for
    her in any return which she may make.  There is the  potential  of  her
    boyfriend's family, relatives of who may reside  in  Sierra  Leone,  as
    well as the potential for her boyfriend  who  is  a  national  of  that
    country to go and give her support  and  support  the  child.   He  has
    finished his studies in Greece and little reason has been  advanced  as
    to what he might do.

38.  Indeed, when the appellant was asked as to  what  discussion  had  been
    made as to their future life together  and  where  that  might  be  she
    indicated that there had been very little such discussion.

39.  Indeed a possibility arises for consideration whether or  not,  if  the
    relationship is as durable as she claims it to be, she could not obtain
    leave to join IT in Greece with his family and  enjoy  family  support.
    That is not something however that has been seemingly discussed between
    them nor indeed has the practicalities been investigated in the hearing
    before me.

40.  In considering the aspect of Article 8 of the ECHR  I  focus  upon  the
    central questions as set out in the case of Razgar.  She has a relative
    in the United Kingdom, namely her aunt who  gave  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The appellant does not live with  her  aunt
    but lives separately in shared accommodation.  I consider the  case  of
    Kugathas but can note no undue emotional dependency such as  to  create
    the aspect of family life.  Clearly it is to  be  recognised  that  her
    aunt and her aunt's family provide some measure of private life for the
    appellant.  The appellant has, to her credit,  been  studying  and  has
    qualifications which she seeks to take forward.  I note the significant
    substantial contribution that she makes to the Brighter  Futures  Group
    and to the Foundation Drive  Forward  Group.   It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant has much to contribute and is  doing  her  best  through  the
    limitations imposed upon her in terms of working and studying to make a
    contribution.

41.  I bear in mind the best interests of the,  as  yet  unborn  child,  but
    clearly in the context of this case the best  interests  of  the  child
    will be to be where its mother is.

42.  I note the health of the appellant  but  note  also  that  sickle  cell
    disease is one that is generally controlled by medication, although  it
    is to be recognised that the  pregnancy  might  make  her  situation  a
    little worse.

43.  In terms of support for her if returning to Sierra  Leone  I  note  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that there are family  members
    that are there.   Also,  it  would  be  entirely  possible  for  IT  to
    accompany her to Sierra Leone, given that  he  is  a  citizen  of  that
    country and the father of her child.  It  may  well  be  reasonable  to
    expect in those circumstances a measure of financial support  from  his
    family in Greece if not practical family support of relatives of his as
    well as hers in Sierra Leone.

44.  The appellant clearly has  demonstrated  skills,  particularly  in  the
    medical sphere and midwifery is her particular desire.  Such skills  as
    I so find would be welcome and relevant in  Sierra  Leone.   I  see  no
    reason at all why she could not put her skills and experience  to  good
    use.

45.  In considering the reasonableness of return I bear  in  mind  SB  (lone
    woman - PSG - internal relocation  -  AA  (Uganda)  considered)  Sierra
    Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090.

46.  The Tribunal noted that the decision in AA  (Uganda)  was  not  support
    for the proposition that it would be unduly harsh to expect lone  women
    to relocate to the capital city of their country or origin or any other
    large urban centre.  Rather it is a re-affirmation that such relocation
    must  be  reasonable,  in  other  words  that  it  must  not  have  the
    consequences upon the individual as to be unduly harsh for her.  It  is
    noted that there was  significant  migration  to  Freetown  from  rural
    areas.  For migrants to Freetown  those  with  the  ability  to  access
    support would face no  risk.   Such  support  mechanism  might  include
    family or other connections or support  mechanisms  from  other  groups
    such as support from a church.  It is noted that the appellant plays an
    important role in her local church in the United Kingdom.   It  is  not
    unreasonable to suppose that she will likewise enjoy some support  from
    a church in Freetown were she to be returned.  An additional factor  of
    course being that it would be entirely reasonable to expect the  father
    of her child who is also a national of that country to return with her,
    certainly in the early stages, to lend support.  It may well be that in
    the future she will gain entry into Greece  to  be  with  him  and  his
    family in that connection.  I find  therefore  that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that the appellant would not return to Sierra Leone  as  a  sole
    woman in any event but even if that were the case  I  find  that  there
    would be family members to lend support.

47.  In considering the human rights of the appellant it is necessary  first
    to  consider  the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  and  in   particular
    paragraph 276ADE.

48.  Clearly the appellant cannot meet the residence requirements,  she  did
    not spend at least half of her life residing in the United Kingdom.

49.  I bear in mind the decision of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  and
    also Agundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC).
    That of course was an authority set within the context of  deportation.
    Maslov was considered  in  that  case  but  does  not  apply  to  this.
    Paragraph 399A and 398 was clearly within that context of deportation.

50.  I was asked to find,  however,  that  the  relevant  consideration  for
    removal was  whether or not the appellant  had  any  "ties"  in  Sierra
    Leone which involved more than  something  merely  remote  or  abstract
    links but rather a real connection to the country.  A consideration  as
    to whether that person has "no ties" to such a country must  involve  a
    rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances and not be limited
    to "social, cultural and family" circumstances.

51.  In that connection it is relevant to note the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on the  matter  of  family  support  and  also  the
    support of Mr G to the appellant and the  fact  that  she  left  Sierra
    Leone relatively recently.  In  any  event  I  find  that  IT  and  his
    potential presence is of significance  in  providing  support  for  the
    appellant.

52.  I find, notwithstanding her pregnancy, that  there  would  be  both  an
    element of support for her already in existence in  Sri  Lanka  and  an
    ability to survive economically with help from the extended  family  in
    the UK or the family of her boyfriend.

53.  The appellant has had the advantage of support in her  formative  years
    and has applied  herself  to  gaining  qualifications  and  experience.
    However, as the appellant fails to meet the Immigration  Rules  I  must
    consider whether there are other compelling or prominent matters  which
    would fall to be considered arising outside such Rules.  I do not  find
    that any exist in this case.

54.  In all the circumstances I do  not  find  that  her  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be disproportionate in all the circumstances.   It
    may be that in the event her best interests would be served and that of
    her unborn child by going to Greece to be with her boyfriend.  That  is
    a matter, as I have indicated, which needs further  consideration.   It
    provides at first sight an alternative to her returning to Sierra Leone
    or indeed she may return to Freetown  and  thence  elsewhere.   However
    such is not a matter which informs the decision as  I  focus  upon  the
    return to Sierra Leone.

55.  For the purposes however of Article 8 of the ECHR, I do not  find  that
    it  would  be  disproportionate  for  her  to   return   in   all   the
    circumstances. The appeal in respect of Article 8 is dismissed.

56.  Thus taking into account the previous decisions  that  have  been  made
    and which were preserved, it falls to  indicate  that  the  appellant's
    appeal in respect of  asylum  stands  dismissed,  that  in  respect  of
    humanitarian protection stands  dismissed  and   that  in  relation  to
    Article 3 stands dismissed and the appeal in respect of  Article  8  is
    now dismissed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


