
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01473/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th September 2015               |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR SIFAT NIAZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  31st  August  1993.
    His immigration history is set out in full detail at paragraphs 423  of
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated on  11th
    June 2015.  Prior to the matter coming before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on 26th August 2014 the Appellant had  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  seeking  discretionary
    leave based upon Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.
    He also claimed that Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights would be breached if he were removed to Afghanistan.  That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 22nd  December  2014
    and subsequent to that the matter went on appeal before Judge  Monaghan
    at Hatton Cross on 22nd May 2015.  In a detailed  determination  of  69
    paragraphs the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum  grounds  and
    under Article 3 of the European Convention  of  Human  Rights  and  the
    Appellant was not found to  be  in  need  of  humanitarian  protection.
    However the Appellant's appeal was allowed under Article 8 outside  the
    Rules.

 2. On 24th June 2015 the Respondent lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  accepting  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he had been disowned by his  father  and  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for its conclusions in respect of Article 8 of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 6th July 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Landes found that it was arguable that the
    judge had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the  credibility
    findings as set out in the first ground.  He noted that credibility was
    an issue although the judge had not recorded this as being part of  the
    Presenting Officer's submissions and that was apparent from the content
    of the submissions of the Appellant's Counsel.  In  the  circumstances,
    and in circumstances where it was clear from the earlier  determination
    of Judge Malins that she  had  not  found  the  Appellant  credible  in
    respect of the facts underlying his asylum claim it was  arguable  that
    Judge Monaghan should have given some reason for finding the  Appellant
    to be credible on the point that his family had  disowned  him  on  the
    grounds that he did not believe in God.

 4. Judge Landes did not consider that there was force in the second ground
    independent of the first ground i.e. the Article 8  appeal.   He  noted
    that the judge had clearly identified the relevant  factors  not  fully
    reflected in the Immigration  Rules  -  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    disowned by his parents; that he had not yet  reached  the  stage  that
    Judge Malins had envisaged when she had initially allowed his appeal on
    Article 8 grounds; that the Appellant was continuing to be a role model
    and significantly, that the Appellant's mental health had  deteriorated
    at least in part because of the  Respondent's  conduct  in  failing  to
    extend the Appellant's leave and that  the  precarious  nature  of  the
    Appellant's status in the UK had at least in part been  contributed  to
    by the Respondent.  However given that  the  finding  of  breakdown  in
    relationship with the family in Afghanistan appears to have  been  very
    significant to the judge's ultimate conclusions if she did  indeed  err
    as alleged in the first ground then Judge Landes considered that it was
    arguable that this must also have affected her ultimate conclusion.

 5. On 15th July 2015 a Rule 24  response  was  served  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.  That Rule 24 response effectively is  in  the  form  of  a
    skeleton  argument  prepared  by  Counsel  to  which  are  annexed  his
    handwritten notes.  It submits that aspects of the Secretary of State's
    grounds are misleading  and  argues  strongly  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal should be dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge should  stand.   I  have  read  thoroughly  all  fifteen
    paragraphs of the Rule 24 response and have cross-referenced so far  as
    it is appropriate the comments made therein to the handwritten notes of
    Counsel attached thereto.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However for the purpose of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process the Secretary of State is referred to herein as  the
    Respondent and Mr Niazi as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears by his
    instructed Counsel Mr Smyth.  Mr Smyth is  familiar  with  this  matter
    being the author of the Rule 24 response  and  having  represented  the
    Appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Bramble starts by noting the basis of the appeal  and  the  emphasis
    put on the first ground by Judge Landes  when  granting  permission  to
    appeal.  He is aware of a note  prepared  by  Mr  Chowdhury,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer prepared on the date of the  hearing  clearly
    setting out the circumstances of the case.  He emphasises  from  within
    the Home Office Presenting Officer's note the paragraph that states

         "Any emphasis that the Appellant's relationship with his father has
         broken down is not credible because there was a discrepancy on  the
         Appellant's account.   This  is  because,  the  Appellant  in  oral
         evidence said the last contact he  had  with  his  father  was  two
         months before the hearing (assuming March), however, in his witness
         statement the Appellant said at the date of RFRL which is  December
         2014.  For this reason I asked the Immigration  Judge  to  make  an
         adverse credibility finding of the Appellant."

 8. He points out the conflict with which he believes in such circumstances
    Mr Smyth has bearing in mind  his  own  submissions  and  the  Rule  24
    response.  Mr Bramble submits that the correct approach is for Mr Smyth
    to step aside and ask for an adjournment.

 9. In response Mr Smyth points out that the materiality of whether or  not
    the Home Office Presenting Officer raised issues are referred to within
    the Rule 24 response and the judge referred to the cogency of the  oral
    evidence i.e. he submits that it was logical and coherent and therefore
    it was open to the judge to find that evidence  credible.   Bearing  in
    mind the absence of the Appellant's uncle as a witness he submits  that
    the Secretary of State's position is not assisted and that there is  no
    challenge specifically made to the Appellant's renunciation of Islam.

10. It is his submission that the appeal does  not  actually  get  off  the
    ground.  He submits that the Grounds of Appeal are not  made  out.   Mr
    Bramble argues that the Appellant claimed in his oral evidence that  he
    last spoke to his father a couple of months ago, that he claims to have
    told his father he no longer believes in God and that as  a  result  of
    this conversation his father called him an infidel and stated he wanted
    him dead.  He points out that the Home Office Presenting Officer at the
    hearing did not accept as credible that  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his father had broken down  and  despite  this,  and  despite  the
    previous  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  Judge  Malins,  the
    Tribunal accepted this aspect of the Appellant's account as set out  at
    paragraph 50 of the determination.   He  submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to provide any reasons for accepting  this  account
    and that this inadequacy of reasoning was unsustainable.

11. Mr Bramble refers to the minute made  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer pointing out that this is a  clear  reference  as  to  how  the
    evidence was put along with comments made before the judge.   He  notes
    at paragraph 36 that reference is made to oral  testimony  being  taken
    from the Appellant where it is said that the Appellant last spoke  with
    his father a couple  of  months  ago  and  therefore  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer brings into play the  Appellant's  credibility.   He
    takes me to paragraph 42 quoting that the  findings  of  fact  made  by
    Judge Malins are adopted and in fact are not  even  disputed  and  that
    following the authority  of  Devaseelan  the  judge  should  have  been
    mindful of the previous evidence and that this is relevant at paragraph
    62 where the judge concludes  that  the  Appellant  gave  credible  and
    cogent evidence about being disowned by his family due to his  lack  of
    belief in God.  He submits that this is a balancing factor  that  needs
    to be taken into account and that no explanation has been given by  the
    judge as to how she found the Appellant to be  credible  especially  on
    the previous judge's  view  and  therefore  submits  that  there  is  a
    material error which renders the whole determination invalid  and  that
    the matter should be addressed again.  On that basis he asks me to find
    that there is a material error of law and to set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and to remit it for re-hearing.

12. In response Mr Smyth takes me to his Rule 24 reply  pointing  out  that
    credibility insofar as it relates to the Respondent's religious beliefs
    and the breakdown in the relationship with the Appellant's father  were
    not challenged by the Home Office Presenting Officer.   He  points  out
    that at paragraph 62 of the decision  the  judge  has  found  that  the
    Appellant gave credible and cogent evidence and submits that the  judge
    has directed himself properly and that it is not necessary  to  address
    every detail.  He submits that the judge has given ample reasons as  to
    why she allowed the appeal under Article 8 and that it is not  open  to
    the Tribunal to overturn unchallenged findings which  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 64 and 66.   Further  the  judge  has  he  submits  directed
    herself to Section 117B of the  Immigration  Rules.   He  submits  that
    there is either no error of law or if there  is  an  error  it  is  not
    material  and  that  unchallenged  findings  of  the  judge  cannot  be
    disturbed.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I have set out in quite considerable detail in this  determination  the
    submissions made by the  legal  representatives.   They  are  supported
    respectively on behalf of the Appellant by the Rule  24  statement  and
    attached notes and on behalf of the Respondent by the  minute  produced
    by the Home Office Presenting Officer.  I  start  by  reminding  myself
    that it is not the role of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  re-hear  a  matter
    unless there are material errors of law and that findings made  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  only  be   set   aside   in   such
    circumstances and that it is always open to an  analysis  that  another
    judge on another day may have come to a different  conclusion  but  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the evidence and providing he/she gives
    full logical reasons which are not perverse then it would not  be  open
    to the Upper Tribunal to overturn them.

16. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and  of  the  general  claim.   These  can  consist  of  the   internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of  the  claim  and
    the  consistency  of  the  claim  with   external   factors.    It   is
    theoretically correct that a claimant need do no more  than  state  his
    claim but that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility.  The judge has in this case carried out such  an
    exercise.  It is necessary to remember that this is an appeal  pursuant
    to Article 8 outside the Rules.  It is only  on  that  basis  that  the
    Appellant has succeeded.  The judge has analysed the evidence and  made
    findings of fact which she was fully entitled to.  She  has  thereafter
    gone on to draw conclusions on the Appellant's asylum claim noting that
    the Appellant had not shown in his earlier appeal to the lower standard
    of proof that he had a well-founded fear of persecution  when  he  left
    Afghanistan and draws conclusions which  remain  unchallenged  that  he
    cannot succeed on his asylum appeal, his appeal pursuant to  Article  3
    of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  or  his  humanitarian
    protection claim.

17. The judge then goes on to consider the Appellant's  claim  pursuant  to
    Article 8.  It is these findings that are challenged.  It  is  accepted
    that the Appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is thereafter that the judge has gone  on  to  consider  the
    position outside the Rules and to consider the principles  outlined  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  She has made findings by way of conclusions  on
    proportionality  at  paragraphs  60  to  67  and  has   given   further
    consideration to the authority of  JS  (Former  Unaccompanied  Child  -
    Durable Solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC) and latterly gone
    on to consider the public interest in maintaining  immigration  control
    at paragraph 68.  Whether another judge would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion is always a moot point but this judge  heard  the  evidence.
    She has carried out a thorough analysis and has set out her reasons  in
    detail.  She has made findings that she is entitled to and I agree with
    the submissions made by Mr Smyth that she has given ample reasons as to
    why the appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  and  that  it  is  not
    appropriate to overturn unchallenged findings.  I acknowledge the point
    made by Mr Bramble that the decision may seem to  be  contrary  to  the
    views previously expressed on credibility particularly by Judge  Malins
    but this is a detailed decision where full  consideration  of  all  the
    evidence including the previous facts have been taken into account.  In
    such circumstances I am satisfied bearing in mind that the issue before
    me is whether or not there is an error of law in the finding  that  the
    Appellant's appeal should be allowed pursuant to Article 8 outside  the
    Immigration Rules that there is no material error of law  disclosed  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in such circumstances
    the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
