
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01619/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 12th September 2016              |On: 30th September 2016              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SG
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Claire, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of both Pakistan and Egypt. She was born in
    1987.




    Anonymity Order

 2. The basis  of  the  Appellant's  case  is  a  claim  for  international
    protection which turns in part on allegations of  sexual  and  "honour"
    based violence.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an
    order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

 3. Due to the nature of the evidence I have considered it  appropriate  to
    anonymise the identity of other individuals named by the Appellant  and
    who have produced statements in support of her case. I do so  with  the
    consent of the Respondent.




    Background to Appeal

 4. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2010 as a student. She  has
    returned to Egypt on a number of occasions, the last being in  December
    2011. She claimed asylum in January 2013.

 5. It is not in dispute that  in  order  to  qualify  for  protection  the
    Refugee Convention the Appellant must show that she faces a  real  risk
    of harm in both Pakistan and Egypt. She is entitled to  citizenship  of
    both  of  those  countries  by  virtue  of  her   parent's   respective
    nationalities.

 6. Her claim was factually complex but can be distilled to this: she had a
    relationship outside of marriage in the UK, that fact has come  to  the
    attention of her family who now  believe  that  she  has  "dishonoured"
    them. She fears serious harm at the hands of her father and/or  various
    other male relatives who live in Egypt and Pakistan who would  seek  to
    punish her for what they regard as  her  sexual  transgression  against
    social mores.  She cannot turn  to  the  man  with  whom  she  had  the
    relationship in the UK for support  or  protection  in  either  country
    because they are no longer together. The  Appellant  now  alleges  that
    this man assaulted and raped her.

 7. The Secretary of State had rejected the claim for want of  credibility.
    A number of discrepancies arose from the Appellant's evidence  and  the
    Respondent noted that the Appellant had not claimed  asylum  until  her
    student visa was about to expire.

 8. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parker)  the
    Appellant  gave  oral  evidence.  The  Judge  was  not  impressed.  The
    determination gives a number  of  reasons  why  the  Tribunal  did  not
    believe that the Appellant was  telling  the  truth.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  and  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker on the  14th  October  2015.  The
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on the 12th  November
    2015 I granted permission in the following terms:

         "It certainly cannot be said  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  give
         reasons for its negative assessment of the Appellant's credibility:
         between paragraphs 16 and 27 there are no fewer  than  12  reasoned
         conclusions as to why the Tribunal did not  attach  weight  to  the
         Appellant's oral and documentary  evidence.  The  question  remains
         whether the numerous findings were infected by  some  other  error.
         The  core  of  the  findings  turn  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         assessment of how a "strict" Muslim father might  behave:  see  for
         instance, the question of whether the  Appellant  wore  hijab,  was
         permitted to pursue her education,  was  able  to  live  alone  and
         whether she was allowed to return to the UK after being beaten. The
         Tribunal found the evidence on these matters to be "incredible"  or
         "at odds" with the Appellant's description of  her  father.  It  is
         arguable, just, that in the  absence  of  any  expert  evidence  or
         country background material as to  how  "strict"  Egyptian  fathers
         might behave, the Tribunal has erred in making findings unsupported
         by the evidence".




    Errors of Law

10. On the 2nd August 2016 I heard oral submissions on whether the decision
    contained an error of law  such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.  The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Claire, the  Respondent  by  Mr  Tufan.
    Having had the opportunity to consider the  case  further,  and  having
    heard the submissions of the parties, I found that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  contain
    material errors over and above that I considered to be "just"  arguable
    when I granted permission. The decision was set aside for the following
    errors.

    Error 1: Failure to consider medical evidence/assess credibility in the
    round

11. The bundles before the First-tier Tribunal contain numerous  pieces  of
    medical evidence from various agencies which indicate inter  alia  that
    the Appellant has been receiving:

          a) Therapy for depression and anxiety since  January  2014  at  a
             service to which she was referred following a rape in 2012[1]

          b) Anti-depressants[2]

          c) Domestic violence outreach support since August 2014[3]

    A letter from her GP further confirms that  she  had  reported  to  him
    being raped and subject to domestic violence as long ago as April 2013.
    A letter dated 28th March 2015 from her therapist  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant had told her about how her father would  pull  out  her  hair
    when he caught her not wearing hijab.  This  letter  was  supported  by
    various photographs  showing  large  patches  of  hairlessness  on  the
    Appellant's scalp.

12. I am satisfied - and Mr Tufan agreed - that in making  its  credibility
    findings the Tribunal nowhere had regard to this medical evidence. That
    is important for a number of reasons.

13. First of all, it illustrates that the Tribunal made  an  assessment  of
    this young woman's evidence without considering  the  possibility  that
    her ability to give a coherent account would have been affected by  her
    mental state. That was a particularly egregious error considering  that
    submissions had been made on the Appellant's  behalf  about  that  very
    matter, reliance having been placed on the  well-known  article  by  Dr
    Juliet Cohen published in 2001 in the Medico-Legal Journal  'Errors  of
    Recall and Credibility - Can Omissions and Discrepancies in  Successive
    Statements Reasonably be Said to Undermine Credibility of Testimony?'

14.  Secondly, it means that the specific adverse finding  on  whether  her
    father would have permitted her not to wear  hijab  has  been  made  in
    isolation  from  her  evidence  on  that  matter.  The  Appellant   was
    photographed for her passport with her  head  uncovered.  The  Tribunal
    placed significant weight on that matter, finding it to be "totally  at
    odds" with her claim to  a  strict  upbringing,  and  found  that  this
    "seriously damages  the  appellant's  claim"  [at  16].  In  fact,  the
    Appellant's evidence had been that her father had  violently  assaulted
    her when he had found out about the photograph, pulling out so much  of
    her hair that she today wears a wig. She had  produced  photographs  of
    her scalp and a letter from her doctor confirming this to have been the
    account given to her long before the asylum appeal.

15. Finally, it suggests to the Appellant that the Tribunal has  not  given
    the "anxious scrutiny" to her appeal that it was obliged to do by law.

    Error 2: Findings not Supported by Evidence

16. When I granted  permission  I  was  concerned  that  the  Tribunal  had
    appeared  to  base  virtually  all  of  its  negative  findings  on  an
    assessment of how a strict Muslim father might  or  might  not  behave.
    Negative inference was drawn, for instance,  from  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was permitted to study in the UK, and  even  to  return  here
    after having received a beating at  her  father's  hands.  His  claimed
    behaviour was considered to be "incredible".  Mr Tufan  was  unable  to
    point to any objective evidence before the  Tribunal  upon  which  such
    findings could have been based. In truth those findings  are  based  on
    speculation and unfounded inference. There may be a stereotype of how a
    "strict Muslim father" might  behave  but  this  will  rarely  if  ever
    translate  into  reality,  which  is  invariably  more  complex.    For
    instance,  in  a  society   where   young   women   are   expected   to
    unquestioningly obey the wishes of their father, it will often  by  the
    case that those women are trusted to  conduct  themselves  accordingly,
    because they know the consequences if they do not. There is to my  mind
    nothing "incredible" in the Appellant's father allowing her to study in
    the UK, nor to him having sought to introduce  a  prospective  marriage
    candidate to her family.




    The Re-Made Decision

    Legal Framework

17. In order to qualify for a grant of refugee status  the  Appellant  must
    show that she has a well-founded fear of persecution  for  one  of  the
    five reasons set out in Article 1A of the Refugee Convention.   In  her
    case this has been identified as her "membership of a particular social
    group", namely 'women'.  The test requires me to consider a  number  of
    factors. Does she actually have a fear? Is it objectively well-founded?
    Is the harm feared serious enough to  amount  to  persecution?  Is  the
    feared harm something that the government in her  home  country  either
    cannot or will not protect her from?  The overall burden of proof  lies
    on the Appellant who must show it to  be  reasonably  likely  that  she
    qualifies as a refugee. This formulation reflects the lower standard of
    proof applicable in claims for international protection.  In this case,
    somewhat unusually, the Appellant must discharge that burden in respect
    of two countries: Egypt and Pakistan.

18. In respect of both countries the Respondent contends that the Appellant
    can reasonably be expected to avoid the feared harm at the hands of her
    family members by relocating elsewhere in  the  country.  In  assessing
    whether or not her relocation is 'reasonable' I must assess all factors
    relevant to her. This requires me  to  examine  not  just  the  country
    conditions generally, but assess those conditions in the context of the
    Appellant's individual characteristics.

    The Appellant's Evidence

19. The Appellant's evidence is set out in the following  documents  before
    me:

           . Screening interview dated 24th January 2013

           . Witness Statement dated 27th October 2014

           . Asylum interview dated 28th October 2014

           . Witness statement dated 4th November 2014

           . Witness statement dated 31st March 2015

           . Witness statement dated 7th September 2016

20. At the hearing she adopted all four of her witness statements and  gave
    oral evidence. She was cross-examined by Mr  Wilding  and  answered  my
    questions asked in clarification. Her core account is as follows.

21. She has always lived in Cairo, Egypt.  Her  father  went  to  Egypt  to
    study a long time ago and when there was introduced to her  mother.  It
    was an arranged marriage but it has never been a happy one. Her  mother
    has been subjected to her father's controlling, and sometimes  violent,
    behaviour over a long period of time. Although he could be very  caring
    and act as if he wanted to help, he has a fiery temper and  would  beat
    her, the Appellant and the Appellant's  younger  sister  if  he  became
    angry. The Appellant describes him as being very manipulative.  Both of
    her parents are Sunni Muslim. The Appellant  describes  her  father  as
    being very conservative and observant, her mother less  so.   Over  the
    years the Appellant's father has  maintained  close  contact  with  his
    family in Pakistan, but has only intermittently visited the country. He
    was last there, as  far  as  the  Appellant  is  aware,  in  2013.  The
    Appellant herself visited her family in Karachi in 2005  and  again  in
    2007. She did not enjoy the experience.  She  regarded  the  family  in
    Pakistan as being overly restrictive in respect  of  her  conduct,  for
    instance insisting that she wear long clothing and a headscarf. On  the
    last occasion that she was there the Appellant  was  very  unhappy  and
    wanted to return home.   She has seven uncles and two aunts  living  in
    Pakistan with their families. Most are in  Karachi  but  she  also  has
    relatives elsewhere.

22. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in October 2010  in  order  to
    study English.   Her father  had  agreed  to  this  because  he  is  an
    educated man (he is a religious scholar and a retired  medical  doctor)
    and he expected his daughters  to  be  educated.  They  had  previously
    discussed possibility that the Appellant might travel to Dubai to study
    but he had ruled this out as they do not have any family members in the
    Gulf. Her father has some relatives living in the UK, in Manchester and
    London, so he was reassured that they would  be  able  to  support  the
    Appellant and look after her. He wanted her to stay with them. That was
    why he agreed to her coming here.  In fact she did not do  that.  After
    her arrival she did not go to her relatives' home but stayed in a hotel
    for the first night. She arranged to rent a room with a Chinese family.
    Her father was cross and said bad words to her on  the  phone  but  she
    wanted to be free and not be controlled by her Pakistani family.

23. On the day after her arrival she was walking home and became lost.  She
    asked a man for directions. He happened to be walking the same way  and
    so they walked together. He told her that his name  was  MFR.   He  was
    from Pakistan. They chatted and  she  told  him  that  her  father  was
    Pakistani. They exchanged numbers.

24. The Appellant stayed in the UK for four months on that occasion. During
    that time she stayed in contact with MFR. They became  friends.  During
    the last month of her stay he underwent an operation. She  invited  him
    to stay at hers afterwards so she could look after him. During the five
    days that he spent with her there  was  a  strange  incident  where  he
    frightened the Appellant.  They  had  been  "messing  around"  when  he
    grabbed a pillow  and  held  it  down  over  her  face.  She  was  very
    frightened and could not breathe as he sat on the pillow.  She  managed
    to get him off her by twisting her face and biting him.  She threw  him
    out and was very upset.

25. After a few days MFR came to see  the  Appellant.  He  was  crying  and
    saying he was sorry for being so stupid. He  begged  the  Appellant  to
    forgive him, and she did. As she put it in her asylum interview: "it is
    not easy for men to cry and say they're  sorry".   They  resumed  their
    friendship, retaining contact by social media and  telephone  when  the
    Appellant went back to Egypt at the end of her English course.

26. When the Appellant got back to Egypt at the end of 2010 her father  and
    her argued. He was angry with her because she had not stayed  with  his
    relatives as had been arranged. He hit her with a stick  on  her  legs.
    He spat in her face. The Appellant became tearful in her oral  evidence
    when he recounted this incident. She  explained  that  her  father  was
    conflicted because he wanted her to carry on with her education but did
    not want her to be living alone in the UK. She talked to him  and  made
    him understand that although  she  was  not  living  with  his  cousins
    because her college was far away, she would retain contact  with  them.
    They would have her address and  they  could  visit  her  accommodation
    whenever they wanted.

27. So it was in 2011 that the Appellant came  back  to  the  UK  to  start
    another course. This one was in Glasgow.  After she returned to the  UK
    her relationship with MFR continued. He would speak to her on the phone
    and visited her in Glasgow.

28. In approximately May 2011 MFR called the Appellant's father  and  asked
    him for her hand in marriage.  As is usual in arranged  marriages,  MFR
    gave her father his home address so that he could conduct checks on the
    family. He explained what he was doing in the UK, what he was  studying
    and what he hoped to do in the future.

29. The relationship between the Appellant and MFR progressed and in around
    June  they  became  a  'couple'.  This  did  not   include   a   sexual
    relationship.   The  Appellant  recounts  another  incident  where  MFR
    behaved erratically and with violence towards her. He was visiting  her
    in Glasgow when he became angry that she had arranged to visit friends.
    He took a knife and threatened her with it. He took her phone from  her
    and said that  she  was  not  allowed  any  contact  with  anyone.  The
    Appellant was  really  scared  and  started  screaming.  Afterwards  he
    apologised and said that he would never do that again.

30. The Appellant travelled to Egypt in December 2011.  Her father told her
    that he was satisfied that MFR was from a  good  family  and  that  the
    marriage  could  go  ahead.  The  Appellant's  uncle  in  Pakistan  had
    contacted MFR's family and had made arrangements for them all to travel
    to Egypt to discuss the wedding.  The  Appellant  was  happy  that  her
    father had agreed but also apprehensive. She could not tell her  family
    about MFR's violent behaviour because she should never have had him  in
    her home.  She was scared and did not want to talk about the  marriage.
    She asked her father if she could come back  to  the  UK  in  order  to
    finish her education. He refused. He was  concerned  that  if  MFR  was
    here, she might have contact with him. The  Appellant  and  her  mother
    begged her father to let her come back. She told him that she needed to
    come back to collect her exam  results  and  graduate.  He  reluctantly
    agreed but made her swear on the Qur'an that she would not see  MFR  at
    all. He said that she was mature and that  he  was  trusting  her.  She
    promised to obey him and was permitted to come back for one month.  Her
    father booked her a return ticket and ensured that she had a  one-month
    visa.

31. When the Appellant arrived in the UK she decided to  change  her  visa.
    She applied for a visa extension. She missed her return flight back  to
    Egypt. Her father was furious and shouted at her over the  phone.   She
    made excuses about her college and said that she would be back soon.

32. The Appellant did not initially tell MFR that she had come back but  he
    found out from her family and pestered her until  she  agreed  to  meet
    him. She thought because the family were involved now he would  not  be
    violent again.

33. In March 2012 she was living at an address in London.  On the 12th  she
    and MFR had gone out for dinner and had argued.  He walked her home and
    outside the building the argument escalated and he attacked  her.   The
    commotion caused people in her building to come to  their  windows.  He
    had her pinned to the wall holding her  by  her  hands  with  one  hand
    whilst he beat her with the other. After he left  her  neighbours  told
    her that she should call the police. They did not want him to come back
    into the building.

34. A couple of days later MFR called the Appellant. She ignored it but  he
    turned up at her house. Again he was apologetic about his violence  and
    begged her to forgive him. She agreed to go out with him for breakfast.
    They went together to his sister-in-laws house. Once there the argument
    flared up again. MFR pushed the Appellant onto a bed and  told  her  to
    take off her clothes. When she refused he kicked  her  with  his  heavy
    boots on. He held her down and although she was crying and  asking  him
    to get off her, he raped her.

35. The Appellant said that afterwards he told her to get dressed and leave
    as he was busy and his sister-in-law would be  coming  home  soon.  The
    Appellant was crying and miserable. She went home because she  did  not
    know what else to do.  She did not want to call the police because  she
    was alone and afraid.

36. On the 19th March 2012 the Appellant called MFR and said  that  he  was
    having abdominal pains. She was bleeding heavily.  She told him he  had
    to take her to a doctor. He said he was too busy and  that  she  should
    leave him alone.   She knew that his brother had come from Pakistan  to
    discuss the marriage so the next day she called him again and  insisted
    that they meet. She said otherwise she would go to the flat  where  his
    family were. When they met she told  him  that  he  had  to  marry  her
    because of what he had done. Otherwise her family would  kill  her.  He
    laughed in her face and asked her if she was crazy. He started  mocking
    her. He told her that this was the UK and it was only fun. He would not
    marry her. The Appellant was very distressed. She ran in the  road  and
    lay in front of an oncoming bus. He ran after her and picked her up and
    pulled her to the side. He said she was crazy. She  said  that  he  had
    damaged her life and now her family would kill her. He left her there.

37. The Appellant returned to her flat. She  received  a  threatening  call
    from MFR's brother telling her not to tell anyone. She took an overdose
    of tablets in an attempt to kill herself.

38. After two weeks of agonising about what she  should  do  the  Appellant
    went to hospital.  She was still bleeding and having pain. She told the
    staff that she  had  been  raped,  and  they  called  the  police.  The
    Appellant states that the two police officers assigned to her case were
    not sympathetic. They were abrupt and she felt that they were  shouting
    at her. When she explained that in her culture the  man  would  now  be
    expected to marry her, they laughed at her. They were scornful  of  the
    suggestion that the perpetrator should be made to marry her.  They  did
    not appear to take her claim seriously and after a couple of days  they
    got back to her. Although they had arrested MFR his brother had  got  a
    lawyer and he had very quickly been released. A judge had said that the
    case could not proceed[4].

39. The Appellant became very depressed. She was very upset about what  MFR
    had done and was frightened about the consequences  for  her  when  she
    returned home. In around June 2012 things got worse.  She  got  a  call
    from her father who was very angry. He told her that she was to  return
    to Egypt as soon as possible. He wanted her on  the  next  flight.  The
    Appellant was scared and refused. He wouldn't tell her why  he  was  so
    cross but she could guess. A few weeks before  the  sexual  assault  in
    March 2012 she had  bumped  into  one  of  her  father's  relatives  in
    Westfield Shopping centre in Stratford, East London. She  and  MFR  had
    been walking "catching hands" and they had met this man, Muhammad.  She
    introduced them  and  the  men  exchanged  numbers.  She  recalls  that
    Muhammad was staring at their hands. After the call from her father  it
    was obvious to her  that  Muhammad  had  gone  back  to  him  and  said
    something bad about her. She feared that perhaps  Muhammad  had  spoken
    directly to MFR and he had told him that they had had intercourse. Even
    if he hadn't the fact that she  and  MFR  had  been  together  was  bad
    enough. In her culture just holding hands with a man is enough to  make
    people think you are having a sexual relationship.

40. Her father stopped sending her money and she became  dependent  on  the
    support of friends. This caused the Appellant further problems as  some
    of these male 'friends' starting harassing  her  and  expecting  sexual
    favours in return for accommodation and  food.   She  had  to  try  and
    extend her visa at that time so she sold her gold to  finance  herself.
    She was afraid of her father trying to contact her so she  changed  her
    telephone number.

41. In January 2013 she received a letter from her  mother  that  confirmed
    her worst fears about what her father might know. Her mother  was  very
    upset.  She said that she was being accused of living like a westerner,
    doing things like drinking and having sex with  men.  Her  mother  said
    that the matter was out of her hands and that she would not be able  to
    protect the Appellant if she returned to  Egypt.  It  was  this  letter
    which prompted the Appellant to seek asylum.   It  was  then  that  the
    Appellant understood why her father had been so angry with her  on  the
    phone - she realised he must have known that she had not behaved as she
    should have done with MFR and perhaps he knew about the rape too.

42. In February 2014 the Appellant was feeling very  isolated  and  lonely.
    She tried to call her Mum but got no reply. Her Mum saw the number from
    the UK and called her back. Her mother was very upset and said that her
    father had told all the family in Pakistan and that everyone was  angry
    and saying that she had to go back to Egypt.  Her  mother  was  worried
    and told her not to go to either Pakistan or  Egypt.   She  was  afraid
    about what would happen to the Appellant.

43. In July 2014 the Appellant was contacted on Facebook  by  Muhammad  who
    was asking her how she was and where she was. She had brief contact  on
    the phone with him but did not tell him where she was living.   Shortly
    after  her  contact  with  Muhammad  the  Appellant  started  receiving
    threatening messages on her mobile  telephone.  They  were  from  three
    different numbers that the Appellant did  not  recognise.  The  threats
    were saying things like "do not return home we will kill you" and  that
    she would have acid thrown on  her.  None  of  the  senders  identified
    themselves but the Appellant surmises from  the  speech  patterns  used
    that they were from her father, her father's cousin and from a  distant
    relative on her mother's side, who lives in the village in Egypt.   The
    Appellant was living in Leicester when she received these messages. She
    went to the police and made a report.  The police advised her to change
    her mobile number and she did so.

44. In November 2015 the Appellant  received  a  further  letter  from  her
    mother, who told her that her father has filed a complaint about her at
    the Egyptian Ministry of the Exterior - he has asked for their help  in
    trying to find the Appellant.  A further letter  from  her  mother  was
    received in August 2016, in which she reiterates her fears  about  what
    her husband will do to the Appellant.

45. In respect of whether the Appellant's  father  was  as  strict  as  she
    claims she notes the issues raised by the  Respondent  as  to  why  she
    appears in photographs not wearing a headscarf.  The Appellant explains
    that she objected to wearing the hijab and only ever did so because  he
    forced her to.   He had made her wear it in Egypt between 2008 and 2010
    but she did not like it. This battle caused many problems between them.
    If he caught her not wearing it, for  instance  for  a  photograph,  he
    would viciously assault her, pulling her  hair  from  her  head.  As  a
    result of repeated assaults like this  the  Appellant  suffers  from  a
    bleeding scalp and poor hair growth. She wears a wig.

46. In her oral evidence the Appellant reiterated a claim she  had  earlier
    made in her witness statements, that her  sister  has  been  driven  to
    attempt suicide by their  father's  behaviour,  latterly  including  an
    attempt to force her to marry an old man of his choosing. The Appellant
    became noticeably distressed whilst giving this evidence.

    Medical and Support-Service Evidence

47. The medical  evidence  consists  of  the  following  (in  chronological
    order)[5]:

           .  Discharge  note  dated  6th  April  2012  issued  by   Newham
             University Hospital confirming that the Appellant attended  in
             connection with  injuries  caused  during  a  rape  two  weeks
             earlier. She was treated for a UTI and discharged,  after  the
             police had been called.

           . Letter dated 29th October 2014 from Leicester Partnership  NHS
             Trust 'Open Mind Service'. This confirms  that  the  Appellant
             has been attending the counselling service there since January
             2014. She originally  presented  with  depression,  anger  and
             flashbacks relating to a  rape  that  occurred  in  2012.  The
             difficulties that this has caused with her family  has  caused
             her  additional  anxiety.  She  has  been   prescribed   anti-
             depressants with variable success

           . Letter dated 4th November 2014 from  Beena  Solanki,  Domestic
             Violence Outreach Worker at 'SAFE  Domestic  Violence  Support
             Services". Ms Solanki confirms that the organisation has  been
             supporting the Appellant on a regular basis since August 2014

           . Letter dated 11th December 2014  from  Leicester  City  Assist
             Practice  which  states  that   the   Appellant   has,   since
             registering  with  the  practice  in  April  2013,   given   a
             consistent account of  rape  and  domestic  violence.  She  is
             receiving counselling at the practice as well as from the rape
             charity SAFE

           . Letter dated 3rd March 2015 from Dr N Malik of Leicester  City
             Assist Practice who  writes  to  confirm  that  the  Appellant
             suffers from bleeding scalp and poor hair  growth  related  to
             the fact that her father repeatedly  violently  assaulted  her
             when she was not wearing a hijab. This letter  is  accompanied
             by photographs showing large bald patches on  the  Appellant's
             head

           . Report dated 28th March 2015 from Maria Finch,  CBT  Therapist
             with Leicester Partnership NHS Trust  who  confirms  that  the
             Appellant  had,  as  of  that  date,  had  twelve  counselling
             sessions  with  the  service.  She  had  been  diagnosed  with
             moderate to severe depression and anxiety and had a number  of
             symptoms  associated  with  Post-Traumatic   Stress   Syndrome
             including nightmares and flashbacks related to  her  rape.  Ms
             Finch  records  a  history  of  events  consistent  with  that
             provided by the Appellant in these proceedings.

           . Letter dated 12th September  2016  from  Dr  Susan  Hadley  of
             Assist Inclusion  Healthcare  confirming  that  the  Applicant
             suffers from hair loss. Blood tests  to  exclude  a  treatable
             cause have been negative. The hair loss is significantly worse
             than would be expected for normal hair loss.

    Police Evidence

48. The Appellant has had contact  with  two  British  police  forces,  the
    Metropolitan Police in London, and Leicester Police.

49. The Metropolitan Police notes date from April 2012 when  the  Appellant
    reported being raped. The record shows that the Appellant was asked why
    she had taken "so long" to report the matter. She  explained  that  she
    had been engaged to the suspect for 2 years. Elsewhere it  states  that
    she had met him 2 years  earlier  in  the  street  and  had  started  a
    relationship with him.   It also shows that the Appellant explained  to
    officers that in her country, he  would  be  made  to  marry  her.  The
    Appellant's description of the event is recorded, reading: "Viw1  tried
    to push sus1 off but was unable overpower sus1. Sus1 then inserted  his
    penis into viw1 vagina. Viw1 then told sus1 "you are paining me" I want
    this, I want to be a virgin". Sus1 ejaculated inside viw1 and then told
    her to get dressed".   Given that description, the report's  conclusion
    that the event should be recorded as  "no  crime"  is  striking,  being
    recorded as such because: "the complainant did  not  allow  suspect  to
    penetrate  her  with  his  penis".   This  apparent  contradiction   is
    explained on the last  page  of  the  report,  which  states  that  the
    complainant had made a withdrawal statement, reiterating that she wants
    the perpetrator to marry her.  The officer recording  the  event  makes
    several references to the Appellant's insistence that the  police  find
    him and enforce marriage.

50. Leicester Police have  provided,  under  cover  of  letter  dated  10th
    November 2014, their records relating to the  Appellant.   This  record
    shows that an aggrieved Appellant made a complaint on the  18th  August
    2014 that she had received threats by  way  of  mobile  telephone.  The
    record shows that the Appellant relayed her account of being  raped  by
    MFR and being disowned by the family to the officer who attended.  That
    officer records that the Appellant "appears petrified" and is  sleeping
    with a knife next to her bed.  The officer concludes that  there  is  a
    "high risk of HBV if her family manage to locate her" and arranges  for
    "drive bys" of the property by patrol cars.  She was  advised  to  stop
    using Facebook, to get rid  of  the  mobile  phone  that  she  received
    messages on, and to keep her door locked.  The records  show  that  the
    Appellant received a follow-up visit from a police officer on  the  6th
    November 2014 whose irritation with the Appellant  and  her  "laidback"
    approach to her own  safeguarding  is  apparent  from  his  notes.  The
    Appellant explained that her family were aware of the addresses she had
    stayed at in London but she wanted to  return  there  because  she  had
    friends in London who were supporting her. The  officer  records  being
    "blunt" with her at this point, telling her that if she was  afraid  of
    her family, she should not go to live anywhere that they might be  able
    to trace her. She was advised again to close her Facebook  account,  as
    she had still not done this. The  officer  explained  various  measures
    that the Appellant could take to protect herself,  from  not  answering
    the telephone to changing her name by deed poll.  The officer concludes
    that report:

         "There is a huge concern over the difference in the report given to
         the MET re the alleged rape and  the  information  [the  Appellant]
         provided to me today. I would  accept  slight  differences  in  the
         information however the circs given to myself and the report on the
         PND are significantly different"

    Those discrepancies are identified as being the fact that she had  told
    the MET that she had been engaged to the perpetrator for almost 2 years
    after having met him in the street to ask  for  directions.   This  was
    contrasted  with  the  information  that  she  had  given  officers  in
    Leicester, that he was a man whom her parents had arranged for  her  to
    marry.

51. The notes from Leicester Police show that the Appellant called them  on
    a number of other occasions, including on the 4th  November  2014  when
    she became frightened that she was being followed  by  an  Asian  male.
    The police  reports  contain  'screenshots'  and  translations  of  the
    messages on the phone that  the  Appellant  submitted  as  evidence  of
    having received threats.

    Other Documentary Evidence

52. The Respondent's bundle contains the Arabic original and an uncertified
    and undated English translation of what purports to be  a  letter  from
    the Appellant's mother. In it the writer criticises the  Appellant  for
    her "western" lifestyle and tells her that her father  and  uncles,  in
    both Egypt and Pakistan, have taken vows to kill her  because  she  has
    slept with a man in the United Kingdom. The letter concludes:

         "All of them are waiting for you to come to Egypt to kill you. They
         said [you] should immediately come to Egypt. I sent  you  a  letter
         because your father and your relatives in Egypt have  forbidden  me
         from calling you. I cry every day. I can't  do  anything.  I  can't
         protect you too because you disrespect our religion's  instructions
         and our traditions. God forgive you".

    The envelope that this document is  said  to  have  been  sent  in  was
    submitted to the Home Office with the letter. It shows that the  sender
    has written her name and address on the back.

53. The  Appellant's  most  recent  bundle  contains  two  further  letters
    handwritten in Arabic which are said to have come from her  mother.  In
    one her mother warns her that her father  has  registered  a  complaint
    against her with the Egyptian Ministry of the Exterior  and  asked  for
    their assistance in finding her.    Both  letters  are  accompanied  by
    envelopes showing that they were delivered by DHL having been posted in
    Egypt, one in November 2015. The second letter is addressed directly to
    the Home Office. In it the Appellant's mother pleads that the Appellant
    should not be removed to Egypt. She states that  her  husband  and  his
    relatives want to "wash her  disgrace"  by  killing  her.  Her  husband
    speaks to his relatives in Pakistan and they too are  waiting  for  the
    Appellant.  The writer states that  to  her  knowledge  the  family  in
    Pakistan are very strict. When the Appellant last visited there in 2007
    she was made to wear the "long Pakistani costume  and  cover  her  body
    completely". She was prohibited from leaving the house  and  even  from
    watching television. She had wanted to return to Egypt but  her  father
    would not allow it. The writer said that she  herself  had  encountered
    problems on a visit to Pakistan in 2005 when she  had  been  forced  to
    contact the Egyptian embassy and ask for help because her  husband  had
    taken away her passport and would not return it.

54. The Appellant's most recent bundle contains  some  photographs  of  her
    father. One shows him standing next to  a  man  described  as  being  a
    famous Islamic cleric, another with two men who are said to be  notable
    politicians in Pakistan. A third shows him with a  microphone  attached
    in what appears  to  be  a  minbar.  The  Appellant  states  that  this
    photograph was taken inside the largest mosque in Pakistan.  The bundle
    also contains photographs of the Appellant and a man identified as MFR.

55. The bundle  contains  the  following  documents  relating  to  Pakistan
    national Mr T:

           . His notarised statement dated 2nd September 2016

           . A copy of his Pakistani identity card

           . A copy of his Pakistani passport

           . A letter dated 12th September 2007 from the Pakistani Ministry
             of Education approving the transfer of his studies and stipend
             from al-Azhar to the University of Cairo

           . A letter dated 26th November 2007 from the  Pakistani  Embassy
             in Cairo confirming that Mr T is studying at  the  Faculty  of
             Law, University of Cairo

           . Envelope showing proof of postage from Islamabad  on  the  2nd
             September 2016

           .  Two  photographs  of  groups  of  men,  said  to  depict  the
             appellant's father with Mr T and other members of his family

56. The statement from Mr  T  explains  that  his  family  have  known  the
    Appellant's father for many years. In December 2006 Mr T  travelled  to
    Egypt in order to attend al-Azhar University.  He  struggled  with  the
    tuition  because  of  difficulties  with  the   Arabic   language   and
    transferred to the University of Cairo. He approached  the  Appellant's
    father for assistance. That was when he first met  the  Appellant.   In
    2009 Mr T left Egypt and came to  study  in  the  UK.  He  subsequently
    graduated from  Huddersfield  University.  His  family  wanted  him  to
    continue with his Qur'anic study  so  under  pressure  he  returned  to
    Egypt. He was accommodated by the Appellant's family. He  stayed  there
    for 1 year. He writes:

         "When I was staying with [the Appellant's father] I  came  to  know
         that he is making calls to his cousins in the  UK  that  find  [the
         Appellant] and send her back to Egypt or Pakistan because  she  has
         sexual relation with her boyfriend and I thought [the  Appellant's]
         life is in danger I contacted with my  family  and  told  them  all
         about that's going in [her father's] house.

         My family shouted on me and said that why are you  trying  to  know
         [the Appellant] she is very bad she is against Islam her family  is
         trying to find her and my cousin told me her uncle will kill her if
         he found [her] my family already had knowledge about all happening.

         Later I tried to convince her father but he packed my bag from  his
         house by saying you are also not good and you are  so  open  minded
         its not in Islam we have to kill [the Appellant] as she has had sex
         before marriage its totally forbidden in Islam and not good for  my
         family respect".

57. The Respondent's bundle contains an undated handwritten letter  from  a
    Mr Amir Khan who states that he was formerly a tenant  at  a  specified
    address in East London.  He states that on the 13th March 2012  he  was
    at home when he heard screaming outside of the building. When he looked
    outside he saw the Appellant and her boyfriend. Her boyfriend had  both
    of her hands held with one of his and was slapping her  with  his  free
    hand. She was struggling to break free and her shoe came off.  The  man
    picked one of them up. It looked like he was going to hit her  with  it
    but the Appellant managed to push him away and run into  the  building.
    Mr Khan states that the boyfriend was hitting the Appellant  "like  and
    animal".  He states that "we" [I take this  as  a  reference  to  other
    tenants of the building] asked her to call the police. She  was  crying
    and shaking and asked that they leave her alone. They informed her that
    she was not to let her boyfriend in the building for everyone's safety.
    Mr Khan provides a mobile telephone number.

    Country Background Material: Egypt

58. I  did  not  understand  the  Respondent  to  contest  the  Appellant's
    assertion that "honour" based violence against women occurs  in  Egypt.
    Mr Wilding certainly made no such submission  before  me.  I  therefore
    need not set out in any great detail the expert evidence of  Dr  Rebwar
    Fatah set out in a report dated 23rd July 2015.  It  suffices  to  note
    that Dr Fatah confirms that reported instances  of  such  gender  based
    violence  include  murder,  attempted  murder,  battery,  burning   and
    kidnapping. Other  examples  of  crimes  against  women  include  false
    accusations of insanity. Fatah cites a series of articles published  by
    Robert Fisk in 'The Independent' about the phenomena of "mass suicides"
    by young woman in Egypt, a device used by families to cover up "honour"
    killing.  In respect of the state's willingness and capacity to protect
    women from such crimes Dr Fatah notes the frequent use of Article 17 of
    the Penal Code which is invoked to reduce the sentences of perpetrators
    who plead that "honour" was the  motivation  for  their  crimes.   That
    Article permits reduction in sentence where  the  conditions  that  the
    crime were committed under "necessitate leniency". Although murder is a
    crime that should incur life imprisonment, in reality  perpetrators  of
    "honour" based killing in Egypt can receive sentences as low as two  to
    three years.  Robert Fisk cites a case in which a brother who  murdered
    his sister went to prison for only six months  because  the  judge  was
    concerned that he would have to "live with" the death for the  rest  of
    his life.

59. In respect of the question of internal relocation within Egypt Dr Fatah
    does not believe that there are any legal impediments to the  Appellant
    living on her own away from her family. He cautions however that it  is
    very rare for a young woman to do so, and as such the  Appellant  would
    be  vulnerable  to  "unwanted  attention,  harassment  and  speculation
    amongst others within the community as to their moral standing". Family
    and social networks play a major role in individuals being able to find
    employment and accommodation, so  without  such  support  networks  the
    Appellant would struggle.

60. The bundle contains the Home Office  Operational  Guidance  Note  (OGN)
    dated October 2014 (version 3.1.19). I was directed to paragraph 3.3.15
    which states that there is widespread discrimination towards women  who
    experience endemic sexual  harassment,  including  sexual  assault  and
    rape. It states "inadequate legal provisions and government efforts  to
    protect women from violence, together with a  serious  lack  of  police
    enforcement  severely   compromises   women's   access   to   effective
    protection". It goes on at 3.13.16 to state that whilst some applicants
    may be able to escape persecution by relocating internally,  "it  needs
    to be noted  that  women,  especially  single  women  with  no  support
    network,  are  likely  to  be  vulnerable  and  may  be  subjected   to
    destitution"

61. The Home Office Country Information and Guidance (CIG), dated May 2015,
    Egypt: Background  information,  including  actors  of  protection  and
    internal relocation reads:

         1.2.6 For persons fearing non-state agents,  decision  makers  must
         assess whether effective protection is available in relation to the
         particular circumstances  and  profile  of  the  person.  Any  past
         persecution and past lack of effective protection may indicate that
         effective protection would not be available in the future. The onus
         is on the applicant to demonstrate that  the  security  forces  and
         judiciary would not be willing  and  able  to  provide  protection.
         Women fearing sexual or gender based  violence  may  be  unable  to
         access effective protection.

         [emphasis added].

62. Mr Claire further submitted  that  there  was  a  risk  that  upon  the
    Appellant's arrival in Egypt the authorities would  alert  her  family.
    Although there was no specific evidence on that point he relied on  the
    Appellant's evidence that her father has now reported  her  missing  to
    the Egyptian authorities. He further relied on the CIG:

         1.2.11 Unmarried young women  occasionally  had  to  provide  their
         father's written permission to obtain a  passport  and  to  travel.
         Many women complained about their exposure to sexual harassment and
         assault whilst using public transport.

    Country Background Material: Pakistan

63. The Appellant  relies  on  the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
    Guidance of February 2016 Pakistan: Women fearing gender based  harm  /
    violence (Version 3.0). She relies on the information in this  document
    first to establish that the risk of "honour" based violence exists  for
    women in Pakistan [emphasis added]:

         2.4.10 In the country guidance  case  of  KA  &  others  the  Upper
         Tribunal held that whether a woman on return faces a real  risk  of
         an honour killing will  depend  on  the  particular  circumstances;
         however, in general such a risk is likely to be confined to  tribal
         areas such as Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  and  is  unlikely  to  impact  on
         married women (paragraph iv).  More  recent  information  indicates
         that the risk of honour  killing  in  Pakistan  is  not  restricted
         geographically or

         otherwise. In 2014, Punjab reported 362 cases  of  honour  killings
         compared to 212 in Sindh,  60  in  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and  77  in
         Balochistan. There were also 2 cases of honour killings reported in
         Islamabad.

64. She further submits that there will not be a sufficiency of  protection
    should her Pakistani relatives pursue her:

         2.4.9 The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws  Amendment)  Act  2006
         has introduced significant changes to  the  consideration  of  rape
         cases in the courts; however, the Act  is  poorly  implemented  and
         some police have reportedly been implicated in rape cases  in  some
         instances.  Police  often  perceive  rape  victims  as  immoral  in
         character and  therefore  to  blame,  and  survivors  of  rape  are
         sometimes pressurised into  withdrawing  their  complaint  and  not
         pursuing the matter, or settling out of court.  There  are  reports
         that some women are forced to marry their  attackers.  Prosecutions
         in rape cases are rare and court cases can take years.

         2.4.11 The authorities  may  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide
         protection for  women  fearing  honour  crimes.  The  Criminal  Law
         (Amendment) Act 2004 which recognises  offences  committed  in  the
         name of honour is reported to be flawed and inadequately  enforced.
         The Qisas and Diyat Ordinances continue  to  be  applied  in  cases
         relating   to   'honour'   allowing   perpetrators   to   negotiate
         compensation with the victim's  family  in  exchange  for  dropping
         charges. An

         estimated 70 per cent of perpetrators go  unpunished.  Jirgas  have
         invoked death sentences against women for  honour  related  crimes.
         The police have been reported to be 'complicit'  with  perpetrators
         of honour crimes to avoid filing cases or destroy  evidence.  There
         is limited support for women fearing  honour  crimes  and  security
         breaches have been reported in shelters and  courts,  resulting  in
         the deaths of women.

65. In respect of internal flight in Pakistan the CIG gives  the  following
    guidance:

         Where the person's fear of persecution is at the hands of non-state
         actors decision makers  must  give  careful  consideration  to  the
         relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on  a  case-by-
         case basis taking full account of the individual  circumstances  of
         the particular person.

         2.5.3 In the country guidance case SN & HM (Divorced women- risk on
         return) Pakistan, 25 May 2004, the Tribunal held that the  question
         of internal flight will require careful consideration in each case.
         The Tribunal found (at paragraph 48 of the determination) that  the
         general questions which decision makers should  ask  themselves  in
         cases of this kind are:

          a)  Has the claimant shown a real risk or  reasonable  likelihood
             of continuing hostility from her husband (or  former  husband)
             or his family members such as to raise a real risk of  serious
             harm in her former home;

          b) If yes, has  she  shown  that  she  would  have  no  effective
             protection in her home area against  such  a  risk,  including
             protection available from the Pakistani state,  from  her  own
             family members, or from a current partner or his family?

          c)  If yes would such a risk and lack of protection extend to any
             other part of  Pakistan  to  which  she  could  reasonably  be
             expected to go (Robinson [1977] EWCA Civ 2089 AE and FE [2002]
             UKIAT 036361), having regard to the available  state  support,
             shelters, crisis centres, and family  members  or  friends  in
             other parts of Pakistan?

         2.5.4 In the country guidance case SM (lone women - ostracism) (CG)
         [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC), 2 February  2016,  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
         that:

           - Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
             area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
             may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and educational
             situation of the woman in question (paragraph 73 ii).

           - It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of  relocation  (paragraph  73
             iii).

         -    It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
             or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps
             if a woman has qualifications enabling her  to  get  well-paid
             employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if required
             (paragraph iv).

         -    Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social support
             because she is in an irregular situation, internal  relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will  be
             a question of fact in each case (paragraph v).




    My Findings

66. I remind myself that the standard of proof is lower than that  normally
    applied in civil proceedings.   It is for the Appellant to  demonstrate
    to that lower standard that she has a well-founded fear of  persecution
    in both countries. Although that is a composite question, in this  case
    it can be broken down into a series of distinct considerations.  I will
    first consider the extent to which the Appellant has  established  that
    her historical account is true, and then whether her circumstances give
    rise to a current risk of serious harm in Egypt and Pakistan.

    The Appellant's Account

67. The Appellant has given her account  on  numerous  occasions.  She  had
    twice been interviewed by an immigration officer (on the last  occasion
    for a very long time), she has provided her legal representatives  with
    four witness statements, she has spoken at length to  the  police,  her
    counsellors and GP, and she has given evidence in the course  of  these
    proceedings.   The Respondent has  sought  to  highlight  a  number  of
    discrepancies that have emerged in that evidence over the  three  years
    that the Appellant has been repeatedly setting out her case.  In making
    my findings I have given careful consideration to those matters, and to
    the points made by Mr Wilding in his submissions.   Having done  so,  I
    am satisfied that although there are some inconsistencies, the  account
    has  remained  consistent  at  its  core.  I  am  satisfied  that  such
    discrepancies that have been identified arise through innocent mistake,
    a failing of memory or simply the  perspective  of  the  author.    The
    substantive interview lasted approximately seven hours and  I  pay  due
    regard to the Appellant's submission that over the  course  of  such  a
    long interview she became tired and confused. I have also had regard to
    the medical /support service evidence that is before me. It is apparent
    that the Appellant has been struggling with anxiety and depression  for
    some time, and I bear in mind that this can have an effect on someone's
    ability to accurately report events.

68. Having had regard to all of those factors I am satisfied that  many  of
    the problems identified in the claim are in truth not discrepancies  at
    all. For instance, she is recorded as having told Leicester Police that
    her family disowned her "because they heard about the rape";  that  was
    not, as I understood it, the Appellant's case before me. Whilst she was
    afraid that her family might know, she  could  not  be  sure  that  her
    family had found that out. More likely  her  father  had  simply  drawn
    negative inferences from the information passed  to  him  by  Muhammad.
    Having read the police reports and having  had  a  chance  to  see  the
    Appellant give evidence  myself,  I  observe  a  tendency  for  her  to
    conflate what she knows with what she suspects.

69. Leicester police found there to be  "significant"  differences  in  the
    information the Appellant gave to them, and that which she had given to
    the Metropolitan Police.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  differences
    identified  as  "significant"  by  Leicester  Police  were   in   truth
    discrepancies at all. The officer who made the report  appeared  to  be
    concerned that the Appellant had told the Metropolitan Police that  the
    perpetrator has someone that she had met, formed a  relationship  with,
    and become engaged to over a period of two years, whereas she had  told
    Leicester Police that this was a prospective marriage arranged  by  her
    parents. Having had regard to the overall evidence before me, I do  not
    consider there to be any difference at all, simply a shift in emphasis.
    This was someone whom she had  met,  and  become  engaged  to,  in  the
    context of a marriage "arranged", i.e. approved, by her family.

70. The police reports give rise to another difficulty.  Close  reading  of
    the record show that the Appellant prevaricated  about  the  degree  to
    which she claimed to have been assaulted, and it would appear  that  it
    was this vacillation which resulted in the event being recorded as  "no
    crime".  In the context of the  Appellant's  cultural  background,  and
    what professionals working with victims  of  sexual  assault  term  the
    "profound shame response"  associated  with  rape,  I  am  not  at  all
    surprised  to  see  that  she  balked  at  pressing  charges  once  she
    understood that pursuing this matter was not going to protect her  from
    her family. On the contrary, it would make matters worse. The Appellant
    claims that the officers laughed when she said that in her culture  MFR
    would be expected to marry her; although the  police  record  does  not
    confirm that (for obvious reasons) it is  apparent  that  the  officers
    were struck by her comments, since they are  referred  to  on  numerous
    occasions in  the  police  notes.   Taking  into  account  the  medical
    evidence that the Appellant was  experiencing  depression  and  anxiety
    throughout the time that she was in contact with the two police forces,
    I do not find that her failure  to  clarify  these  matters  should  be
    weighed against her.

71. There is some variation in the dates that the Appellant  has  provided,
    and as she herself says, she appears to have a difficulty in  recalling
    dates accurately.  I attach little weight  to  a  slight  variation  in
    dates, since anyone might struggle to  accurately  remember  dates,  or
    even the order of events that happened a  number  of  years  ago.   For
    instance, the Appellant was at times confused  in  her  evidence  about
    when she changed her mobile telephone number, and at what  exact  point
    she was in contact with her mother.  In the circumstances I do not find
    such confusion surprising.  If  the  Appellant  has  been  through  the
    traumatic events that she describes I would expect  there  to  be  some
    confusion in her memory

72. Overall I am satisfied that the Appellant has been consistent about the
    following core events:  her father subjected her, her mother and sister
    to domestic  violence  when  she  was  growing  up;  she  fell  into  a
    relationship with MFR in the UK;  her family approved  their  marriage;
    MFR raped her; her family have turned on her and threatened her because
    they believe her to have contravened their conservative Islamic  social
    mores.   That consistency at the core of the account is a  matter  that
    weighs in the Appellant's favour.  I have attached  significant  weight
    to this factor.

73. There does not appear to be any dispute between the  parties  that  the
    account is consonant with the country  background  material.  Women  in
    both Egypt and Pakistan are subject to "honour" based violence, and the
    practice of forcing rape victims to marry their  rapists  is  one  that
    sadly remains ingrained  in  many  communities.  That  the  account  is
    generally plausible in the context of the country  background  material
    is a matter that weighs in the Appellant's favour. I have attached some
    weight to this factor.

74. Whilst the Respondent accepts that some men  in  Egyptian  society  (or
    indeed Pakistani) would wish to violently enforce  strict  conservative
    norms on their daughters, she does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's
    father is such a man. In his submissions Mr Wilding asked  me  to  look
    carefully at the chronology. First there is the issue as to  whether  a
    traditional and controlling man would allow his  daughter  to  come  to
    study abroad.  In view of my findings at the 'error of  law'  stage  Mr
    Wilding did not press this point. He acknowledged that people can  have
    different pressures upon them and that in some cases a father's  desire
    to have his daughter educated, and the social status that brings, would
    outweigh his impulse to control her.  Mr Wilding rather focused on  the
    plausibility of the alleged events after the Appellant  initially  came
    to the UK in 2011.  He points out that the Appellant has twice returned
    to Egypt to be met by hostility by her father. In  2010  when  she  had
    completed her English course he assaulted her and spat at  her  because
    he was so furious she  had  disobeyed  him  and  not  stayed  with  his
    cousins. In 2011 he again let her return to the UK even though he  knew
    that there was a man here who wanted to marry her, and  he  was  afraid
    that they would have direct  contact.  Mr  Wilding  submits  that  this
    chronology points to one of two possible truths. Either the Appellant's
    father is not the ruthless murderer that she now claims to fear, or the
    account cannot be true. I  have  given  careful  consideration  to  the
    former suggestion.   If the Appellant has managed to 'talk  him  round'
    on all these previous occasions, the risk is perhaps not  as  great  as
    she portrays it to be. In respect of the latter Mr Wilding asked me  to
    consider whether it was credible that  a  man  such  as  the  Appellant
    describes would allow his daughter to a) come back to the UK after  she
    had  directly  disobeyed  his  instructions  that  she  live  with  her
    relatives and b) when  he  knew  that  her  honour  was  at  risk  from
    potential contact with MFR.  I  have  attached  some  weight  to  these
    points. That the account is arguably  inherently  implausible  in  this
    respect weighs against the Appellant.  It is not however a matter  that
    weighs  heavily  against  her.  That  is  because  there  is  a   third
    possibility, namely that the Appellant's father does not  behave  in  a
    rational  or  consistent  manner.  This  interpretation  receives  some
    support from her  description  of  her  earlier  years,  in  which  she
    specifically said that her father could be kind  and  would  listen  to
    her, but then would be quick to turn angry and be violent  towards  his
    family.

75. The account  is  supported  by  other  evidence.  The  claim  that  the
    Appellant is of mixed Pakistani-Egyptian heritage is supported  by  her
    passports. Her claim  to  have  been  subjected  to  repeated  domestic
    violence is a teenager, specifically being dragged by her hair, derives
    some support from  the  medical  evidence  which  shows  that  she  has
    suffered  from  significant  hair  loss,  for   which   there   is   no
    straightforward  medical  explanation.   The  evidence  concerning  the
    relationship with MFR is supported in a number of ways: Amir Khan,  the
    student in the halls of residence, confirms that he saw  the  Appellant
    being assaulted by this man; the bundle  contains  photographs  of  the
    couple  together;  the  police  reports  confirm  that  a  suspect  was
    investigated for rape.   The rape claim itself is supported by the fact
    that the Appellant did go to the police (exposing herself to  the  risk
    of arrest if the allegation  was  fiction),  that  she  sought  medical
    attention within a few weeks of the alleged event occurring and by  her
    long history of involvement with various support agencies, all of  whom
    confirm her consistent reporting of having been raped in March 2012.

76. The claim that the Appellant is now  estranged  from  her  family,  the
    matter at the heart of the case, is also  generally  supported  by  the
    medical evidence which attests to her ongoing depression  and  anxiety.
    Furthermore, it is directly corroborated by three other sources.  First
    there are the telephone text messages. Mr  Wilding  did  not  make  any
    submissions about these but I have taken into account the obvious point
    that they could have been easily engineered with the  assistance  of  a
    friend or relative in Egypt. The fact that they were taken seriously by
    Leicester Police does not take  the  matter  much  further,  since  the
    officer was simply doing his job. In themselves  the  messages  do  not
    therefore attract much weight.   Second there are the letters from  the
    Appellant's mother. Again, there is an  obvious  criticism  that  these
    letters are easily produced and even if they are from her  mother,  are
    self-serving. Much was made at the First-tier  of  the  fact  that  the
    envelopes  have  a  return  address  on  them,  thereby  exposing   the
    Appellant's mother to risk if for whatever reason they were returned to
    her undelivered. That is a matter I  have  borne  in  mind.  Again,  in
    themselves the letters do not attract a  great  deal  of  weight.   The
    third tranche of evidence is in my view of a different quality. That is
    the evidence of Mr T, the Pakistani student who stayed with the  family
    in Egypt.   His statement attracts greater weight than that purportedly
    sent by the Appellant's mother for a number of reasons.  He  is  not  a
    member of the Appellant's family. He is a distant family friend who has
    no obvious motivation to perjure himself in assisting her to  pursue  a
    false  claim.  He  has  provided  a  detailed  account  which  contains
    additional information - such as his dispute with his own  family  over
    the described events - that give it the ring of truth. He has  provided
    copies of his own identity documents and contact details  so  that  the
    evidence could have been verified at any time.  He  has  also  provided
    documentary evidence which confirms that he was  indeed  a  student  in
    Cairo at the given time. For those reasons I  am  minded  to  attach  a
    significant amount of weight to his evidence. Overall I find  that  the
    corroborative evidence produced lends weight to the Appellant's claim.

77. Having weighed all of that evidence in the round I  am  satisfied  that
    the Appellant has told the truth about the events  over  the  last  few
    years. Although there were some  discrepancies  in  her  evidence,  and
    there were aspects of her account that were arguably implausible, I  am
    satisfied that she has discharged the burden of proof.  The  weight  of
    the evidence established that the core events in her account are  true.
    I find as fact that she was in a relationship with  MFR  and  that  her
    family have discovered that. Whether  he  did  in  fact  rape  her,  or
    whether her family are aware of the details is in  fact  immaterial  to
    the claim. The Appellant has established that she has received  threats
    from her father in Egypt  who  perceives  his  "honour"  to  have  been
    stained by her behaviour.

    Current Risk in Egypt

78. I find as fact that the Appellant has a currently well-founded fear  of
    persecution in Cairo for reasons of  her  membership  of  a  particular
    social group.   The Appellant  believes  without  hesitation  that  her
    father will kill her in order to restore his family name.   Having  had
    regard to the country background evidence, the statement of Mr  T,  the
    consistent evidence of the Appellant and to  some  extent  the  letters
    from her mother, I am satisfied  that  this  threat  is  real.    I  am
    satisfied that it would be highly problematic for the Appellant to  try
    and return to the city. I am satisfied that a  young  woman  trying  to
    live away from her family would very quickly be at risk  of  discovery,
    simply because of the novelty that she would represent.

79. Given the conclusions drawn in the Respondent's own OGN,  and  mirrored
    in the rest of the material I have been given, I am satisfied that  the
    police in Egypt would be unwilling or unable to intervene  in  what  is
    essentially seen as a family matter.

80. I have considered whether it would be possible  for  the  Appellant  to
    move away from Cairo, and to live independently from  her  family.  She
    considered this to be an impossibility.  The  CIG  and  Dr  Fatah  both
    indicate that Egypt has an endemic problem with sexual  harassment  and
    assault. A young woman living on her own would be vulnerable  not  just
    to gossip and social exclusion but to a real risk of unwanted attention
    from sexual predators.  The  Appellant  would  be  living  without  the
    financial support of her family, and this would leave  her  exposed  to
    relying on kindness in return for 'favours'. She would live in constant
    fear of discovery by her father.  I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    would not be able to lead anything like a 'normal' life if she tried to
    live  in  Egypt  alone.  Internal  relocation   would,   in   all   the
    circumstances, be unduly harsh.

    Current Risk in Pakistan

81. Since the Appellant has never lived  in  Pakistan,  I  must  perform  a
    somewhat artificial exercise in assessing the risk to her in her "home"
    area. Mr Wilding agreed that in the circumstances the most sensible way
    to construe that test would be to look  at  the  situation  in  Karachi
    where many of her uncles live and where her father regards  the  family
    home to be. Given my findings on the risk from her father it  does  not
    require any great analysis to conclude that she is equally at risk from
    his brothers, all of whom have apparently supported his stated  aim  of
    killing her.  The suggestion arising from KA that it would be  unlikely
    to find honour based violence outside of the Khyber Pukhtunkhwa is,  it
    seems, no longer reliable given the statistics cited in the recent CIG.



82. The same CIG makes it clear that the Appellant  would  be  unlikely  to
    receive any material support from the police or any other state  agency
    in Pakistan.   I  find  that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.

83. The Appellant does not of course have to  go  to  Karachi.  She  speaks
    English, as do many educated Pakistanis, particularly  in  the  cities.
    She would however face significant disadvantages in trying to  relocate
    within Pakistan away from Karachi. She does not speak  Urdu  or  indeed
    any other Pakistani language and would therefore immediately be  marked
    out as a foreigner. Notwithstanding that  status  she  is  Muslim,  and
    would be readily identifiable as such by people around her.  She  would
    therefore be  expected  to  confirm  with  social  norms  perceived  by
    Pakistanis to be commensurate with her status as a Muslim woman. As  in
    Egypt, this would immediately raise questions about why a young  single
    woman was living on her own away from her family. It is  not  the  norm
    and it would be bound to attract attention. The Appellant would have no
    obvious means of supporting herself. It is difficult to imagine how she
    would possibly manage in a country to which she has no connection  save
    with people who want to kill her.  I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    would run the risk of discovery by her  family,  would  be  subject  to
    societal isolation and possibly the risk of unwanted sexual advances by
    men who misunderstand her situation. She would, as in Egypt, be  living
    with the constant fear of discovery, not an easy matter for someone who
    has already suffered serious psychological difficulties over  a  number
    of years. I am satisfied that it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    Appellant to live alone in Pakistan.




    Decisions

84. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that must be set aside in its entirety.

85. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

         "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

         The Appellant is not entitled to  humanitarian  protection  because
         she is a refugee".

86. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         25th September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Letters dated 29th October 2014 and 28th March 2015 from a CBT
Therapist at the Leicester Partnership NHS Trust, Letter dated 11th
December 2014 from the Leicester City Assist Practice
[2] ibid
[3] Letter dated 4th November 2014 from 'SAFE' Domestic Violence Support
Services for Women and Men in Leicester
[4] I took this to mean that the court did not authorise any further pre-
charge detention
[5] There are other medical reports in the bundles but unfortunately they
are illegible due to poor photocopy quality

