
[pic]
IAC-FH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01496/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 October 2014                         |On 20 November 2014            |
|Prepared 2 November 2014                   |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                    M H T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Messrs Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Iran born  on  5  November  1985,  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Hembrough who in a determination promulgated on 29 April 2014 dismissed
    his appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  made  on  19
    February 2014 to refuse his application for asylum.

2.   The appellant entered Britain on 20 September 2011 and  claimed  asylum
    on arrival.  The basis of his claim to asylum  was  that  he  had  been
    brought up in Tehran where his father owned a motorcycle shop.  He  was
    born into the Muslim faith but no longer believed.  Before leaving Iran
    he had studied for a degree in  mechanical  engineering  where  he  had
    engaged in freelance work setting up and programming computer  networks
    and computer assembly.   He  claimed  that  he  had  been  exempt  from
    military service because of his father's service in  the  revolutionary
    guard in the Iran/Iraq war.  His mother had fled Iran in  2010  fearing
    persecution at the hands of her husband because she had engaged  in  an
    extramarital affair.  Although  refused  asylum  her  appeal  had  been
    allowed and she  was  granted  refugee  status  which  is  valid  until
    September 2016.  The appellant's sister now lives  in  Britain  as  the
    dependant of his mother.

3.   The appellant said that his father  was  a  violent  man  with  extreme
    Islamist views who had often been violent towards him and  his  mother.
    When the appellant's father had found out about his mother's affair  he
    had beaten her but had been restrained by  the  appellant.   He  stated
    that his father was a commander in the local Basij  who  insisted  that
    the appellant join under  his  command.   The  appellant  had  done  so
    manning checkpoints and engaging in raids on  political  and  religious
    dissidents.  He had been told to engage in the torture of detainees but
    had refused and had then been beaten by his  father  and  locked  in  a
    storage room of the family home for two days.  He was then  transferred
    to administrative duties.  During the course of his work  he  had  been
    required to compile and maintain computer  records  for  detainees  and
    suspected dissidents and he claimed that he had undertaken "small  acts
    of defiance and sabotage" making alterations to the records by changing
    addresses and swapping photographs.  If  he  recognised  a  suspect  he
    would warn them that they were under surveillance by calling them  from
    a public phone.

4.   In July 2011 he had been assigned  to  undertake  computer  repairs  at
    Basij bases.  While at one of the  bases  he  was  given  access  to  a
    database and was able to  download  information  about  membership  and
    salaries to a USB with which he hoped to damage the Basij in some way.

5.   While undertaking administrative work at a base  of  which  his  father
    was the commander two suspects were brought in.  He recognised them  as
    fellow students at his university.   They  were  beaten  by  the  Basij
    before being taken for interrogation.  The appellant heard  them  being
    accused of being reporters and spies.  The men's possessions were taken
    from them.  These included a mobile phone, a camera and a laptop.   The
    appellant noted that they were taken by a member  of  the  Basij  to  a
    storeroom on the edge of the building complex and when that  member  of
    the Basij returned the appellant took the  opportunity  to  go  to  the
    storeroom, find the items and  viewed  pictures  on  the  camera  which
    showed Basij beating people.  As he realised that the photographs would
    place the men in danger and they were likely to be sent with the laptop
    and phone for analysis he decided to destroy the  evidence  by  setting
    fire to the  items  using  his  lighter  and  various  flammable  items
    scattered around the storage room including a mullah's robe and various
    books and papers which included a copy of the Koran,  although  he  was
    not aware of that until it was burning.

6.   He then left the base and returned home and told a friend who knew  the
    men who had been picked up that their families  should  be  warned  and
    sensitive information disposed of.  He then went to the home of another
    friend and that friend contacted an agent who made arrangements for the
    appellant to leave Iran.  He crossed the border into Turkey on foot.

7.   Whilst in Turkey he had contacted his sister who had told him that  she
    had been questioned by their father and two plainclothes security force
    officers about his whereabouts and contacts and they had  shown  her  a
    document which authorised them to search the house and his laptop,  CDs
    and other documents had been taken  away.   The  laptop  had  contained
    backup files in relation to the Basij membership and salaries which the
    appellant had taken from the base and notes in relation to books  which
    he had read which were banned in Iran as well as rock music  which  was
    regarded as "devil's music" by the Iranian authorities.

8.   The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  evidence  and  evidence  from  the
    appellant's mother who in cross-examination  stated  that  she  had  no
    direct knowledge of the circumstances giving rise  to  the  appellant's
    claim.  She had had no contact with him after she  left  Iran  in  2010
    until he contacted her from Turkey in 2011 after he had  already  fled.
    The judge stated that she had described  her  husband  as  "a  kind  of
    religious fanatic and supporter of the Islamic regime" and "a  vengeful
    man" and referred to his influence with the  Basij.   She  also  stated
    that her own mother had been asked by her husband about the appellant's
    whereabouts.

9.   The judge set out his findings and reasons in paragraphs 41 onwards  of
    the determination.  He wrote:-

         "41. Before making a determination in this appeal I have considered
             all of the admissible documentation as well as my notes of the
             oral evidence given by  the  Appellant  and  his  mother,  the
             submissions made by both representatives and elements  of  the
             background country information to which reference was made.


         42.  I  take  as  the  starting  point  for  my  consideration  the
             Appellant's mother's claim.  She was found to  be  a  credible
             witness by Immigration Judge Bruce.  Her evidence in so far as
             it is material to this appeal  was  that  her  husband  was  a
             violent and abusive man who was a dedicated supporter  of  the
             Islamic regime.  He was a former  Revolutionary  Guard  and  a
             participant in the  Basij  with  connections  to  the  Iranian
             judiciary.  His brother had been a member of the Sepah.


         43.  In her witness  statements  she  makes  reference  to  several
             incidents when she was  attacked  by  her  husband  that  were
             witnessed by the Appellant  and  in  particular  to  the  last
             incident in 2010  when  her  husband,  having  discovered  her
             affair, would have killed her but for the Appellant's physical
             intervention.  She also confirms that her daughter Maryam  had
             suffered from restricted development and mental health  issues
             since she was a child.


         44.  However when she left Iran both of her children were living in
             the family home and as she accepted in her oral  evidence  she
             had no direct knowledge of the background to  the  Appellant's
             asylum claim and in particular  his  claimed  service  in  the
             Basij.


         45.  As highlighted in the reasons for refusal  letter  there  were
             one or two inconsistencies in the Appellant's account  of  the
             background to his asylum claim as given in interview but  then
             there always are and having regard to the  lower  standard  of
             proof I consider that it is important to look at  the  broader
             picture rather than  focussing  on  minor  points  of  detail.
             However it is in considering the broader picture that  I  find
             the Appellant's account to be lacking in credibility.


         46.  He was nearly 25 years old when his  mother  left  Iran.   His
             evidence was of an antipathetic relationship with  his  father
             involving regular disobedience.  He was a mature adult whom it
             appears was prepared to stand up to his father both physically
             and mentally as evidenced by his intervention when his  father
             was beating his mother having discovered her  affair  and  his
             claims to have read  numerous  books  banned  by  the  Iranian
             regime.


         47.  Despite his father's fanaticism and commitment to the  Islamic
             regime he had not at that stage been forced into service  with
             the Basij even though it might be  considered  that  he  would
             have been more vulnerable to parental pressure in his teens or
             early twenties.  In this regard I note the observations in the
             COIS for Iran that membership of the Basij is often seen as  a
             way of gaining access to a place at university.


         48.  The evidence was that his father was aware that the  Appellant
             held political views contrary to  his  own  and  against  that
             background I do not consider it credible that his father would
             seek, or would be  able,  to  pressurise  the  Appellant  into
             joining the Basij in 2010 or that the Appellant  would  accede
             to such pressure.


         49.  The Appellant has produced no  documentary  evidence  to  show
             that he was ever a member of the Basij.  I reject his evidence
             that he left his ID card at home and that it  has  since  been
             seized.  His evidence was  that  on  15  August  2011  he  was
             working at the Ghaem Basij base and that  he  did  not  return
             home after setting the  fire.   It  is  reasonable  to  assume
             therefore that had this been the case he would  have  been  in
             possession of his ID card which would have  been  required  to
             gain access to the base.


         50.  Given the antipathy that existed between the Appellant and his
             father I do not consider it to be remotely  credible  that  he
             would put him in  position  where  he  would  have  access  to
             sensitive data and would  be  able  to  engage  in  subversive
             activities prejudicial to the security of the  Basij  and  the
             Islamic regime.  Nor do I consider  it  credible  that  having
             been pressurised  into  joining  the  Basij  he  would  openly
             express political views in opposition to the Basij and Islamic
             regime as he claims.


         51.  I found his account of his attempted destruction of the phone,
             camera and laptop allegedly  taken  from  his  friends  to  be
             wholly implausible.  I do  not  find  it  credible  that  such
             sensitive materials would  be  left  in  the  open  unguarded.
             Moreover this is a man with a background in IT.  His  evidence
             was that he has worked freelance in computer assembly.   I  do
             not find it remotely  credible  that  if  he  was  seeking  to
             destroy data on the devices named he  would  not  simply  have
             removed the SIM and SD memory cards and the hard drive on  the
             laptop.  This would have taken seconds.  They could have  been
             smashed or dropped down the nearest drain.  Instead he  claims
             to have started a fire with all  of  the  attendant  risks  of
             discovery with the aim  of  burning  devices  which  were  not
             obviously combustible and without  the  use  of  any  form  of
             accelerant throwing onto the pile for good measure a  Mullah's
             robe and a copy of the Quran.  Anyone who has  tried  to  burn
             clothing or a book will know that it takes a very long time to
             catch fire.  I did not find him at all credible when  he  said
             that he considered the risk in starting a fire to be less than
             that of being stopped in possession of the memory cards.


         52.   I  reject  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant's   home   was
             subsequently searched by members of the security services  and
             that incriminating materials  were  discovered.   It  was  not
             explained why, if his father was a Commander in the Basij,  it
             would be necessary for the  authorities  to  obtain  a  search
             warrant.  Surely he would simply  have  invited  them  in  and
             yielded up the relevant materials.


         53.  Looking at the evidence in the round even having regard to the
             lower standard of proof I find that I have not been  satisfied
             that the Appellant was ever a member of the Basij or  that  he
             engaged in  the  subversive  acts  he  has  described  or  any
             subversive  acts  or  that  he  is  wanted  by   the   Iranian
             authorities.  Whilst his mother's evidence was that his father
             had made enquiries of her own mother  as  to  the  Appellant's
             whereabouts I consider  that  this  is  nothing  more  than  a
             natural consequence of his unexplained disappearance.


         54.  I suspect that what had happened is that his  mother's  flight
             from Iran caused a  further  deterioration  in  the  relations
             between the  Appellant  and  his  father,  who  perceived  the
             Appellant to have taken her part, and that this is what caused
             him to leave Iran and join his mother in the UK.  Although the
             oral evidence was  that  there  had  been  no  direct  contact
             between the Appellant and his mother after she left Iran it is
             clear  from  her  witness  statement  dated  3  February  2011
             (paragraph 53) that they had indirect contact via her brother.


         55.  Although it appears that the Appellant exited Iran illegally I
             do not consider that any of risk factors set out SB  (risk  on
             return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 are present in
             this appeal.  In particular I have considered whether there is
             a real risk that he  may  be  denounced  by  his  father  upon
             return.  However given the long history of  antipathy  between
             the two, the fact that he was  not  denounced  by  his  father
             whilst living in Iran and his oral evidence  that  his  father
             was unaware of his anti-Islamic views I find that I  have  not
             been satisfied that there is a real risk that he would accused
             of anti-Islamic activity upon return.


         56.  Similarly I have not been satisfied that there exists  a  real
             risk of the Appellant suffering serious harm at the  hands  of
             his father.  Although I have accepted the  evidence  that  his
             father was a violent and abusive man, time has moved on.   The
             Appellant is now 28 years  old  and  for  the  reason  I  have
             identified at paragraph 46 above I am satisfied is  more  than
             capable of looking after himself and of  living  independently
             of his father and exercising his right of free movement within
             Iran.


         57.  In summary having regard to all of the evidence  before  me  I
             find that I have not been satisfied on the lower  standard  of
             proof applicable that  this  Appellant  has  established  that
             there is a real risk or a reasonable degree of likelihood that
             he will suffer persecution in Iran  for  one  of  the  reasons
             cited in the 1951 Convention or that he would face a real risk
             of suffering serious harm by reason of being returned there."

10.  The appellant appealed but permission was refused  in  the  First-tier.
    The application was renewed in the Upper Tribunal and on 24  June  2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission.

11.  The grounds asserted that the judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant was not a member of the Basij and that that finding was based
    on a reason which was not open to him which was that the appellant  had
    failed to produce any documentary evidence to show that he was  ever  a
    member of the Basij and that had he been a member of the Basij he would
    have had a Basij ID card and would have had that at  the  time  of  the
    incident at the Basij base and would therefore have been able to  bring
    it  to  Britain.   It  was  claimed  that  the  judge   was   requiring
    corroboration and that that was an error of law.  It was  also  pointed
    out that that reason was not  given  in  the  letter  setting  out  the
    respondent's reasons for refusing the claim.

12.  The second ground argued that the judge  was  wrong  to  say  that  the
    storeroom would not have been left unlocked stating that in  any  event
    it was a storeroom within the secure Basij base but the judge was wrong
    to find that there could not plausibly ever be security lapses  by  any
    organisations such as the Basij.

13.  The third ground alleged  that  the  judge  had  merely  speculated  in
    stating that what had happened had merely been a deterioration  in  the
    relations between the father and the appellant  after  his  mother  had
    left Iran.  In any event it was stated that it  was  not  a  matter  of
    speculation that the appellant's father was a  violent  and  intolerant
    man  who  had  attempted  to  kill  or  at  least  seriously  harm  the
    appellant's mother on account of the  discovery  of  an  affair.   That
    being an unchallenged starting point it was not, it was argued, open to
    the judge to assert that there was no risk that the  father  would  use
    his power and influence to adverse effect against the appellant were he
    to return.  It was claimed that the appellant  would  therefore  be  in
    danger from his father.

14.  When granting permission to appeal Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  stated
    that:-

         "Having read the determination of the  FtTJ,  I  find,  just,  that
         there may be something in the issue concerning the Basij  card  not
         having been put to the appellant at any point and so not  having  a
         chance to address it.


         It may also be, of course, that after  hearing  submissions  a  UTJ
         concludes that even if he did not this  was  not  material  to  the
         decision and that the other grounds have no merit but I  find  that
         the grounds are arguable."

15.  At the hearing of the appeal  before  me  Mr  Hodson  referred  to  the
    grounds of appeal arguing  that  there  would  be  no  reason  for  the
    appellant to have had his identity card on the base and that the  Basij
    bases would not be places where it would invariably be  the  case  that
    every door would be locked.  The Basij were  a  voluntary  paramilitary
    group  without  formal  guidance  and  therefore  there  would  be   no
    requirement for the appellant to have had the identity card with him at
    all times.

16.   He  referred  to  the  appellant's  witness  statement  and   to   the
    appellant's mother's witness statement although it was noted  that  she
    had only referred to the appellant's father  being  involved  with  the
    Basij and not being in any way a leader of a  group.   He  pointed  out
    that the appellant's statement had stated that his father was a "senior
    member, a 'commander', of the local Basij".  I asked Mr Hodson what the
    appellant's mother had said  about  her  husband  and  he  referred  to
    paragraph 39 of the appellant's mother's statement  in  which  she  had
    said:

         "My husband used to participate with the Basij committed (sic)  and
         revolutionary guard and one of his friend's  (sic)  from  this  was
         friends with the judge in the court."

17.  Mr Hodson went on to say that it was not  clear  that  Judge  Hembrough
    had taken the view that the appellant's father was not a member of  the
    Basij but had merely considered that the appellant would not have  been
    forced to join.  He noted  that  it  was  argued  from  the  background
    evidence that joining the Basij was something which people would do  at
    an earlier stage of their lives -  possibly  as  a  means  of  securing
    university entrance but  he  referred  to  the  appellant's  answer  to
    question 87 of the interview when the appellant had been  asked  if  he
    had had to undergo any form of training  to  become  a  member  of  the
    Basij.  The appellant replied:-

         "No.  From childhood my father sent me to  camping  and  learn  the
         holy book and I grew up in this atmosphere."

18.  He asserted that the  judge  had  merely  made  assumptions  about  the
    appellant and his father and that various issues  on  which  the  judge
    relied had not been raised in the refusal letter and therefore had  not
    been dealt with in the appellant's appeal statement.  In any  event  he
    pointed out that the appellant had stated that there had been a raid on
    his home and all the documents had been taken  away  and  therefore  he
    would not have been able to produce an identity card in any event.

19.  In reply Mr Nath referred to the Rule 24  statement  in  which  it  was
    submitted that the judge reached findings which were entirely  open  to
    him that if the appellant had been a serving member  of  the  Basij  he
    would have possessed an identity card and it was open to the  judge  in
    any event to conclude that the appellant's claim to have left the  card
    at home was not credible.  The notice stated that the burden  of  proof
    lay on the appellant and it was for him to discharge and  that  he  had
    not done so.  The grounds merely amounted to a  disagreement  with  the
    way in which the judge had approached the evidence and he  argued  that
    the adverse credibility findings were fully open to the judge.

20.  Mr Nath went on to refer to the refusal of  permission  in  the  First-
    tier in which Judge Zucker had stated that:

         "The determination is to be read as a whole.  Rather  than  looking
         for corroboration the judge in  reality  rejected  the  appellant's
         evidence to the effect that he was not required to carry ID and  it
         follows from what followed in the  appellant's  narrative  that  he
         could not have left the ID at home as he  contended.   That  was  a
         finding open to the judge.  The grounds taken as a whole amount  to
         no more than a disagreement with the findings  of  the  judge  who,
         having applied the correct standard, simply  did  not  believe  the
         appellant's account for reasons which were adequately set out."

21.  He asked me to find that the assessment of the judge was fair and  that
    he had reached conclusions which were  properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

22.  In  reply  Mr  Hodson  stated  that  the  grounds  were  not  merely  a
    disagreement.   There  were  findings  which  were  little  more   than
    speculation.

Discussion

23.  I have considered the determination in the  light  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal and submissions to me.  I note that the judge correctly set  out
    the relevant burden and standard of proof and that he did consider  the
    subjective evidence and background country information before him.   He
    set out in considerable detail the basis of the appellant's  claim  and
    took into account  what  the  appellant's  mother  had  stated  in  her
    evidence before the First-tier Judge who had allowed  her  appeal.   He
    accepted that her evidence had been that the appellant's father  was  a
    violent and abusive man who was a dedicated supporter  of  the  Islamic
    regime.  He was a participant in the Basij.  He pointed  out  that  his
    mother had said that she had no direct knowledge of the  background  to
    the appellant's asylum claim or his claimed service in the Basij.

24.  The judge properly gave himself the self-direction  (in  paragraph  45)
    that one or two inconsistencies were not relevant and it was  necessary
    to have to consider the broad picture.

25.  In paragraph 46 he noted that the appellant had stood up to his  father
    when his father had attacked his mother.  He had read books  banned  by
    the Iranian regime and that he had not been forced to  join  the  Basij
    until after his mother had left the country.   By  that  stage  he  was
    nearly 25.  The judge took the view that those  sets  of  circumstances
    made it unlikely that the father would force the appellant to join  the
    Basij or that the appellant would agree to do so.  That is, I consider,
    a conclusion which was open to  the  judge.   The  background  evidence
    indicates that those who join the Basij join it at a much  earlier  age
    and that they do so because that is what they wish to do or  that  they
    feel that it would be of use to them.

26.  The judge followed on  that  observation  with  the  comment  that  the
    appellant could not prove by the production of  an  identity  card  his
    involvement with the Basij.  While  I  accept  the  argument  that  the
    appellant might not have had to carry his identity card around with him
    as presumably everybody on the base would know who he was  if  he  were
    indeed a member or working for the  Basij  that  finding  does  not,  I
    consider, undermine the judge's findings that the appellant would  have
    been unlikely to have been a member of the Basij.  The judge goes on to
    state that given that antipathy existed between the appellant  and  his
    father he did not consider it remotely credible that he would have been
    put in a position where he would have  access  to  sensitive  data  and
    would be able to engage in subversive  activities.   Again  I  consider
    that that conclusion was open to him.

27.   In  paragraph  51  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant's  attempted
    destruction of the phone, camera  and  laptop.   He  did  not  find  it
    credible that such sensitive  materials  would  be  left  unguarded  or
    indeed find it "remotely credible" that if the appellant was seeking to
    destroy data on the devices he would not simply have  removed  the  SIM
    and SD memory cards and hard drive and the  laptop.   That  would  have
    taken seconds.

28.  I consider that that conclusion was one which was  fully  open  to  the
    judge to make.  Given the appellant's background in IT he would  surely
    have been able to remove incriminating information  without  the,  less
    effective, method of setting fire in a storeroom which would be  likely
    to be noted and put out and particularly that the  appellant  would  be
    unlikely to have used a mullah's robe and a Koran.

29.  Similarly I consider that the judge gave sensible reasons  for  finding
    that there would not need to be any warrant  for  the  entry  into  the
    appellant's home.

30.  I consider that the conclusions  of  the  judge  in  paragraph  53  are
    entirely open to him.  It is the duty  of  the  judge  to  decide  what
    evidence he believes  and  what  he  does  not.   This  duty  has  been
    fulfilled by the judge, who made it clear why he did  not  believe  the
    appellant's evidence.  It is not for the judge to produce  evidence  on
    which to base his findings that there is a lack of credibility  in  the
    evidence of the appellant: it is for the  appellant  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof - that burden is on the appellant.

31.  The Judge had taken  into  account  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    mother and, of course, was entitled to place weight on  the  fact  that
    she had no direct knowledge of the  appellant's  involvement  with  the
    Basij and to point out that there had been  some  contact  between  the
    appellant and his mother through his uncle. Moreover,  the  appellant's
    mother's statement makes no reference to her husband being a  commander
    in the local Basij.

32.  The Judge was further correct to point out that the appellant,  who  is
    now 28, was not at risk of  ill-treatment  from  his  father  and  that
    indeed internal relocation would be open to  him.   Again  he  properly
    considered the issue  of  risk  on  return  in  paragraph  54  and  his
    conclusions were was again open to him.

33. I therefore consider that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and conclude that
    his decision dismissing this appeal on asylum grounds and  indeed  also
    on human rights grounds shall stand.

34. I have considered it appropriate to make the  anonymity  direction  set
    out below.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


