
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01214/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision&Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd December 2015                    |On 18th May 2016             |
|                                         |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Short instructed by Rahman & Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of any doubt,  that  order  continues.   The  appellant  is
       granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction
       applies both to the appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Failure  to
       comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought
       for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Morris promulgated on 22nd  July  2015  in  which  she
       dismissed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State
       on 7th February 2014, to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and  to
       remove the appellant from the UK.  At the time  of  the  respondent's
       decision of 7th February 2014, the appellant had one dependent child,
       a daughter born on 19th November 2009.  By the time  of  the  hearing
       before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morris,  the  appellant  had  given
       birth to her second daughter on 26th February 2015.


    3. The proceedings have a considerable history which is referred  to  at
       paragraphs [3] to [5] of the Judge's decision  and  which  I  do  not
       repeat here.


    4. The appellant's claim for refugee status has two facets to it. First,
       the appellant fears return to Mali because her  parents  were  killed
       and she was made to do household chores and forced into  marriage  by
       an uncle, and raped.  Her aunt tried to help in 2007 by  sending  her
       to Senegal but she was taken back, by  her  uncle  who  arranged  her
       marriage.  She went to France, again with the assistance of her  aunt
       but she again returned to Mali.  She was then  forced  into  marriage
       before her aunt could make arrangements for her  to  leave,  but  her
       aunt arranged for her departure  to  the  United  Kingdom  after  the
       appellant had sent her a message via someone she met at a  bus  stop.




    5. Second, the appellant would  be  at  risk  of  suffering  persecutory
       treatment either directly or indirectly as a result of her two female
       children being subject to FGM.  This second aspect of the appellant's
       claim was first  raised  by  the  appellant  after  the  respondent's
       decision of 7th February 2014 in preparation for  her  appeal  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  for
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal set out the background and
       state:


             "3.  The Appellant's  appeal  was  first  listed  for  hearing
             before the FIT on 13 June 2013. That  hearing  was  adjourned,
             because the Appellant had in the preparation of her appeal put
             forward the risk  of  FGM  to  her  daughter  as  a  new  risk
             category. The SSHD had not considered  this  as  part  of  her
             asylum decision, and the matter was adjourned on agreement  of
             both parties in order for her to consider this issue.

             4.   The matter was then re-listed for 8 October 2014, and the
             appeal was heard by FTTJ Majid on that date. The SSHD had  not
             reconsidered the case and  had  not  issued  any  new  reasons
             letter dealing with the FGM issue. This issue  was  raised  on
             behalf of the Appellant at the hearing, but no application  to
             adjourn was pursued.

             ....

          6. At the outset of the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant raised
             as a preliminary issue the fact that the SSHD  had  still  not
             provided  the  Appellant  with  any  notification  as  to  her
             position regarding the risk of FGM to what is now both of  the
             Appellant's daughters. It was at that point that  FITJ  Morris
             queried whether the matter was properly before  the  Tribunal,
             as this issue was not expressly mentioned in  the  Grounds  of
             Appeal, as drafted in 2014.  Counsel for the Appellant pointed
             out that this point had not previously been raised  in  either
             the adjourned or full hearings before the FIT, but nonetheless
             formally applied to amend the Grounds of  Appeal.   Permission
             to do so was granted, as recorded in the determination.

          7. The gravamen of this situation is that the Appellant  did  not
             know before the start of the hearing what was the Respondent's
             position with regards to this aspect of her claim.

 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris


    6. The Judge set  out  the  background  to  the  appeal  before  her  at
       paragraphs [3] and [4] of her decision.  At paragraph  [7]  she  sets
       out, in broad terms, the appellant's claim:


             "7.      As can be seen from the matters I have set out above,
             the Appellant's core claim was the treatment she  alleged  she
             had received from her uncle and her husband. In  the  Skeleton
             Argument  the  Appellant  had  raised  the   issues   of   the
             Respondent's tracing obligations on the basis that her date of
             birth was 15 June 1992  and  also  the  risk  of  FGM  to  the
             Appellant's daughters who were born on 19 November 2009 and 26
             February 2015."

    7. At paragraphs [8] to [18] of her decision, the  Judge  sets  out,  in
       broad terms, the matters referred to by the respondent in the reasons
       for refusal letter of 7th February 2014.  At paragraphs [19] to  [25]
       she refers to the hearing and the evidence  that  she  received.   At
       paragraph [20] the Judge refers to the issue of the  appellant's  age
       and goes on, importantly, at paragraphs [20] and [21] to  record  the
       following:


             "20. .....I then sought confirmation as to whether or not  the
             issue of FGM is before the  Tribunal.   Miss  Pountney  stated
             that it was not without any application to amend  the  grounds
             of appeal.  Miss King then stated that she sought to amend the
             grounds of appeal to include FGM and the precise  wording  she
             sought was:

                  "That  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of   suffering
                  persecutory treatment either directly or indirectly  as  a
                  result of her two female children being subject to FGM."

         21. Miss Pountney did not object to the application to  amend  the
             grounds of appeal and on the basis  that  there  had  been  no
             objection to the application to amend I allowed the  amendment
             to the grounds of appeal as set out.

    8. The Judge records at paragraph [22] that following the exchange  that
       is  recorded  above,  the  appellant  resumed  her  evidence  and  at
       paragraphs [23] to [25] of the decision, that evidence  is  set  out.
       The Judge records the submissions made by Miss Poutney on  behalf  of
       the respondent at paragraph [26] of the  decision.   Insofar  as  the
       issue of FGM is concerned, the Judge records:


             "26. ....When dealing  with  the  amended  grounds  of  appeal
             concerning FGM Miss Pountney submitted that there is  no  case
             law in the United Kingdom of FGM  in  Mali  and  the  Skeleton
             Argument submitted  relies  upon  details  for  Sierra  Leone.
             Miss Pountney submitted that such matters are not relevant  to
             Mali. There is no objective evidence as to the extent  of  FGM
             in Mali.  She referred to the expert report  of  Dr  Rodet  at
             pages  7-19  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.  She  referred,  in
             particular, to page 12 and said that the expert is not  giving
             evidence of her own knowledge and relies on  a  French  report
             which was accessed in May 2014.   There is no  information  to
             show when such report was made or the  methodology  used  etc.
             Such is not sufficient to make findings  about  FGM  in  Mali.
             The Respondent acknowledges a US report in 2013  that  FGM  in
             Mali is not criminalised.    She submitted that the  documents
             provided at the hearing by Miss King echo the fact that FGM is
             not criminalised. The document  provided  at  the  hearing  on
             behalf of the Respondent shows that there  are  efforts  being
             made to see that the practice is  discontinued  and  that  one
             thousand villages show that efforts are being  made  to  stamp
             out the practice....."

    9. At paragraph [27], the Judge sets out the submissions  made  by  Miss
       King on behalf of the appellant:


             "27. Miss King relied upon her Skeleton Argument  as  amended.
             She said that the starting point is credibility and such  does
             affect the protection claim on asylum and Article 8. The issue
             on FGM does largely stand alone  from  a  full  assessment  on
             credibility.  She  submitted  that  I  should  look   at   the
             circumstances to which the Appellant would be returning.   She
             said that the Respondent's  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's
             account has continuously changed is not a fair  or  reasonable
             assessment if the evidence  is  looked  at  as  a  whole.  The
             Appellant's difficulties cover an eight year  time  span  from
             2007 to 2015.   The Appellant's difficulties with her uncle in
             2007 was the first occasion when her aunt had facilitated  her
             exit.  On that occasion it was to Senegal but  on  the  second
             occasion it was to France and on the third occasion it was  to
             the United Kingdom.   Miss King submitted that aside from  the
             Appellant's failure to declare that she had been to France her
             account has  been  remarkably  consistent.  The  core  of  her
             account is that her parents were killed; she  lived  with  her
             uncle Solo; she was made to  do  household  chores;  her  aunt
             tried to help in 2007 by sending her to Senegal; she was taken
             back by Uncle Solo; he arranged  her  marriage;  she  went  to
             France with the assistance of her aunt; she returned to  Mali;
             she was forced  into  marriage  before  her  aunt  could  make
             arrangements for her to leave and her aunt  arranged  for  her
             departure to the United Kingdom after the Appellant  had  sent
             her a message via someone she met at the bus stop.    She then
             referred to the age assessment which was  carried  out  on  17
             August 2009 and she accepted that in that  assessment  cutting
             was  not  mentioned  at  all.  At  this  point  Miss  Pountney
             interjected to confirm that the Respondent did not accept that
             the Appellant has undergone FGM and that her credibility is in
             doubt, the extent of cutting in Mali is in dispute  and  there
             is no medical evidence in relation to the Appellant.  I  asked
             Miss King if there were any medical records  relating  to  the
             Appellant and she replied that there  were  not.  I  asked  if
             there were any obstetric records available since those may  be
             of assistance when considering FGM given  that  the  Appellant
             has now given birth to two children.  Miss King repeated  that
             there were no medical records  available  for  the  Appellant.
             She continued her submissions by stating  that  from  the  age
             assessment the Appellant's account for leaving  Mali  and  her
             history is consistent. She referred me to various passages  in
             the age assessment and she said that it would take  a  lot  to
             "hoodwink" an experienced social worker.   She said  that  the
             answers given by the Appellant to questions 68 and 69  in  the
             Asylum Interview dated 29 June 2011 were subject to  a  letter
             from the Appellant's solicitors dated 6  July  2011  in  which
             they had tried to correct the answers given  at  question  68.
             She accepted that the evidence in the Appellant's  application
             made in 2007 for  a  visa  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  is
             inconsistent  with   the   Appellant's   subsequent   evidence
             concerning the death of her parents, but  she  submitted  that
             such is consistent  with  the  Appellant's  account  that  she
             wanted to get out of Mali. When refusing  the  application  in
             2007 the Respondent had said that the applicant's  application
             was not truthful and the appellant now agrees that it was  not
             truthful. She submitted that there is sufficient  evidence  to
             find on a low standard  that  the  events  did  occur  as  the
             Appellant alleges. She continued her  submissions  by  stating
             that the Appellant would face reprisals from her uncle or  her
             husband on return and she referred me  to  paragraphs  in  the
             report by Dr Rodet.   She submitted that the expert report  is
             consistent with other background information.  The expert  has
             demonstrated that her  report  is  prepared  after  conducting
             research and her evidence to the Tribunal  that  this  is  the
             situation in Mali can  be  accepted  without  going  into  the
             minutiae of exactly what her report says. She  summed  up  the
             submissions she had made thus far by saying that the Appellant
             is credible; she would be at risk if returned to her home area
             from her husband and uncle; her aunt  would  not  be  able  to
             provide protection and there is  no  state  assistance.     It
             would  be  unduly   harsh   to   relocate   due   to   general
             discrimination against women and the lack of support. There is
             a real risk that the Appellant and her children  will  end  up
             destitute or in a situation of exploitation. The two  children
             also need to access healthcare for sickle cell and that  is  a
             further factor on reasonableness.    When dealing with FGM she
             submitted that there is sufficient evidence that it is endemic
             throughout Mali and although there have been some  efforts  by
             NGOs to combat it it is still a  real  likelihood.  There  are
             societal pressures which the Appellant would not  be  able  to
             resist.  She continued by submitting that the Appellant  would
             be a lone female without family support. Such matters could be
             considered separately to the forced marriage point. Given  the
             passage of time there is real risk that  the  Appellant  would
             return to a country where she would not have  family  support.
             She  submitted  that  when  I  make  a  decision  as  to   the
             Appellant's age I should take account of the fact that 1992 is
             on her Home Office card and that the date  of  birth  did  not
             seem to be an important aspect to  the  Respondent.  She  said
             that it is a matter for the Tribunal to decide the Appellant's
             age but where there is room for doubt the earlier  age  should
             be accepted. That has two main factors on Article  8:  if  she
             was a minor she should never have been  considered  under  the
             Dublin Convention and if she was a minor tracing was relevant.
             Miss King accepted that  the  children's  sickle  cell  cannot
             reach the threshold for Article 3. She went on to submit  that
             part of  private  life  under  Article  8  is  healthcare  and
             particularly the suffering the children  would  face  if  they
             were to be returned.    Both children have the same condition.
             She said that the cumulative factors show that it  is  in  the
             children's best interest to remain in the United Kingdom.  She
             concluded by making submissions in relation to Section 117A of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and said that
             the delay in deciding the Appellant's claim has not  been  her
             fault."

   10. The Judge's conclusions are set out at paragraphs [28] to [59] of her
       decision.  At paragraphs [31] and [32], the Judge deals with the  age
       of the appellant and finds that her date of birth is 15th June 1991.


   11. At paragraph [33], the Judge states:


             "33. By reason of the matters set out above and below  I  find
             the Appellant's evidence to  be  inconsistent,  contradictory,
             not credible and unpersuasive such that I do  not  accept  her
             story."

   12. At paragraphs [34] to [40] of her decision, the Judge  sets  out  the
       inconsistencies in the appellant's account relating to  her  previous
       travel to Senegal and France.  The  Judge  carefully  considered  the
       evidence of the appellant and concluded  that  the  inconsistent  and
       contradictory evidence of the appellant  undermines  her  credibility
       and the credibility of her case.  At paragraph [42] the Judge finds:


             "42. By reason of all the matters set out in this decision and
             taking the evidence as a whole, as  I  do,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has not established to the  low  standard  that  her
             parents are dead; that she was a victim of domestic  abuse  by
             her uncle; that she was the victim of domestic violence by her
             husband; that she was forced into marriage by  her  uncle  and
             raped by her husband or that she is at risk from any person in
             Mali.  I further find that  she  has  not  shown  to  the  low
             standard that she has no contact with her family in Mali.  Not
             only do I refer to the matters  set  out  above  but,  in  the
             Appellant's own evidence, she was  helped  to  leave  Mali  on
             three occasions by her aunt but  on  each  occasion  when  she
             returned in 2007 and 2008 she remained in  contact  with  that
             aunt. In contrast, she now states that since  her  arrival  in
             the United Kingdom in August 2009 she  has  lost  all  contact
             with that aunt and  she  would  not  be  able  to  assist  the
             Appellant because she is now an adult.   For all  the  reasons
             set out in this decision I reject that."

   13. The Judge went on at paragraph [43] of her decision to find  that  it
       is in the best interests of both of the  appellant's  daughters  that
       they should continue to be cared for by their  mother.     She  found
       that if the appellant is removed to Mali the children  will  go  with
       her.  The Judge noted that the youngest child was only  4  months  of
       age and is entirely dependent upon her  mother  for  her  care.   The
       eldest child was now 5 years of age and any move to  another  country
       would require her to adapt to that new  country,  but  there  was  no
       evidence before the Judge to show that she would not be able to do so
       with the help and support of her mother.


   14. The Judge turned to the issue of FGM and stated at paragraphs [44] to
       [46] of her decision:


             "44. The Appellant has raised the issue of FGM in  respect  of
             her two daughters. It is for  his  reason  that  an  anonymity
             direction has been made in this case. The Respondent does  not
             accept that the Appellant has undergone  cutting  herself  and
             there is no medical evidence before me to show that  she  has.
             As I have already set out at the beginning of  this  decision,
             there were no medical records or obstetric  records  available
             which would have assisted with such  matter.  Further,  during
             the  course  of  the  various  interviews  the  Appellant  has
             undertaken since her arrival in 2009 she has never stated that
             she was the subject of FGM.  On 29 June 2011 the Appellant was
             asked, at question 163, "Apart from  what  you  have  told  me
             today did anything else happen to you in Mali?" In response to
             that question the Appellant said that she?was pregnant but she
             did not mention FGM.   Likewise, at question 166 she was asked
             "Did anything else happen to you?" to which she replied "No".

             45.  By reason of all the matters set out above  I  find  that
             the Appellant has not shown to the low standard that  she  has
             been subject to FGM.

             46.  It is accepted by both representatives that there  is  no
             specific case law as to FGM in Mali.  The  Respondent  and  Dr
             Rodet agree that FGM is not criminalised in Mali.  Dr  Rodet's
             report is based on the Appellant's assertion that she was  cut
             as a young girl.  Dr  Rodet  then  goes  on  to  consider  the
             situation of the Appellant's  in-laws  or  her  own  relatives
             carrying out the procedure. By reason of  all  the  matters  I
             have set out above I find that the Appellant has not shown  to
             the low standard that her children are  at  risk  of  cutting;
             that she could not prevent them being cut or that  they  would
             return to an area where the children would be at risk."

The Appeal before me


   15. The grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant are twofold.   First,
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give  any,  or  any  adequate
       reasons for rejecting the core of the appellant's claim,  namely  the
       death of her parents, the abuse by her uncle, the forced marriage and
       her aunt's attempts  to  help  her.   Second,  the  Judge  failed  to
       properly assess, with anxious scrutiny, the risk to the appellant and
       her daughters upon return to Mali, with regard to the FGM claim.  The
       appellant submits that she was disadvantaged at the  hearing  of  the
       appeal because  of  the  respondent's  failure,  despite  a  previous
       adjournment so that the respondent could consider that aspect of  the
       claim, to properly set out the  respondent's  position  so  that  the
       appellant knew the case that she had to meet on appeal.


   16. The appellant states in the  Grounds  of  appeal  that  she  has  now
       obtained confirmation from her GP that she has been subject to an FGM
       procedure.    She seeks permission to  rely  upon  this  evidence  to
       demonstrate that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material  error
       of fact in assessing the appellant's claim on the basis that she  had
       not been cut.


   17. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 21st
       September 2015.  He noted that a copy of the GP report had  not  been
       provided with the grounds, but that if the Judge did make  a  mistake
       of fact, this may have been material to the FGM aspect of the appeal.


   18. At the hearing before  me,  Ms  Short  relied  upon  the  appellant's
       grounds of appeal and reminded me of  the  procedural  history.   She
       submits that it was not until the closing  submissions  made  by  the
       appellant, that the respondent for the first time, claimed  that  the
       respondent did not accept that the  appellant  has  been  cut.    The
       respondent had not disputed the cutting of the appellant, before  the
       hearing.   She submits that the Judge has failed to make any  finding
       as to the risk upon  return  to  the  appellant's  children  and  the
       conclusions  at  paragraph  [46]  are  inadequately  reasoned.    She
       submits that the judge fails to give any reasons as to why the report
       of Dr Rodet should be rejected.  Ms Short submits  that  the  adverse
       credibility findings made against the appellant, do not relate to the
       risks to which the  appellant's  daughters  would  be  exposed,  upon
       return to Mali.  She  submits  that  the  credibility  findings  made
       against  the  appellant  are  based  entirely  upon  the  appellant's
       immigration history and that the Judge fails to provide any  adequate
       explanation at paragraph [42] of the decision, as to why the core  of
       the claim for asylum is not credible.


   19. I was provided with a copy of a letter from the appellant's GP, Dr  R
       Baqai dated 12th August 2015.  The letter states:


             "...On reviewing her medical records, I can confirm  that  she
             disclosed a  history  of  Female  Genital  Mutilation  to  the
             obstetric team at  Kings  College  Hospital  during  her  most
             recent pregnancy. This  has  been  confirmed  as  FGM  Type  1
             according  to  the  Post  Natal  Discharge  Summary  and  Baby
             Transfer of Care enclose with this letter.

             There is no documentation to confirm she had disclosed this to
             a member of the medical team at the surgery."

   20. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated  7th  October  2015
       that was adopted by Mr Whitwell.    The respondent opposes the appeal
       and submits that in a detailed decision, the Judge considered all the
       evidence before her, and reached conclusions as to the credibility of
       the appellant and her claims, that were open to her.  The  respondent
       submits that the appellant had failed to adduce any medical  evidence
       to corroborate her claim that she had been subjected  to  FGM.    The
       deficiency in the evidence  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
       appellant's Counsel by the Judge, but there  was  no  application  to
       adjourn  the  hearing,  even  part  heard  if  necessary,  despite  a
       successful application to amend the grounds of  appeal  so  that  the
       issue of FGM was before the Tribunal.


   21. Mr Whitwell submits that the decision of the Judge must be read as  a
       whole and that the Judge clearly rejected the core of the appellant's
       account at paragraph [42] of her decision.  Mr Whitwell submits  that
       the  findings  as  to  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account   are
       inextricably linked to the appellant's account  of  her  having  left
       Mali on at least two previous occasions before she left to travel  to
       the United Kingdom. The reasons why she had previously left Mali, and
       returned there, must be relevant  to  the  core  of  the  appellant's
       account and the events  that  she  claimed,  occurred  in  Mali.   He
       submits that the Judge has clearly considered the best  interests  of
       the appellant's two daughters and the finding at  paragraph  [46]  of
       the decision was open to the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  Mr  Whitwell
       submits that the Judge had proper regard to the  expert  report,  and
       this appeal amounts to a disagreement with the findings of the  Judge
       that were properly open to her.


   22. Mr Whitwell submits that irrespective of whether the  respondent  had
       made a decision upon the FGM claim,  the  burden  remained  upon  the
       appellant to establish that claim, and to satisfy the Judge that  she
       had been  subjected  to  FGM.    No  evidence  was  provided  by  the
       appellant in that respect and  the  interjection  by  the  presenting
       officer during the appellant's closing  submissions,  was  simply  to
       clarify that the respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  had
       been cut, as she appeared to be claiming.


   23. Ms Short responded by drawing my attention to paragraph [26]  of  the
       decision.  She accepts that it is for the appellant to establish  her
       case,  but  submits  that  the  appellant  suffered   a   significant
       disadvantage because the respondent did not make her  position  clear
       in  advance  of  the  hearing,  and  until  the  appellant's  closing
       submissions. Ms Short submits that it is  irrational  for  two  young
       uncut girls, to be expected to return to  a  country  such  as  Mali,
       without very careful consideration of the expert evidence.


 Discussion


   24. I shall take each of the  two  grounds  of  appeal  advanced  by  the
       appellant separately.


   25. I deal first with the Judge's assessment of  the  substantive  asylum
       claim, as it was when first made, and considered by  the  respondent.
       The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude that the appellant was not  a  credible  witness  and  to
       reject the core of the appellant's account for the reasons  that  are
       given at paragraph [42] of her decision.  In that  respect  I  follow
       the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v  SSHD  [2005]
       EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only  be
       set aside for error of law on the grounds of  perversity  if  it  was
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one  that  was
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A  finding  that  is  "perverse"
       embraces  findings  that  are  irrational  or  unreasonable  in   the
       Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by
       the evidence.  On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should  not  overturn  a
       judgment at first instance, unless it really could not understand the
       original  judge's  thought  process  when  she  was  making  material
       findings. I apply that guidance to my consideration of  the  decision
       in this appeal.


   26. I  have  carefully  considered  the  reasons  that  are  set  out  at
       paragraphs [34] to [40] of the Judge's decision.  The  Judge  focuses
       upon  the  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  in  the  appellant's
       evidence by reference to what  the  appellant  said  about  her  time
       previously in Senegal and France.  However, when properly read,  that
       evidence is not  only  concerned  with  the  appellant's  immigration
       history and her journey to the UK as one often finds.  In this  case,
       her account of her travel to  Senegal,  return  to  Mali,  travel  to
       France and return again to  Mali,  is  relevant  to  the  appellant's
       subjective fear of return to Mali and  the  events  that  she  claims
       occurred.  One has  to  read  the  findings  of  the  Judge  and  the
       conclusions that she reached against the evidence that she  sets  out
       at paragraphs [22] to [25] of the decision in particular.  The  Judge
       finds at paragraph [42] of her decision that the  appellant  has  not
       established to the low standard that her parents are dead;  that  she
       was a victim of domestic abuse  by  her  uncle;  was  the  victim  of
       domestic violence by her husband; that she was forced  into  marriage
       by her uncle and raped by her husband or that she is at risk from any
       person in Mali.  The Judge found that the appellant has not shown  to
       the low standard that she has no contact with her family in Mali. The
       Judge states:


           "...Not only do I refer to the matters set out above but, in the
           appellant's own evidence, she was helped to leave Mali on  three
           occasions by her aunt but on each occasion when she returned  in
           2007 and 2008  she  remained  in  contact  with  that  aunt.  In
           contrast, she now states that since her arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom in August 2009 she has lost all contact with  that  aunt
           and she would not be able to assist the Appellant because she is
           now an adult.   For all the reasons set out in this  decision  I
           reject that."

   27. I reject the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
       Judge failed to give any, or any adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
       core of the appellant's claim.  The appellant's  immigration  history
       is intrinsically linked to her account of  events  in  Mali.  On  the
       appellant's own account she had left  Mali  previously  in  2007  and
       2008.  She returned on each occasion, before she finally left on  the
       third occasion to come to the UK. In my judgement it was open to  the
       Judge  to  find  the  appellant's  evidence   to   be   inconsistent,
       contradictory, not credible and unpersuasive such that  she  rejected
       the story advanced by the appellant.  The Judge  made  findings  that
       were adverse to the appellant having had the opportunity to  see  and
       hear the appellant give evidence.  She properly  noted  at  paragraph
       [30] that she had borne in mind that although a person may  be  found
       to be not truthful on one matter, it does not mean that they are  not
       truthful  on  other  matters.   The  appellant  disagrees  with   the
       findings, but the findings are not irrational or unreasonable in  the
       Wednesbury sense, or findings that  are  wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence.


   28. Turning to the second aspect of the protection claim,  the  issue  of
       FGM, the Judge allowed an amendment to the  grounds  of  appeal  such
       that that matter was before the Tribunal.  The precise wording of the
       ground relied upon by the appellant is set out at paragraph  [20]  of
       the decision.  The appellant resumed her evidence after the amendment
       to the grounds of appeal was permitted, but no further evidence about
       the risks that her daughters may be exposed  to,  was  given  by  the
       appellant in her oral evidence in chief.  At paragraph  [24]  of  her
       decision, the Judge records the evidence  of  the  appellant  in  re-
       examination:


             "24. ....She was asked if her aunt would help her to avoid FGM
             and she said that in their  village  all  the  girls  are  cut
             whether they like it or not. Someone could come and take  your
             daughter whether you like it or not.".

   29. I have already set out the submissions that were made  on  behalf  of
       the appellant and which are recorded at paragraph [27] of the Judge's
       decision.  Following the interjection by the presenting officer,  the
       decision records:


             27.  .....  I asked  Miss  King  if  there  were  any  medical
             records relating to the Appellant and she replied  that  there
             were  not.  I  asked  if  there  were  any  obstetric  records
             available since those may be of  assistance  when  considering
             FGM given that the  Appellant  has  now  given  birth  to  two
             children.  Miss King  repeated  that  there  were  no  medical
             records available for the Appellant...."

   30. In reaching her conclusions, at paragraph [44] the Judge  notes  that
       the respondent does not  accept  that  the  appellant  has  undergone
       cutting herself, and that there were no medical records or  obstetric
       records available which would have assisted with such  matters.   The
       Judge also noted the appellant's failure to mention that she had been
       subjected to FGM previously, before finding at  paragraph  [45]  that
       the appellant has not shown to the low standard  that  she  has  been
       subject to FGM.  The Judge notes at paragraph [46]  of  her  decision
       that Dr Rodet's report is based on the appellant's assertion that she
       was cut as a young girl. That was at odds with the  finding  made  by
       the Judge.


   31. The letter that is now before me from the appellant's GP  appears  to
       establish that the appellant  disclosed  a  history  of  FGM  to  the
       obstetric team at Kings  College  Hospital  during  her  most  recent
       pregnancy.


   32. In E & R -v- SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49], the Court of Appeal held  that
       the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal  have  the  power  to  review  a
       decision of the Tribunal where it is shown that an important part  of
       the Tribunal's reasoning is based on ignorance or  mistake  of  fact,
       and to admit new evidence to demonstrate the mistake. When giving the
       judgment of the Court of Appeal Carnwath LJ stated, at paragraph 66:


             "In our view, the time has now come to accept that  a  mistake
             of fact giving rise  to  unfairness  is  a  separate  head  of
             challenge in an appeal on a point of law, at  least  in  those
             statutory contexts where the parties share an interest in  co-
             operating  to  achieve  the  correct  result.  Asylum  law  is
             undoubtedly such an  area.  Without  seeking  to  lay  down  a
             precise code, the  ordinary  requirements  for  a  finding  of
             unfairness are apparent  from  the  above  analysis  of  CICB.
             First, there must have been a mistake as to an existing  fact,
             including a mistake as to the availability of  evidence  on  a
             particular matter. Secondly, the fact or  evidence  must  have
             been "established", in the sense that it was uncontentious and
             objectively  verifiable.  Thirdly,  the  appellant   (or   his
             advisers) must not been have been responsible for the mistake.
             Fourthly,  the  mistake  must  have  played  a  material  (not
             necessarily decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."

   33. In my judgment, the Judge's conclusion at  paragraph  [45]  that  the
       appellant has not been subjected to FGM contains a mistake  of  fact,
       since there is now medical evidence available that  establishes  that
       the appellant "..is FGM Type 1..".  Whether or not the appellant  has
       been subjected to FGM is objectively verifiable.   It  was  a  matter
       that was in issue during hearing of the appeal, but it  appears  that
       the appellant's representatives were not aware that the  question  of
       whether the appellant had been subjected to FGM was in  issue,  until
       counsel for the appellant was making her closing submissions.  I have
       some  sympathy  with  the  submission  made  by  Mr.  Whitwell   that
       irrespective of whether the respondent had made a decision  upon  the
       FGM claim, the burden remained upon the appellant to  establish  that
       claim, and to satisfy the Judge that she had been subjected  to  FGM.
       However, notwithstanding the opportunity previously provided  by  the
       Tribunal, the respondent had failed to set out her position  on  that
       issue.  I cannot find therefore that the  appellant  was  responsible
       for the mistake, since further evidence might have  been  adduced  on
       behalf of the appellant if she had been  aware  of  the  respondent's
       position before the hearing of  the  appeal.   In  my  judgment,  the
       mistake played a material part in the Judge's reasoning  in  relation
       to the risk arising from FGM, and the weight to be  attached  to  the
       report of Dr Rodet.  The Judge  found  at  paragraph  [45]  that  the
       appellant has not shown that she has been subject to FGM,  but  noted
       at paragraph [46] that Dr Rodet's report is based on the  appellant's
       assertion that she was cut as a young girl.


   34. In my judgment, the Judge's conduct of the hearing and  her  decision
       is not to be evaluated by reference to a test  of  reasonableness  or
       fault.  The judge cannot in any way be criticised for the appellant's
       failure to put evidence before her.  It is the  mistake  as  to  fact
       that can now be seen from the medical evidence now available and that
       was not available during the  proceedings  at  first  instance,  that
       gives rise to a material error of law requiring the decision  of  the
       Judge in relation to the issue of FGM to be set aside.


   35. The findings made by the Judge in respect of the protection claim  on
       what has been described as  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account,
       stand.


   36. I must then consider whether to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, or to re-make the decision with regard to  the  FGM  issue,
       myself. I consider that where a first instance decision is set  aside
       on the basis of an error of law  involving  the  deprivation  of  the
       appellant's right to a fair hearing, the appropriate course  will  be
       to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for the  risk  to
       the appellant's daughter's arising from  the  issue  of  FGM,  to  be
       determined.


Notice of Decision


   37. The appeal is allowed, limited to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in respect of the issue of FGM.  The appeal is  remitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
       appellant would be at risk of suffering persecutory treatment  either
       directly or indirectly as a a result of her two female children being
       subject to FGM, to be determined.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


   38. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
       continued by me.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
       otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member
       of her family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to
       the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


As I have allowed the appeal in part and remitted the matter to  the  First-
tier Tribunal, the question of any fee award can properly be  determined  by
the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

