
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01396/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th November 2014                           |On 7th January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          mrs parvaneh mohammadbegi
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley-Daley
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on  1st  September  1965.   The
    Appellant arrived at Heathrow on 8th February 2010  on  a  flight  from
    Iran.  She claimed she had a problem in Iran and an agent had aided her
    journey and retained her passport used for the  journey.   She  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was based  upon  a
    fear that if returned she would face mistreatment due  to  her  imputed
    political opinion.  Her application was considered by the Secretary  of
    State and by Notice of Refusal dated 10th February 2014 her application
    was refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mulvenna sitting at Manchester on 15th May  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 16th May 2014 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  and  the  Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.  On 10th June  2014
    the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  23rd
    June 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Appleyard granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Appleyard noted that  the  grounds  sought
    permission to appeal asserting that the judge had erred at paragraph 49
    of his determination where it states that

         "There is no medical evidence of any underlying condition or  other
         diagnosis which gives rise to a possibility of  serious  ill-health
         which would merit the grounds for leave to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I find there is no medical condition which would  have  a
         material bearing on my findings and conclusions."

    The grounds go on to assert that medical evidence was  adduced  at  the
    hearing consisting of correspondence from the Appellant's GP dated 22nd
    February 2014 and 14th May 2014.  Judge Appleyard considered  the  file
    and noted that within the Appellant's bundle there was  another  letter
    dated 22nd March 2014 with attached medical notes.  He noted that  that
    letter referred to an opinion of the doctor that

         "If Mrs Beigy were to be forced to return to her country of  origin
         that would be a significant deterioration in her  mental  wellbeing
         and she is at significant risk to herself."

 3. The judge considered that it was not  clear  from  the  file  that  the
    evidence  referred  to  at  Ground  5  was  lodged  at   the   hearing.
    Nonetheless on the basis of what was on the file it was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred in the consideration of the  medical  evidence  and
    had failed to properly reason why such evidence as there was  had  been
    rejected.

 4. On 2nd July 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under  Rule  24.   The  Rule  24  response  opposes  the  appeal
    submitting that  the  evidence  relied  upon  in  the  application  for
    permission was wholly inadequate to generate a risk of an Article 3  or
    Article 8 breach and that the grounds did not disclose a material error
    in law.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed solicitor Mr Medley-Daley.   Mr  Medley-Daley
    is familiar with this matter  having  attended  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer Ms Johnstone.

Submissions

 6. Mr Medley-Daley acknowledges that it is not argued that there would  be
    a breach of the  Appellant's  rights  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights on return and that if she does  not
    succeed under Article 3 then there will not be a breach of  Article  8.
    He submits that the letter of 26th  March  2014  from  Dunstan  Village
    Group Practice from Dr J Burki is relevant evidence that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and that this letter has not been  considered
    at all.  He submits that that is a material error and more  importantly
    that the failure to consider it when Judge Mulvenna drew conclusions is
    material.

 7. He takes me to the evidence  disclosed.   His  starting  point  is  the
    objective report of Dr Juliette Cohen entitled "Errors  of  Recall  and
    Credibility" pointing out that the section at pages  8  and  9  of  the
    generic report show clearly that post traumatic  disorders  can  affect
    memory and recall and be responsible for  depression.   He  points  out
    that the Appellant has shown evidence of a previous attempt at suicide.
     He  submits  that  the  Appellant's  medical  condition  went  to  her
    testimony and that there is no reference within  the  determination  of
    that having been taken into account.

 8. He also considers that the judge has  made  findings  on  the  way  the
    Appellant has been converted to Christianity.  He submits  that  it  is
    inappropriate to impute paragraph 43 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    determination on the Appellant in isolation and that it is necessary to
    look at the medical evidence and to take  into  account  the  fact  the
    Appellant was at that stage at a low point  in  her  life  and  seeking
    solace.  He asked me to find that there is a material error of  law  in
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  to  set  aside  the
    decision and to either rehear the matter or remit it to the  First-tier
    for redetermination.

 9. Ms Johnstone's starting point is the Rule 24 response.  She reminds  me
    that  there  has  been  a  previous  hearing  in  this  matter   before
    Immigration  Judge  Lever  when  the  Appellant  was  found   to   lack
    credibility.  She submits that the judge set out an  accurate  analysis
    as to his  approach  to  the  law  at  paragraphs  32  and  33  of  his
    determination.  Further she  submits  that  the  judge  has  made  very
    careful findings in this matter and at paragraph  49  of  his  decision
    made a finding that there is no medical condition which  would  have  a
    material bearing on his findings and conclusions and  that  this  is  a
    decision the judge was entitled to reach.   She  points  out  that  the
    letters in  question  are  from  general  practitioners  and  not  from
    consultant psychiatrists and that the letters have to be looked  at  in
    detail and it will be seen that the Appellant's condition has  improved
    and that there is no suggestion that she has further  current  suicidal
    thoughts.  She also points out that there is an earlier letter from the
    Appellant's general practitioner indicating that the  proceedings  were
    having an effect upon her mental health.

10. Ms Johnstone turns to the generic report and points out that there  are
    no diagnoses before the Tribunal of specific PTSD or evidence of  brain
    injury or major depression and therefore she submits  the  report  does
    not assist the Tribunal so far as a recall  problem  is  concerned  and
    that in any event recall would not in  this  case  affect  the  hearing
    bearing in mind the previous findings  against  the  Appellant  of  her
    credibility.

11. Ms Johnstone points out that the Appellant went to church as  a  failed
    asylum seeker.  The GP does not comment at 2012 that the Appellant  was
    suffering from any problems of recall when interviewed and there is  no
    suggestion she could not or did not have a fair interview.  She submits
    that there is no error of law at paragraph 43 of the determination  and
    that the judge was entitled to make the findings that he did  and  that
    the decision he reached was open to  him.   She  submits  there  is  no
    medical evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  say  that  the  Appellant's
    conversion should be given more weight due to  her  mental  health  and
    that the judge has considered all issues in the round.  She asked me to
    find that there is no material error of law and to dismiss the  appeal.
    Mr Medley-Daley indicates that question  28  of  the  interview  record
    reflects a lack of recall so that there is evidence that the  Appellant
    was being affected and that the judge has failed to take  into  account
    the effect upon the Appellant's memory.  He submits that the judge  has
    made findings and conclusions before looking at  the  medical  evidence
    and that there is a material error of law.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. Had the judge made findings and  conclusions  without  looking  at  the
    medical evidence then I acknowledge that would  constitute  a  material
    error of law.  I am satisfied that he has not done  this.   Firstly  in
    this instant case it has to be remembered that the  starting  point  is
    the judge's analysis on the findings of credibility  and  fact  and  as
    mentioned above he has followed a  perfectly  proper  approach  to  the
    weight  and  consideration  he  has  given  to  the  findings  made  by
    Immigration Judge Lever back in April 2010.   The  challenges  in  this
    matter relate to his assessment thereafter of the  Appellant's  medical
    condition and her conversion to Christianity.  I start  initially  with
    criticisms at paragraph 43 in the determination purely because that  in
    chronological  order  is  before  the  conclusions  relating   to   the
    Appellant's medical condition.  I totally disagree with  the  arguments
    put forward  by  Mr  Medley-Daley  that  the  assessment  herein  under
    paragraph 43 has any bearing or relationship to the Appellant's  mental
    health.  There was no medical evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to suggest that the Appellant's conversion should be given more  weight
    as a result of her mental health  and  the  judge  has  considered  all
    issues in the round and has made findings and conclusions that  he  was
    perfectly entitled to.

15. So far as the analysis of the medical evidence is concerned  the  judge
    has made a detailed analysis of the medical evidence.  He may not  have
    specifically made reference to the letter of 26th March 2014  but  that
    letter is a letter from a general practitioner.  It is  interesting  to
    note there was seemingly no  medical  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal from a consultant psychiatrist and all that  there  were  were
    letters from the Appellant's general practitioner.  Further it is clear
    from those letters that the Appellant's condition had improved and that
    she  was  no  longer  having  suicidal   thoughts.    Further   earlier
    correspondence  indicates  that  the  proceedings  were  affecting  the
    Appellant's mental health something that happens regularly.  The report
    of Dr Cohen is no more than a  generic  overview.   I  agree  with  the
    comments made by Ms Johnstone that firstly the report does not help the
    Tribunal as to whether or not this Appellant has a recall  problem  and
    secondly that in any event I am reminded and note that there have  been
    previous findings of adverse credibility against the Appellant.   I  am
    quite satisfied that paragraph 49 does not imply  that  the  judge  has
    made findings prior to considering the  Appellant's  medical  condition
    and the medical evidence.  In fact it is clear that he  has  adopted  a
    proper approach.  All paragraph 49 states is that  having  carried  out
    that analysis there is no medical condition which persuades him to come
    down in favour of the Appellant.  That is  a  conclusion  that  he  was
    entitled to make.

16. This  is  a  well  thought-out  and  reasoned  determination  and  full
    explanations as to the basis upon  which  the  judge  has  reached  his
    conclusions are set  out  therein.   For  all  the  above  reasons  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses no  material  error
    of law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  No application is made to  vary  that  order  and
    none is made.




Signed                              Date 6th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

