
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/01442/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 February 2016                        | On 29 April 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



1.   I was not addressed by either party on  the  issue  of  anonymity,  but
    considering the issues raised, I have made a direction  for  anonymity.
    The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  His claim is that his  date
    of birth is 23 March 1998.  The respondent's position is that his  date
    of birth is 23 March 1996.  The applicant made an application  to  vary
    his leave to remain in the UK on 22 March 2013 to be  recognised  as  a
    refugee under the 1951 Convention.

2.   The application that was made  on  23  March  2013  was  refused  on  8
    January 2015.  The appellant made an application to appeal against that
    decision and his appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal MacKenzie ("the  second  judge")  following  a  hearing  on  9
    October 2015 in a decision that was promulgated  on  2  November  2015.
    Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baker  in  a
    decision of 30 December 2015.

3.    The  appellant's  appeal  had  been  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Kopieczek ("the first judge") following a hearing on 10 February  2011.
    He concluded that the appellant was a minor and took into  account  the
    "Merton compliant age assessment" before him  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant and his brother N were not credible and  the  judge  rejected
    his account.

4.   The first judge took into account the  documentary  evidence  that  the
    appellant submitted, namely a birth certificate, a vaccination card and
    identity card and concluded that they were  not  reliable.   Whilst  he
    accepted that the appellant's brother N was  a  commander  for  Hizb-e-
    Islami, he concluded that this would not establish that  the  appellant
    is at risk on return or that there was a general risk of indiscriminate
    violence pursuant to Section  15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
    ("the Qualification Directive")


5.   The matter came before the second judge on 9 October 2015 and he  heard
    evidence from the appellant and N and reached the same  conclusions  as
    the first judge.  In relation to the age  assessment  produced  by  the
    respondent the second judge considered a number of challenges  to  this
    that were made by the appellant's representative.

6.   The  second  the  judge  took  into  consideration  a  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi relating to investigations that Dr  Giustozzi  instructed  in
    respect of the vaccination card.  A copy of the  vaccination  card  was
    produced at the hearing before the first, but the second  judge  had  a
    report from Dr Giustozzi which was not before  the  first  judge.  This
    report was produced to establish that the vaccination card was in  fact
    genuine.

7.   The second judge made the following findings:

         "51. Taking all the relevant evidence before  me  in  the  round  I
             find, to the low standard of proof  that  the  Respondent  has
             established that the Appellant was born in 1996 and  not  1998
             as he claims.  I did not accept the Appellant's oral  evidence
             that he did not understand the nature of the interview by  the
             social workers.  He indicated that he was spoken to  first  of
             all by two females and they  were  using  hand  gestures  from
             which he understood they were making enquiries about age.  The
             Appellant stated that he had not been provided with any access
             to an interpreter either before or during the  age  assessment
             process.  Looking at the Age Assessment report it is, I  find,
             a clear inference that an interpreter was provided  given  the
             detailed information that it recorded.  I also do  not  accept
             the submission on behalf of the Appellant that the  assessment
             was unfair because the Appellant did not  have  a  responsible
             adult  present.   It  is  narrated  in  the  report  that  the
             Appellant smiled when asked by a social worker if he  was  ok.
             The Appellant, in any event, accepted in his evidence that his
             recollection of these events were unclear given the passage of
             time.


         52.  I note that the assessment makes reference  to  the  Appellant
             wearing  'teenage'  clothing.    Taken   in   isolation   this
             observation cannot be relied upon as  pointing  the  Appellant
             being a teenager given that he was not asked about what he was
             wearing.  However, this was only one of a  number  of  factors
             which the authors of the report had regard to in forming their
             assessment.  It is correct that the assessment made  reference
             to  physical  features,   including   the   Appellant   having
             'wispy/light upper lip and side facial hair' and 'small  spots
             on  the  epidermis  to  both  cheeks  and  nose  and  an  oily
             complexion as would be expected in  an  adolescent'.   It  was
             also noted that the Appellant's  voice  indicated  that  of  a
             'pubescence/not fully 'broken' male voice'.   While  I  accept
             that physical appearance alone can be unreliable indicator  of
             a child's age (NA v London Borough of Croydon [2009] EWHC 2357
             (Admin), paragraph [27]) it is again clear that this was again
             only one of a number of factors referred to in the assessment.


         53.  I have taken into account the fact that the age assessment was
             carried out a  very  short  period  after  the  Appellant  had
             arrived in the United Kingdom and it is recorded that  he  was
             'extremely tired'.  I also acknowledge that it  is  not  clear
             from  the  assessment  that  the  Appellant   was   given   an
             opportunity to comment on the age attributed  to  him.   I  do
             not, however, find that to be fatal to the overall conclusions
             reached by the authors of the report (Merton,  paragraph  56).
             Had the age range identified been put to the  Appellant  then,
             as the Presenting  Officer  submitted,  this  would  not  have
             altered the conclusions reached, he  having  given  a  clearly
             stated age that the local authority did not agree with.   This
             can be contrasted with the situation where there might been  a
             misunderstanding reached by the interviewing  local  authority
             officers and, to ensure fairness, the subject should be  given
             an opportunity to comment the provisional view reached.


         55.  I do not attach weight to the Report of  Dr  Giustozzi,  which
             was of course evidence that was not First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             Kopieczek,  in  terms  of  supporting  the  claim   that   the
             Appellant's  date  of  birth  is  23  March  1998.   While  Dr
             Giustozzi's expert credentials are  fully  documented  in  his
             Report the research upon which his conclusion  that  the  copy
             vaccination card relates to the Appellant and that his date of
             birth is in 1998 was carried  out  by  a  third  party,  a  Dr
             Andarabi.  No statement is produced from Dr  Andarabi  or  the
             Ministry of Public Health official referred to in paragraph  6
             of the Report.


         56.  More importantly however, the enquiries  were  focussed  on  a
             copy of the vaccination card.  I did  not  find  N's  evidence
             that he was sent faxed copies of the Appellant's documents  by
             his uncle in Afghanistan but when he asked for  the  originals
             to be sent he was  'unable  to  get  through  to  him'  to  be
             credible (statement, paragraph 27).   This  statement  was,  I
             found, contradicted by N's oral evidence that he  remained  in
             contact with his uncle.  I do not accept the evidence  in  the
             statement from the  Appellant's  cousin,  [ND]  (the  maternal
             uncle's  son)  that  the  night  after  the   Appellant   left
             Afghanistan his family had to leave their  home  because  they
             had helped him flee Afghanistan.  The explanation  offered  by
             this witness in  paragraph  15  of  his  statement  about  the
             circumstances in which he re-established contact with  [N]  in
             2015, I find, lacks credibility.


         57.  I do not, taking the evidence  before  me  in  the  round  and
             applying the low standard of proof, attach any weight  to  the
             identification   documents   produced   as   supporting    the
             Appellant's claim that he was born in 1998.  I note  that  the
             document claimed to be the Appellant's identification document
             from Afghanistan is dated 28 July 2010.  At  the  end  of  the
             asylum interview [N],  who  was  present  at  the  responsible
             adult, provided information that because the original document
             that  his  mother's  cousin  had  was  in  poor  condition   a
             replacement was obtained from the registry office.  It  is,  I
             find, significant that the original - albeit claimed to be  in
             poor  condition  -  has  never  been  produced.   It  was  not
             explained in the evidence why the original was not sent by fax
             or in the post to [N].  I did not find [N] evidence about  the
             Appellant's documents to be credible.


         58.  In considering the Appellant's age I have taken  into  account
             the evidence that  when  first  detained  by  the  police  the
             Appellant  gave  his  age  as  12  years   (custody   records,
             Appellant's bundle, tab B, page  44).   Furthermore,  the  Age
             Assessment concludes that the Appellant 'may  be  older'  than
             his stated age, 'possibly up to 14 years of age'.  I also note
             that when the Screening Interview was carried out on  18  June
             2010 it is recorded for the Appellant's date  of  birth,  '...
             given as 23/03/98 by brother'.  In terms  of  the  Appellant's
             age I also note, as did Judge Kopieczek, that  the  chronology
             given of him being kidnapped when he was 4 or 5 years old  and
             then having been kept on the farm for about 8 years sits  more
             comfortably with him being the age he claims.


         59.  I have given consideration to all these factors,  to  which  I
             have applied the  low  standard  of  proof.   However,  taking
             matters in the round and not  finding  the  Appellant  or  his
             brother [N] to be credible witnesses regarding his age,  I  am
             not persuaded that the finding of  Judge  Kopieczek  that  the
             Appellant's date of birth is 23  March  1996  is  one  that  I
             should depart from."



  8.  The second judge went on to consider the appellant's claim for asylum
    and directed himself in accordance with the principles set out in
    Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT
    00702.   He found that the expert evidence did not alter his views in
    relation to the assessment of the evidence and that it lacked
    credibility.  He concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on
    return to Afghanistan on account of his brother's political activities
    and he went on to conclude that:



    "I do not attach weight to the evidence of Dr Giustozzi in  his  report
    dated 9 May 2015 regarding the risk to the Appellant on his  return  to
    Afghanistan.  The points he advances in paragraph 18 are, I find, based
    on a degree of speculation - for example his observation that '... MH's
    background might emerge later ...'"

9.   The judge went on to conclude that if the appellant  did  not  want  to
    return to his home area he could internally locate, taking into account
    RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami - Risk) Afghanistan CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00013 and PM and Others (Kabul -  Hizb-i-Islami)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00089.  The judge concluded at paragraph 74:

         "I  agree  with  Judge  Kopieczek  that  the  Appellant   has   not
         demonstrated that there are substantial grounds for believing  that
         he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as  defined  in
         paragraph 339C (HC 395) if returned to Afghanistan.  He would  not,
         I find, be at personal risk from the Taliban or anyone else in  his
         home area."

10.  The judge went on to dismiss the  appeal  under  Article  8  concluding
    that the appellant's relationship with his brothers  and  wider  family
    members in the UK did not amount  to  family  life  that  could  engage
    Article 8 with reference to Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.


The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

11.  The grounds of appeal are insufficiently particularised and are  silent
    on the determination of the first judge and the implications of this as
    regards Devaseelan.   Mr  Bundock  assisted  me  and  made  clear  oral
    submissions.  Before the second judge there was evidence that  was  not
    before the first judge, in particular the report of Dr Giustozzi, which
    was capable of corroborating the appellant's substantive asylum  claim,
    and his evidence relating to his age.


Error of Law

12.  In relation to Article 15(c)  the  appellant  also  submitted  evidence
    from Dr Lisa Schuster of 26 March 2015 and Professor Susan  Clayton  of
    23 March 2015.  This evidence was capable of supporting the appellant's
    claim to be at risk from violence in  his  home  area  and  Afghanistan
    generally. There was a skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal
    and reference is made in that  to  the  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi  in
    relation to the appellant's individual circumstances and his claim  for
    asylum and relocation to Kabul.     The second judge's  starting  point
    was the determination of the first judge and his findings  therein,  in
    particular the findings in relation to the appellant's credibility

13.  First, the second judge applied the wrong standard and burden of  proof
    in relation to the  age  assessment  (see  paragraph  51).   Second,  I
    conclude that the second judge's findings in relation to Dr Giustozzi's
    report  are  insufficiently  reasoned.   The  report  was  capable   of
    corroborating the appellant's evidence that the  vaccination  card  was
    genuine and therefore capable of corroborating the appellant's evidence
    relating to his date of birth.

14.  The second judge attached no weight to the  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    because there was  no  statement  produced  from  Dr  Andarabi  or  the
    Ministry of Public Health Official referred to by Dr Giustozzi  in  the
    report. Whilst there were other reasons given by the second  judge  for
    not accepting the appellant's evidence in relation to his age  and  the
    weight to attach to Dr Giustozzi's evidence was a matter for  him,  his
    conclusion (to attach no weight to it) was not adequately reasoned  and
    he applied a too high standard of proof by requiring a  statement  from
    Dr Andarabi or the Ministry of Public Health.

15.  In relation to the assessment of risk the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    take into account the evidence that was  before  him  relating  to  the
    situation as it was in 2015 at the time of the hearing.  He  considered
    risk relying on the first judge's findings, but whether  the  appellant
    was at risk on  return  to  Afghanistan  should  have  been  considered
    assessing the position at the date of the  hearing  before  the  second
    judge.  The second judge did not adequately engaged with  the  evidence
    of the experts relating to risk which was relied upon by the  appellant
    in order to establish risk under 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.



16.  The second judge  considered  Article  8  and  the  decision  that  the
    relationship  between  the   appellant   and   his   family   here   is
    insufficiently reasoned and I refer specifically to paragraph 82.   The
    evidence was that the appellant had been here since the age of 12,  (on
    his account and aged 14 on the respondent's account), and that  he  had
    since then resided with his brother and  his  brother's  wife  who  had
    assumed the role of parents.




Notice of Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal made material errors. I set aside the  decision
    in its entirety. Both parties agreed that the matter should be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal and reheard afresh.




Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date  25.02.16


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam





