

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/01163/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 9 October 2014                      |15 October 2014           |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                                     LB
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel
      (instructed by Lawrence Lupin)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Eshun on 6 August 2014 against the decision of  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Wiseman made in a determination promulgated on 23
           April  2014  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
           protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 15 January 1998.
             He  had  appealed  under  section  83  of   the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the Respondent's refusal
           on 4 February 2014  to  grant  him  asylum.  The  Appellant  had
           claimed that he was a potential victim of a blood feud.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
           considered that it was arguable that Judge Wiseman had erred  by
           failing to consider the Respondent's tracing duty in respect  of
           the Appellant's relatives: see AA (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA  Civ
           1625.  No findings had been made.  The Appellant  was  permitted
           to raise the other grounds of appeal he had put forward.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.


      Submissions


      5.    Mr Sellwood for the Appellant relied on the two sets of  grounds
           of onwards appeal earlier submitted, i.e., that  to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal and that to the Upper Tribunal.  There was a  duty
           to trace explained in AA  (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1625
           which the judge had failed to deal with  completely.   The  best
           interests  of  the  Appellant  had  not  been  considered.   The
           credibility findings were unsound and had failed to reflect  the
           vulnerability of the Appellant and the fact that  the  screening
           process was exploratory only and did not oblige the Appellant to
           state his full case at that stage.  The judge had not taken into
           account all of the evidence which had been placed before him  in
           making his credibility assessment, such as  the  report  of  the
           Appellant's social worker.


      6.    Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
           notice.  He submitted that the determination disclosed no  error
           of law and wished to add nothing further.


      No material error of law


      7.    The tribunal accepts  Mr  Bramble's  submissions.   Indeed,  the
           tribunal considers that the  two  sets  of  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal as submitted and urged in argument were meretricious  and
           that the ultimate grant of permission to appeal was  a  generous
           one.  At most the onwards grounds  were  simply  an  attempt  to
           circumvent the experienced judge's careful and balanced findings
           of fact.


      8.    The Appellant had been granted ELR until 14 July  2015,  and  so
           was not facing removal.  It was thus an "upgrade" appeal.  It is
           not easy to see why  such  appeals  are  pursued  on  behalf  of
           unaccompanied minors  at  substantial  public  expense,  as  the
           Appellant is protected from any immediate risk and will enjoy  a
           full right of appeal if he faced with a removal decision once he
           has become an adult.  His position can be preserved by a  simple
           letter to the Secretary of State reserving his rights.   It  can
           hardly be in  a  minor's  best  interests  to  be  pressed  into
           involvement in any litigation which  can  avoided  or  at  least
           sensibly postponed, the more so in an  appeal  as  weak  as  the
           present one.


      9.    Nevertheless Judge Wiseman  embarked  on  a  full  and  detailed
           consideration of the Appellant's asylum claim, as he was obliged
           to do.  The judge did so applying the current  country  guidance
           set out in EH (blood feuds)  Albania  [2012]  UKUT  00348.   The
           judge was bound to assess the Appellant's credibility, which had
           been placed squarely in issue by the Respondent.


      10.   The material available to the judge included the record  of  his
           first interview, the point at which his need  for  international
           protection if it existed ought to have been  fresh.   The  judge
           set out at [51]  and  also  at  [58]  relevant  factors  in  the
           Appellant's  favour  when  reaching  his  conclusion  that   the
           Appellant had spoken the unvarnished truth that he had  come  to
           the United Kingdom because he had nothing in Albania.  The judge
           also  examined  the  Appellant's  later  claim  that  he  was  a
           potential victim of a blood feud, and gave comprehensive reasons
           for finding that the claim was vague in the extreme  and  wholly
           implausible to the lower standard: see, e.g. [63].


      11.   The skeleton argument of the counsel who appeared  before  Judge
           Wiseman  (see  [40]  of  the  determination)  made  no  specific
           reference  to  AA  (Afghanistan)  (above),  although  there  was
           reference to regulation 6 of the 2005 Reception Regulations.  At
           [4.iii] of the relevant skeleton argument it was submitted  that
           "the failure of the Respondent [to attempt to trace] has  denied
           this  unaccompanied  minor  the  benefit  of   evidence   either
           supporting his claim  or  putting  him  into  contact  with  his
           family."


      12.   The  complete  fallacy  of  that  submission  had  already  been
           demonstrated in [52] of AA (Afghanistan) when, in dismissing the
           unaccompanied minor's appeal, the Court of Appeal observed:  "It
           is part of the Appellant's own case that his family arranged for
           him to leave Afghanistan  and  come  to  the  UK,  at  no  doubt
           considerable cost; and they are very unlikely to want him to  be
           returned.  Even if it were possible to contact any member of his
           family they would have had a strong  incentive  to  support  his
           account of persecution even if it were untrue (and also  to  say
           that they were unwilling or unable to look after him if he  were
           retuned) and any corroboration that they would give  would  thus
           be of doubtful value."


      13.   That approach is fully reflected in Judge Wiseman's findings  at
           [64].  Having noted that the Appellant was able to  contact  his
           (unharmed) brother in Albania  immediately  on  the  Appellant's
           safe arrival in the United Kingdom, the  judge  disbelieved  the
           Appellant's claim that he could not contact his family,  finding
           that it rather suited his case.


      14.    Any  failure  to  implement  the  tracing  obligation  on   the
           Respondent imposed by the 2005 Reception Regulations thus had no
           harmful impact on  the  Appellant's  case  and  the  failure  to
           require it to be  strictly  applied  cannot  be  said  to  be  a
           material error of law, vitiating the decision to  refuse  asylum
           and to dismiss the appeal against that refusal.  The  judge  had
           established that the Appellant was not at any risk on return and
           that the Appellant had freely admitted he had come to the United
           Kingdom for economic reasons.  The  Appellant's  best  interests
           pursuant to section 55 of Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
           Act 2009 has been more than met by the grant  of  ELR  with  its
           accompanying benefits.


      15.   The subsidiary argument advanced by Mr Sellwood that  the  judge
           had failed to  take  all  relevant  evidence  into  account  was
           equally without substance.  The brief and uninformative  reports
           produced on the Appellant's behalf added nothing to his case and
           required no specific mention in the credibility assessment.


      16.   Thus the tribunal finds that there was no material error of  law
           in the determination.  There is no basis  for  interfering  with
           the judge's decision to dismiss the Appellant's  asylum  appeal,
           which dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     9 October 2014




