
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01153/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 March 2013                                |On 7 June 2013             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MK
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Salmon, Bradford Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MK, was born on 2 May 1969 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Togo.  The appellant had appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shimmin) against the decision of the respondent dated 19  January  2012
    to refuse him leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  having  refused  his
    claim for asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal and the
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Blandy wrote:

         "The grounds of  the  application  draw  attention  to  the  rather
         unusual nature of the appellant's claim, namely that he was  guilty
         of serious misconduct in Togo such that he was  excluded  from  the
         right to protection under  the  Refugee  Convention  by  virtue  of
         Article 1F of that Convention, but nevertheless argued that he  was
         at risk on return treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  because  of
         what  he  had  allegedly  done.   It  is  argued  the   judge   was
         inconsistent as to whether the appellant's account with  regard  to
         the core of his claim, namely his misconduct, was true.  It is also
         argued the judge erred in law with regard to his treatment  of  the
         medical evidence.  I do find the grounds to be arguable.  There  is
         arguably a material inconsistency between the findings of the judge
         in paragraph 32 and his overall finding that the  appellant  lacked
         credibility in paragraph 50 of the determination.  Furthermore with
         regard to the medical evidence, whilst a report of Dr Lord dated 19
         August 2011 might  not  have  been  entirely  consistent  with  the
         Istanbul Protocol a  later  report  of  30  January  2012  arguably
         clarifies her opinion by reference to that Protocol and I  consider
         it is arguable that the judge did not give sufficient  grounds  for
         appearing to disregard her evidence as to the  consistency  between
         the injuries and the appellant's account.  I accordingly  find  all
         the grounds to be arguable."

 3. As the grounds note, the appellant,

         "claims to have committed what in any civilised country would be  a
         serious  criminal  offence  -  burning  down  a  number  of  houses
         (hutnents) belonging to another ethnic group,  the  Kabye,  against
         whom he was resentful.  He was also unclear as  to  whether  people
         could have been killed in the fires concerned."

    The grounds assert that the judge's  findings  regarding  this  central
    part of the appellant's account of past events in Togo was unclear.  At
    [32], the judge wrote this:

    The respondent also submits that when questioned on what he did to  the
    Kabye village in 2003 he stated, "We set fire to their  houses".   When
    questioned whether anyone was injured or hurt he stated  "No.   Whether
    there was somebody in the houses I do not know"  and  "...  there  must
    have been because when there is such a file people tried to throw water
    on it because there is houses are made of  straw.   People  always  get
    injured."  In the appellant's statement dated 12 August, 2011 he states
    in relation to the village fire that "I would like to clarify that when
    we went there the houses were all unoccupied.  The only  people  living
    in Kantsikope were Kabyes.  The men were out at the field at the  time.
    I never saw any women or children myself.  Some may have fled when they
    grew aware we  were  setting  fire  to  the  houses."   The  respondent
    considers this to be inconsistent with  his  claim  at  interview  that
    there must have been people there as people throw water on the fires as
    houses are made of straw.  I find that the appellant has been ambiguous
    from the start as to whether  anyone  was  hurt.   That  ambiguity  has
    continued.  He seems to be saying that he does not know if  anyone  was
    hurt but speculates that there were not.  Then he says there  may  have
    been some injuries to people attempting to put out the fires.  I do not
    find there is lack of credibility on the part of the appellant  but  in
    an attempt to give the full picture he has indulged in speculation  and
    has not expressed himself clearly.





 4. The grounds draw attention to the fact that, having indicated  at  [32]
    that the he did "not find there is a lack of credibility on the part of
    the appellant but in an  attempt  to  give  the  full  picture  he  has
    indulged in speculation and has  not  expressed  himself  clearly"  the
    judge had nonetheless found that the appellant had failed to  prove  to
    the required standard of reasonable likelihood that any of the facts he
    alleges are true apart from his claim to be of Togo citizenship and  of
    Ewe ethnicity. It was submitted that the reasoning  of  the  judge  was
    unclear and inconsistent.

 5. Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, argued that there was  no  error  of
    law.  She submitted that, at [32], the judge was simply assessing  that
    part of the evidence which he had  discussed  in  that  paragraph  (the
    burning of the houses) whilst his conclusions at [50]  had  been  drawn
    not only from his assessment of that part of the evidence but also from
    the remainder of the appellant's evidence which he  discusses  at  [33-
    47].  The judge's comments at [32] were in  the  nature  of  the  judge
    "thinking aloud"  and  making  observations  as  he  went  through  the
    evidence item by item. His considered conclusion had been that,  whilst
    some of the evidence may have  been  true,  the  appellant  had  proved
    himself to be generally an unreliable witness.

 6. I have no doubt that the judge's findings  of  facts  could  have  been
    better expressed.  However, I  agree  with  Mrs  Pettersen  that,  upon
    reading the entire determination, there is no real  inconsistency  with
    what  the  judge  says  at  [32]  and  the  findings  which  he   makes
    subsequently in the determination.   What  the  judge  is,  in  effect,
    saying at [32] is that the appellant's claim to have set  fire  to  the
    houses was  not  in  itself  incredible  but  contains  an  element  of
    speculation (for example, as to whether anyone was hurt in  the  fire).
    Mrs Pettersen's submission is given support by the fact that  the  next
    paragraph [33] begins with the words "The appellant  then  claims  that
    after setting fire to the houses he went to live in the fields for  two
    to four days [my emphasis]".  The use of the word "then"  indicates  to
    me that the judge was, as he was required to do, examining the evidence
    item by item and that his comments at [32] did not constitute  a  final
    assessment of the appellant's credibility  as  the  grounds  of  appeal
    assert.  It could be said that the judge quite fairly in  his  analysis
    finds that  the  appellant's  account  was  prima  facie  credible  but
    subsequently concluded (having examined, in particular, the appellant's
    immigration history in the  United  Kingdom)  that  nothing  which  the
    appellant had said (other than his claim  to  Ewe  ethnicity  and  Togo
    nationality) could be regarded as reliable.

 7. Mr Salmon submitted that the judge had failed to take  account  of  the
    fact that the appellant had cast himself in a bad light (by claiming to
    have set fire to the houses) and that he would not have done so had  he
    been lying.  I find that the judge was aware of that very  point  when,
    at [48], he wrote:

         "I also take into account and weigh in the balance in favour of the
         appellant the argument that if the appellant was  not  telling  the
         truth he would not have included in his account  information  which
         put him in a bad light, namely the arson attack on the village."

 8. It was open to the judge to find that the plausibility of parts of  the
    appellant's account and the "bad light" point raised by Mr Salmon  were
    insufficient, having considered the evidence as a whole, to lead him to
    conclude that the appellant was a credible witness.

 9. The grounds also allege that the judge erred in his assessment  of  the
    expert evidence of Dr Lord.  There was no merit in  the  argument  that
    the judge has ignored Dr Lord's supplementary report of 30 January 2012
    (which confirms her compliance with the Istanbul Protocol) as the judge
    makes specific reference to that supplementary report at [39].  Dr Lord
    had found that the scars on the appellant's body  were  in  some  cases
    "highly consistent" with the appellant's account  of  ill-treatment  in
    Togo.  She found that the scars on the backs of  the  appellant's  legs
    "were unlikely to be due to accidental  causes."   At  [45]  the  judge
    writes "Mr Salmon argues that the report of Dr Lord is so  strong  that
    the appellant's injuries cannot reasonably be said to have been  caused
    by any way other than he describes.  I do not agree."  The  judge  goes
    on to note that the non-accidental injuries could  have  been  suffered
    "in a fight with persons other than the  Togo  authorities"  and  notes
    possible accidental causes of other injuries.  I  find  that  there  is
    nothing in Dr Lord's report which compels the conclusion (as Mr  Salmon
    appeared to argue) that the appellant's injuries could only  have  been
    caused in the manner he described.  The judge noted the high degree  of
    consistency  between  the  appellant's  account  and  the  injuries  as
    recorded by Dr Lord but I find that  the  judge  has  been  careful  to
    assess Dr Lord's reports as part of the totality  of  the  evidence  (I
    find that there was no suggestion here of  the  expert  evidence  being
    considered by the judge only after making negative credibility findings
    - see Mibanga (2005) EWCA Civ 367).  In other words, it was open to the
    judge  to  conclude   that   the   appellant's   account   was   untrue
    notwithstanding the contents of Dr Lord's reports.

10. Finally, the grounds assert that the judge failed to make a finding  as
    to whether or not the appellant had set fire to houses in Togo.  I find
    that ground has no merit.   The judge's conclusion (that no part of the
    appellant's account had been credible) is sufficient to deal  with  all
    parts of that account, including his claim to have committed  arson  in
    Togo; there was no need for the judge to make  a  separate  finding  on
    that issue.

11. In the circumstances, I find that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err
    in law such that the determination falls to be set aside.

DECISION

12. This appeal is dismissed.
                                Date 30 May 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

