
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01348/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent                         |
|On 5 June 2013                                |On 3 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                  MRS L H X
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D O'Callaghan of counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
solicitors LLP
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 23 June 1988. She
   has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge S Lal who dismissed her appeal against the respondent's
   decision of 12 February 2013 to give directions for her removal from the
   United Kingdom following the refusal of asylum.


2. The appellant said that she arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 January
   2013 hidden in a lorry. She claimed asylum on 8 January 2013. She claimed
   to come from a poor and ill educated family and to have married a better
   off man with extensive and influential connections throughout Albania.
   She went to live with him in Italy where he subjected her to persistent
   domestic violence. She left him, found an agent through a friend and was
   brought to this country via Belgium. The agent turned out to be a people
   trafficker who intended to force her into prostitution. However, before
   this could happen, she managed to escape and claim asylum. She claimed to
   fear persecution from her husband and his family in Albania and that her
   deserting him would have started a blood feud. She also claimed to fear
   re-trafficking or ill-treatment from those who had tried to force her
   into prostitution.


3. The respondent accepted the appellant's identity and that she was
   Albanian. It was also accepted that she had been subjected to domestic
   violence. I will need to return to the question of the extent to which
   the respondent accepted the appellant's evidence. However, much of her
   evidence was not accepted, including that relating to her claim to have
   been trafficked.


4. The appellant appealed and the judge heard her appeal on 15 March 2013.
   Both parties were represented. The appellant gave evidence as did her
   brother. It appears that the appellant has one brother living in this
   country who is a British citizen and another brother and her father whose
   precise status is unclear but they may be in the process of claiming
   asylum.


5. The judge found the appellant not be a credible witness and
   comprehensively disbelieved her evidence. He dismissed the appeal on
   asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds. He made an
   anonymity direction which I continue in force.


6. The appellant sought permission to appeal arguing, firstly, that the
   judge erred in law and acted unfairly by paying no regard to the
   respondent's concession that the appellant had been subjected to domestic
   violence. Secondly, that the judge erred in law by applying an incorrect
   standard of proof when stating that he was "not satisfied" that she had
   escaped from the trafficker in the manner she claimed.


7. Mr O'Callaghan relied on the grounds of appeal. He made it clear that he
   was not suggesting that there were no circumstances in which the judge
   could have gone behind the concessions made by the respondent. However,
   if the judge intended to do so fairness dictated that he should inform
   the appellant's counsel at the hearing and in sufficient time for her to
   address this. Counsel would then have had the opportunity to make it
   clear that the appellant's case had been prepared on the basis of the
   refusal letter where the concessions were made. The appellant and those
   representing her would have known that as a result of the concessions she
   did not have to give evidence about those aspects of her claim or need to
   prove them. Counsel would have had the opportunity to take instructions
   and ask to recall the appellant and possibly the other witness to give
   evidence on these matters. Finally counsel would have been able to make
   submissions to the judge in relation to the changed position.


8. In relation to the ground of appeal relating to the alleged incorrect
   standard of proof Mr O'Callaghan did no more than rely on the grounds. He
   also submitted that in paragraph 15 of the determination there was a lack
   of reasoning and, in paragraph 16, a failure to address material
   evidence.


9. Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 statement put in by the respondent dated
   2 May 2013. He submitted that the judge was within his rights to consider
   the credibility of the domestic violence aspects of the appellant's
   claim. On the evidence it was open to him to find that she was not a
   credible witness. The fact that the judge did not tell the appellant or
   her representatives that he was minded to go behind the concession made
   by the respondent was not, he argued, unfair. If it was an error of law
   it was not material. As to the second ground, the judge correctly stated
   the appropriate standard of proof and there was no indication that he
   failed to apply it. I was asked to find that there was no material error
   of law and to uphold the judge's decision. I reserved my determination.


10. The extent to which the respondent accepted the appellant's account of
   events is important. The relevant passages are contained in paragraphs
   11, 20 and 45 of the refusal letter dated 7 February 2013. They say; "11.
   You have given a consistent and plausible account of being a victim of
   domestic violence. It is accepted that you were a victim of domestic
   abuse and that you have left your husband as a result of this." "20.
   Nonetheless, in view of the domestic abuse you suffered in the past at
   the hands of your husband and the threats made against your father and
   brother by your husband's family, it is accepted that there is potential
   for further violence against you from your husband or his family. Your
   fears are understood. You cannot reasonably be expected to return to your
   home area of Shishtavec in north-eastern Albania, or to nearby Kukes
   where your husband's family reside." and "45. In conclusion, it has been
   accepted that you have given a consistent and plausible account of
   events. Your fears of your husband are understood. However, it is
   considered that you have both sufficiency of protection and the option of
   internal relocation within Albania."


11. I find that the extent to which the respondent accepted the appellant's
   account of events goes beyond simple acceptance that she was the victim
   of domestic abuse. In addition, the respondent accepted that she left her
   husband as a result, appears to have accepted that this resulted in
   threats to her husband and brother by her husband's family, accepted that
   there was the potential for further violence from her husband's family
   and concluded that she could not return to her home area.


12. The judge gave no indication that he was minded to go behind these
   concessions. I find that his failure to do so resulted in unfairness to
   the appellant amounting to an error of law. I agree with Mr O'Callaghan's
   submissions that if the judge intended to do this fairness dictated that
   he should inform the appellant's counsel at the hearing. Counsel would
   then have had the opportunity to make it clear that the appellant's case
   had been prepared on the basis of the refusal letter in which the
   concessions were made. The appellant and those representing her would
   have known that as a result of the concessions she did not have to give
   evidence about those aspects of her claim or need to prove them. Counsel
   would have had the opportunity to take instructions and ask to recall the
   appellant and possibly the other witness to give evidence about these
   matters. Finally counsel would have been able to make submissions to the
   judge in relation to the changed position.


13. There is also the question of the alleged blood feud. The judge
   rejected the claim that there would be a blood feud because he rejected
   the evidence of a violent marital relationship. This flies in the face of
   the concessions made by the respondent in particular those in paragraph
   20 where the respondent appears to accept that threats were made against
   the appellant's father and brother as well as the potential for further
   violence from her husband's family.


14. I do not accept that the error of law was not material. It cannot be
   said that the judge would inevitably have reached the same conclusion had
   he acted fairly.


15. I find that the judge did not err in law by applying an incorrect
   standard of proof. The correct standard is set out in paragraph 9 and the
   words "not satisfied" in paragraph 29 do not indicate that he departed
   from this.


16. I find that the judge made errors of law such that his decision must be
   set aside. It is set aside. It should be reheard and the decision remade.
   None of the judge's findings of fact or credibility are preserved.


17. Whilst the appellant attended the hearing, with at least one of her
   brothers and her father who wished to give evidence, there was no Gorani
   speaking interpreter. The effect of my conclusion is that the appeal must
   be heard afresh. In the circumstances and as it is more likely to be
   heard quickly, I direct that it be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

   1) To be listed for first available date after 1 July 2013 in the First-
      Tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

   2) Time estimate - three hours

   3) The appellant must prepare a properly paginated and indexed bundle
      containing all material previously before the Tribunal, together with
      any further evidence on which she intends to rely including witness
      statements from all witnesses to be filed with the Tribunal and served
      on the respondent no later than 28 June 2013.

   4) Any witness statement must be capable of standing as evidence in
      chief.


   5) The respondent will consider whether the concessions contained in the
      refusal letter continue in force. If not the respondent should inform
      the Tribunal and the appellant's representatives no later than 28 June
      2013.


   6) Gorani speaking Interpreter to be provided





Signed:........................................
    Date:  6 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


