
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA013452015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2016                            |On  17 June  2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     P S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, P S, was born in 1994 and is a male citizen  of  Angola.
    He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ince)  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse him asylum and to make  directions
    for his removal from the United Kingdom.  That decision was made  on  8
    January 2015.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  1
    June 2015, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that he faced the real risk of  ill-treatment  in
    Angola at the hands of his father who he claimed was an officer in  the
    army.  The appellant's account described previous violence to which  he
    had been subjected by his father who had wished the appellant  to  join
    the army whereas the appellant did not wish to do so.  Judge Ince found
    that the appellant had "told the truth about what happened  to  him  in
    his home country." [61]. Where Judge Ince had "great difficulty" was in
    relation to "communications with the [appellant's] mother and the  lack
    of involvement of his  mother's  friend  in  contacting  her  once  her
    telephone number had been lost."  Given that the appellant claimed that
    his mother had been worried about the appellant, it was  not  plausible
    (in the opinion of Judge Ince) that contact had been so  minimal.   The
    judge went on to find [63] that it was not likely that no  mention  had
    been made in conversations between the appellant and his mother of  the
    possible reaction of the appellant's father to  the  appellant  leaving
    home.  The appellant claimed that  he  had  been  in  "a  safe  country
    thousands of miles from home" having travelled to  the  United  Kingdom
    precisely because of the treatment he had received at the hands of  his
    father.  However, Judge Ince found it likely that the  appellant  would
    want her to have known whether her mother had suffered  any  "reprisal"
    for assisting the appellant  to  leave  Angola.   He  made  a  specific
    finding that the appellant and his mother had discussed the appellant's
    father and his reaction [63].  The judge found that the  appellant  had
    denied that such conversation had taken place because the appellant had
    been "told there had been a change  in  his  father's  attitude"  [64].
    This led the judge to conclude that the appellant had decided to remain
    in the United Kingdom for reasons other than a fear of ill-treatment at
    the hands of his father in Angola.

 3. The grounds of appeal are little more than a  disagreement  with  those
    findings.  The judge had accepted the appellant had in  the  past  been
    effectively "kidnapped and assaulted by a man on  the  request  of  his
    father."  The grounds go on to  submit  that  it  was  "not  reasonably
    likely the appellant's father would have had a change of heart."   That
    certainly is one interpretation of the facts but it does  not  displace
    that reached by the judge who has carried out  a  proper  and  thorough
    examination of the evidence and has supported his findings  with  clear
    and cogent reasons.  The judge's findings are not perverse on the  face
    of the evidence nor is  his  reasoning  anything  other  than  entirely
    cogent and well-expressed.

 4. Judge Ince went on to make a finding in the alternative  in  [69].   In
    this paragraph, the judge discusses the likely rank in the army of  the
    appellant's father.  The appellant had initially described  his  father
    as a sergeant but later said he did not know what his rank  was.   When
    the appellant had applied for a visa to come to the United Kingdom, the
    Entry Clearance Officer had recorded that  the  father  was  "a  senior
    military officer".  However, "due to this lack of specific evidence, it
    cannot be said that it would be reasonably likely the father  would  be
    able to [arrange for the appellant to be  conscripted  to  the  Angolan
    Army]."  I find that there is no error in the judge's  conclusion  that
    there is no longer a risk to the appellant from his father but, even if
    there is (as Judge Ince  described  it)  "a  remaining  risk  from  the
    father", the judge's finding at [69] as regards the  inability  of  the
    father to compel the inscription of the appellant  effectively  dispels
    any remaining doubts as to possible risk.

 5. I find, therefore, that Judge Ince has  not  erred  in  law  either  as
    asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
