
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01159/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision an Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                Mr ZABI NIAZI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Saleem, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1990,
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet dated 23 June 2015 to refuse  his  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent dated 23 January 2015 to refuse to grant
    the appellant asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.



 2.  At  the  hearing,  the  representatives  of  the   parties   presented
    submissions on whether the determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Sweet
    involved the making of a material error on a point of law.

 3. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Saleem adopted his grounds of appeal. He
    submitted that the Judge did not take into account all the evidence  in
    the appeal in reaching his decision. The determination does not  refer,
    to much of the evidence which was in the bundle  of  documents,  before
    the previous Judge.

 4. The Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  following  documentary
    evidence. Pages 1-8 of the profile of Basir Salangi,  the  Governor  of
    Parwan Province and Haji Almas MP a businessman of  the  same  province
    who the appellant claims to fear in Afghanistan. The remaining pages 15
    to 17 where the insecurity  throughout  the  country  and  the  Taliban
    increase in power is documented. Pages 47-72 of the UNHCR guidelines on
    pages 71-72 about businessmen and their family members form a  specific
    social group. Page 32 where it is stated officials and commanders whose
    forces have a history of abuse, typically go  unpunished.  Pages  74-75
    where  there  was  a  recommendation   against   sending   particularly
    vulnerable people back to Pakistan. Part B pages 76 to  230  which  was
    submitted pre-decision and is included in the  Home  Office  bundle  of
    documents.

 5. Pages 77 to 95 which has passport copies  of  the  family  members.  In
    pages 98 to 112, he failed to  take  into  account  the  vehicle  lease
    agreement between the appellant's father and East Logistics Company. At
    pages 113-2187, he did not take into account  the  medical  records  of
    Zubair which supports the consistency of the account that the appellant
    received medical treatment in Pakistan, India because of torture. Pages
    118-230 of the medical records of the appellant's mother  who  was  ill
    and who the appellant had to visit in  Afghanistan.  At  page  192,  it
    specifically refers to the brothers kidnapping leading  to  depression.
    Page 202 refers to the kidnapping of  his  brother.   Page  62  in  the
    statement of the appellant's  father  and  documents  relating  to  the
    paternal uncle's death at page 66-77. Also  the  threatening  telephone
    calls from the kidnappers of his uncle. The newspaper article  at  page
    78-82 in regards to the appellant's brother's kidnapping.

 6. Had the Judge taken all this into account,  he  would  have  reached  a
    different conclusion. The appellant's maternal cousin  worked  for  the
    coalition forces and therefore his family members were  targeted  as  a
    result.

 7. The evidence of the appellant's brother who was due to receive  medical
    treatment in the United Kingdom in 2010 but his  visa  was  not  issued
    even though his appeal was allowed.

 8. Mr Saleem further submitted that the Judge did not made findings  on  a
    fundamental limb  of  the  appellant's  claim  in  accordance  with  AF
    warlords. He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  father  is  a  wealthy
    businessman and whether he sent his son a small amount of  money  or  a
    large amount of money, is not material to the decision.

 9. In the  16  November  2010  decision  by  the  First-tier  Judge,  (the
    appellant's father's visa appeal determination) this issue  were  dealt
    with and it was found by the Judge that  the  appellant's  father  will
    return to Pakistan because he  is  wealthy.  He  also  found  that  the
    appellant's brother was kidnapped and there  was  sufficient  objective
    evidence provided in the bundles of documents. The Judge did not  refer
    to any of this evidence.

10. On behalf of the respondent, Tufan submitted as follows.  There  is  no
    material error of law in the determination.  The  case  of  AF  is  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal and  MPs  cannot  be  characterised  as
    warlords even if linked to them. The Judge cited the evidence and found
    it not to be credible and gave sufficient  reasons  for  his  findings.
    Even if the appellant's father is wealthy that does not mean  he  would
    be at risk because not all wealthy people are at risk  in  Afghanistan.
    In the 2010 determination for a the appellant's father's  visitor  visa
    application, the Judge found that there were sufficient funds  for  the
    appellant's father's holiday and that he would  go  back.  It  made  no
    definitive findings about the level of  his  father's  wealth.  If  the
    appellant's father is wealthy no reason has  been  given  for  why  the
    appellant was living in squalor when there were plenty of funds for the
    appellant's for him to live in comfort on his  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom. The FIR which was produced in Pakistan has nothing to do  with
    Afghanistan. The appellant lived in Pakistan for three years. The Judge
    properly considered the issue  of  internal  relocation.  The  case  of
    Devasleen does not apply to the determination by the Judge in his  2010
    determination which was in any event was an appeal against a refusal of
    a visitor's visa for the appellant's father.

11. Mr Saleem replied that AF warlords relates to people in power  as  much
    as it does to warlords. This should have been taken into account  which
    it was not. In the case of ZN which was after the case of AF, this  was
    reinforced. The appellant's father had links  with  the  United  States
    Company and therefore a western government.  Extremely  wealthy  people
    are considered to be a social group as found in the  case  of  AK.  The
    appellant lived in Pakistan for three years and  as  a  result  of  his
    problems in that country, he came to the  United  Kingdom.  There  have
    been inadequate and sufficient reasons given to dismiss the appellant's
    appeal. The  determination  of  2010  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    father's appeal for a visitor's Visa application, should be considered,
    even if it is not binding.

Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

12. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of Immigration Judge
    Sweet. He concluded that he did not find the appellant credible or  his
    claim credible and dismissed his appeal. The appellant's  quarrel  with
    the determination is that there was a lack of  adequate  reasoning  for
    rejecting the  appellant's  credibility  and  a  lack  of  findings  on
    relevant evidence placed before the Judge.

13. The Judge gave the following reasons in his determination in  rejecting
    the appellant's credibility and his claim.

14. At paragraph 56, the Judge stated "I have  not  found  the  appellant's
    account to be credible. There is no evidence that  he  himself  was  at
    risk while living in Afghanistan/Pakistan. Furthermore  if  he  was  at
    such a risk, there was no satisfactory explanation as to why he  sought
    asylum in France in August 2010 and yet did not await  the  outcome  of
    his asylum application but instead return to  Afghanistan.  Furthermore
    his decision to return to Afghanistan in December 2010,  albeit  for  a
    short time before going  to  Pakistan  (where  he  resided  for  nearly
    another three years) is incredible in the context of his  claimed  fear
    from the Taliban. The appellant also has not  satisfactorily  explained
    why he stayed in Pakistan then for nearly 3 years, before returning  to
    the United Kingdom via  Germany  and  France,  using  a  false  Italian
    passport, and claiming asylum in the United Kingdom in  November  2013.
    If he was truly at risk, surely he would have remained  in  France  and
    awaited the outcome of his asylum claim."

15. Paragraph 57 "I do not place much weight of the  discrepancies  in  the
    spelling of his brother's names in the  medical  reports,  not  in  the
    various ages given by his mother to her doctors. It is significant that
    the FIR referred to above relate to Pakistan and not to Afghanistan. It
    is to Afghanistan where  the  appellant  would  be  removed.  There  is
    sufficient evidence of his ability to be relocated in that country  and
    obtain protection, as set out in the  refusal  letter.  For  all  these
    reasons his asylum claim does not succeed in his claim under Articles 2
    and 3 likewise."

16. Paragraph 59 "nor  do  I  consider  that  any  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection can succeed, because there is no real risk of the  appellant
    suffering serious harm on return and there is sufficiency of protection
    (and the ability to relocate) in that country".

17. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that  these  are  not  adequate
    reasons because swathes of evidence provided was not taken into account
    by the Judge which I have set  out  above.  Mr  Saleem  brought  to  my
    attention the bundle of documents which he claims is evidence which was
    not taken into account by the Judge in reaching his decision.

18. Mr Saleem's submissions are  not  entirely  without  merit.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's claim in five paragraphs of reasoning.  While
    I accept that the Judge did not set out all the evidence before him but
    that does not necessarily mean that  he  did  not  consider  it  before
    reaching his decision.

19. The main reasons given for not finding the appellant's  claim  credible
    and upon which much emphasis was  placed  was  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant after having claimed asylum in France, did not wait  for  the
    outcome but returned to Afghanistan in order to see his mother  who  he
    claims was not well.

20. This is a sustainable finding because if the  appellant  was  truly  at
    risk in Afghanistan, he would not have left  a  safe  country,  France,
    where he had claimed asylum and instead return to Afghanistan,  however
    ill his mother was. The appellant must have realised that his  decision
    to leave the country to seek asylum in France would inevitably lead  to
    him being separated from his family. This is a cogent  reason  for  the
    Judge to find that the appellant was not credible and  also  his  claim
    that he fears returning to Afghanistan is not credible.

21. The other reason given by the  Judge  for  not  finding  the  appellant
    credible, was that the appellant lived in Pakistan for nearly  3  years
    after he returned from France, even though he claimed he was in fear of
    the Taliban. The Judge took into account that the appellant returned to
    the United Kingdom from Pakistan using a false  Italian  passport.  The
    Judge found that if the appellant was genuinely at risk in  Afghanistan
    and Pakistan, he would not have been able to live there for three years
    without incident. This is also a cogent reason given by the  Judge  for
    why he did not find the appellant credible or his claim credible.

22. The Judge found that it was not credible that the appellant would  live
    in squalor if his father was  a  very  rich  man,  as  claimed  by  the
    appellant and yet he was given very little money for his journey to the
    United Kingdom. The evidence was that the appellant's father  sent  him
    E300-E400 over a period of four months which is clearly not  sufficient
    for the appellant to live on. Although it was argued on behalf  of  the
    appellant that whether the appellant was given a small amount of  money
    or a large amount of money it was not relevant. I  disagree  because  I
    find that this is highly relevant to the  appellant's  claim  that  his
    father is a very rich man in Afghanistan which  puts  his  children  at
    risk. The appellant in his statement said that it was  enough  for  his
    needs but this still does not explain  why  a  rich  man  with  a  huge
    contract with the United  States  of  America,  earning  a  substantial
    amount of money would allow his son to live in squalor  when  he  could
    have lived comfortably. This is a credible finding.

23. The Judge took into account that the 2010 determination in  respect  of
    the appellant's  father's  appeal  for  a  visitor's  visa.  Mr  Saleem
    accepted that the decision was not binding but said that it  should  be
    taken into account. The appellant's father's  appeal  was  against  the
    refusal of his visitor's visa application.  The  Judge  did  not  place
    reliance on the 2010 determination of the  appellant's  father  because
    the issues were different. The Judge in 2010 found that the appellant's
    father had sufficient funds for his visit and  return  to  Afghanistan.
    This finding does not, in itself say, that the appellant's father is  a
    very rich man. Similarly, the 2010 determination did not  consider  and
    evaluate the  evidence  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  brother  was
    kidnapped because it had no bearing on the criteria to be satisfied  in
    the visa application. It was accepted, very sensibly, by Mr Saleem that
    this is not  a  binding  determination  on  the  Judge  who  heard  the
    appellant's appeal.

24. The question I now have to ask myself is whether these reasons given by
    the Judge were sufficient to dismiss the appellant's claim.  The  Judge
    was entitled to find that the appellant  would  not  have  returned  to
    Afghanistan if he was genuinely in fear. The Judge was also entitled to
    find that the appellant returned to Afghanistan even before he knew the
    outcome of his asylum claim in France. Mr Saleem argued at the  hearing
    that it was an emotional decision because his mother was not  well  and
    that in any event he spent a very  short  time  in  Afghanistan  before
    going to  Pakistan.  This  makes  it  even  more  incredible  that  the
    appellant would return to Afghanistan, only for a  few  hours  and  put
    himself in danger when he was in a safe country awaiting the outcome of
    his asylum appeal. This also does not explain the appellant's objective
    in visiting his mother for only a few hours only to go on to  Pakistan,
    when he could not have seen his mother in any event.

25. The Judge was also  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  lived  in
    Pakistan for three years which is not credible given his claim that  he
    is in fear of the Taliban. The Judge found that the appellant then left
    Pakistan three years later and entered to the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    forged Italian passport and claimed asylum in this country.  The  Judge
    was entitled to find that this is not the profile of a  genuine  asylum
    seeker.

26. I have considered all the documents Mr Saleem very kindly availed me of
    at the hearing which were also before the Judge. I have looked  at  the
    pages that I have referred to and I find all this evidence  still  does
    not take away from the reasoning of the Judge for why he did  not  find
    the appellant credible. I find that no other Tribunal Judge would reach
    a different conclusion, on the evidence.

27. Ultimately, I find that the Judge was entitled to reach the credibility
    conclusions that he did about the appellant and his claim. Even  if  he
    did not refer to all the evidence in his  determination,  it  is  clear
    from the determination, his reasons for not finding  the  appellant  or
    his claim credible is in impeachable. There is  no  reason  to  suspect
    that he did not consider all the evidence in this appeal.

28. I find that no error of law has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's Sweet's  determination.   I  accordingly  uphold  that
    determination.

Decision

I uphold the decision

I dismiss the appellant's appeal


                                          Dated this 5th day of October 2015
Signed by,

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
