
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01605/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 June 2013                               |On 17 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     A A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, of Thompson & Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    O'Keeffe)  dismissing  an  appeal  by   the   appellant   against   the
    respondent's decision of 15 February 2013 refusing him leave  to  enter
    following the refusal of his claim for asylum.


Background

2.   In brief outline the background to this  appeal  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18 August 1985.  He  entered
    the UK on 6 November 2010 with a Tier 4 Student visa.  He went back  to
    Pakistan on 7 December 2012 and returned to the UK on 22  January  2013
    when he claimed asylum.  He claimed that he was an Ahmadi and  that  he
    had come to the UK initially under the guise of being a student because
    he was the victim of an attack on a mosque on 28 May 2010.  He had  had
    no option but to obtain a student visa.  He had been to college for the
    first three months but had opted not to continue his studies and  never
    completed his course.  During his recent stay in Pakistan he  had  been
    sitting with a friend discussing religion when he was introduced  to  a
    man called Nasir.  He later found out that Nasir was a member of Jamaat-
    e-Dawaa and that a police report had  been  filed  against  him  on  16
    January 2013.  He then returned to the UK on 22 January 2013.

3.   In her decision letter of 14 February 2013 the  respondent  noted  that
    according to the  background  information  available  to  her,  if  the
    appellant was an Ahmadi in Pakistan his religion would  be  printed  in
    his passport but his contained no  such  information.   The  respondent
    went on to consider the appellant's account of events in  Pakistan  but
    was not satisfied that he had been reported to the police  or  that  he
    was of any adverse interest to the authorities there.

The Hearing before the Immigration Judge

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  his  uncle.   The
    appellant maintained his claim that he  was  an  Ahmadi.  He  had  been
    involved in Ahmadi activities in Pakistan from 2007  to  2010  and  had
    also been involved in preaching in the UK.  He repeated his claim  that
    in January 2013 he had  met  with  an  activist  in  a  hotel  who  had
    subsequently filed a police report against him.  The police had visited
    his home twice and as a result his family had moved.  His  parents  had
    not had problems with the authorities but they had  had  problems  with
    Khatumnabawat. His uncle said that he knew that the appellant had  been
    in the mosque where there was an explosion  in  May  2010  and  he  had
    arranged the passport for him.  The appellant had stayed with him  when
    he came to the UK in 2010.  He knew he had not been studying and  after
    he left college, he mostly went to the mosque.   When  considering  the
    evidence about the events following the appellant's return to  Pakistan
    on 7 December 2012 the judge commented that it was not  plausible  that
    his friend would place him at risk in such an obvious way.  A  copy  of
    the police report was produced in evidence but the judge did not regard
    this as a genuine or reliable document.

5.   The judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   She
    did not believe that he was an Ahmadi  or  that  he  would  be  of  any
    interest to the authorities on return.  She  noted  that  his  passport
    recorded his religion as Islam and that  when  asked  why  it  did  not
    contain a declaration that he was an Ahmadi, he had given a  number  of
    explanations: his agent had told him that  if  he  mentioned  being  an
    Ahmadi in his passport application he would not get a  visa,  later  in
    interview the appellant said that after he received  his  passport  and
    saw that Islam was recorded in the religious column the agent told  him
    that if he changed it he would not get a visa and when it was later put
    in interview that he did not get his passport amended  when  aware  the
    details were incorrect  he  said  that  the  agent  had  requested  the
    passport be delivered urgently for a visa and they did not have  enough
    time to get it amended.

6.   In oral evidence in cross-examination the appellant was  asked  whether
    he had told the agent to put Ahmadi in his passport,  he  replied  yes.
    He said again that the agent had told him he would not get a visa if he
    changed his passport to Ahmadi.  The judge was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant had given a plausible explanation  as  to  why  his  passport
    recorded his religion as Islam if in fact he was an Ahmadi.

7.   The judge commented that the appellant had said that  he  was  involved
    in  Ahmadi  activities  but  the  letter  from  UK   Ahmadiyya   Muslim
    Association produced in support of his claim made  no  mention  of  the
    involvement he described and in particular did not  mention  his  claim
    that he had been involved in preaching or had had  any  specific  role.
    She found that his account of his role within the community in Pakistan
    was not supported by the letter and that he had not  demonstrated  that
    he was involved in Ahmadi activities in Pakistan.

8.   The  judge  took  into  account  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  as  damaging  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Although the appellant had said he  spent  some  time  at
    college, when he was asked in interview what he was  studying,  he  had
    said that he did not come to  study.   The  judge  found  that  he  had
    entered the UK as  a  claimed  student  and  that  this  was  behaviour
    designed or likely to mislead and  should  be  taken  into  account  as
    damaging  his  credibility.   Further,  he  had  accepted   in   cross-
    examination that he had been in fear when he left Pakistan in 2010  but
    had not claimed asylum on arrival later in 2010.  The judge rejected an
    argument that she should  not  draw  any  adverse  inference  from  his
    failure to claim asylum at that time on the basis that a fear  was  not
    the same as qualifying for asylum and the attack on the mosque had been
    an attack of indiscriminate violence.  The judge pointed out  that  the
    appellant's explanation  for  not  claiming  asylum  was  that  he  was
    frightened of being placed in the fast  track  procedure  and  returned
    home.

9.   She summarised her findings as follows:

         "38. Considering the evidence as a whole I find that the  appellant
             has not given a credible or plausible account of the  incident
             in January 2013 which he claims resulted in the police  report
             against  him.   Although  the  letter   from   the   Ahmadiyya
             Association  sets  out  the  appellant's  involvement  in  the
             community in the UK, I  have  already  set  out  the  lack  of
             information as to when  those  activities  took  place  and  I
             attach  limited  weight  in  any  event  to  these  sur  place
             activities.  On  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not demonstrated that he is genuinely an Ahmadi.


         39.  If I am wrong on that, I consider the  appellant's  intentions
             or wishes as to his faith if returned to  Pakistan.   For  the
             reasons set out above, I  find  that  the  appellant  was  not
             involved in Ahmadi activity in Pakistan to the extent that  he
             claimed.  Information provided by the Ahmadiyya Association in
             the  UK  about  the  appellant's  engagement  in  the   Ahmadi
             community in Pakistan may be summarised as  showing  that  the
             appellant was of good  character  and  was  connected  to  the
             auxiliary organisation  for  his  age  group.   There  was  no
             suggestion  that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  what   is
             described in MN as paragraph 2(i) behaviour.


         40.  The appellant had demonstrated  that  he  was  involved  to  a
             degree with the Ahmadiyya community in the UK but not  to  the
             extent  that  he  claimed.   The  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya
             community did not specify when the appellant was  involved  in
             such  activity.   The  appellant's  uncle  did  not  give  any
             evidence that the appellant had  been  involved  in  paragraph
             2(i) behaviour in the UK and there were no witnesses  to  give
             evidence that he had been actively involved  in  preaching  or
             proselytising.  On the evidence before  me  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not discharged the burden of demonstrating  that
             he has any intentional wish to practise or manifest his  faith
             openly in Pakistan or that it is important to him to  preserve
             his religious identity.


         41.  The appellant's own evidence was  that  his  parents  had  not
             faced any problems with the authorities and  on  his  evidence
             they had clearly been  able  to  practise  their  faith  on  a
             restricted basis.  Even if I am wrong on my finding  that  the
             appellant is not an Ahmadi, his evidence does not  demonstrate
             that he practised his faith at all in Pakistan or that he  did
             so on anything other than a restricted basis which  would  not
             infringe domestic Pakistani law."

Grounds and Submissions

10.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred in law in the way  she
    approached s.8 of the 2004 Act and in particular by failing  to  engage
    with the basic point made by the appellant's  representative  that  his
    presence at the explosion in the mosque in 2010 would not place him  in
    need of international protection.  The grounds argue that it could  not
    be said that the appellant had failed to take advantage of a reasonable
    opportunity to claim asylum if he would  not  have  qualified  at  that
    time.  It is also argued that the judge appeared to treat s.8 issues as
    automatically damaging the appellant's credibility.  The  grounds  then
    argue that the judge reached  conclusions  which  were  not  rationally
    sustainable particularly in relation to his answers at interview  about
    why he was not listed as an Ahmadi in his passport (Q85 and 88).

11.  In his submissions Mr Khan  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  been
    entitled to find that the appellant was not an Ahmadi.   She  had  been
    wrong to place such weight on the  explanations  given  about  why  the
    appellant's passport did not contain the declaration  that  he  was  an
    Ahmadi.  He submitted that the judge had  misunderstood  the  evidence.
    The appellant's concerns about being identified as  an  Ahmadi  in  his
    passport  arose from the fact that he could not get  a  visa  from  the
    British authorities if he had disclosed that he  was  an  Ahmadi.   The
    fact that he was in fact an Ahmadi was confirmed by the letter from the
    Ahmadiyya Association which described him as an Ahmadi by  birth  whose
    contact and cooperation with the Ahmadi community had been  good.   The
    judge had failed to take into account, so he argued, what had been said
    in the country guidance determination in MN & Others (Ahmadis - country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 at [66] that Ahmadiyya
    Associations kept sophisticated records of their members.  He submitted
    that the judge had failed to deal adequately with the issues arising in
    the letter relied on.  He adopted the  arguments  set  in  the  grounds
    about s.8 but did not seek to add  any  further  submissions  on  those
    issues.

12.  We did not need to hear from Mr Saunders.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

13.  The issue for us at this stage of the appeal  is  whether  the  judge's
    determination contained an error of law,  and  if  it  did  whether  we
    should set her decision aside and re-make it.  We would only  take  the
    latter course, if we concluded that any error  was  likely  to  make  a
    difference to the outcome.  We shall deal first with the issues  raised
    in the grounds.  The main argument in the grounds is that the judge was
    wrong to draw an adverse inference on credibility under  s.8  from  the
    fact that the appellant had not claimed asylum when he arrived  in  the
    UK in November 2010 as he would not have been entitled to asylum had he
    claimed then because the bomb  attack  was  an  act  of  indiscriminate
    violence and was not aimed at him.  However, this submission  overlooks
    the fact that it was the appellant's evidence that he had been in  fear
    when he left Pakistan in 2010 and that the  purpose  of  obtaining  the
    student visa was  so  that  he  could  come  to  the  UK  and  his  own
    explanation for not claiming asylum was that he was in  fear  of  being
    placed in the fast track procedure and being returned home.

14.  Further, the appellant's uncle in his evidence said that  some  of  the
    appellant's friends had advised him to  apply  for  asylum  as  he  had
    suffered on account of his faith but he refused to  do  so  as  he  was
    frightened of the fast track procedure.   In  these  circumstances  the
    judge was entitled to take the view that a failure to claim  asylum  in
    2010 was a factor properly to be taken into account in  her  assessment
    of credibility and in the light of the  appellant's  admission  of  his
    reasons for coming to the UK and  that  it  had  never  been  his  real
    intention to study, she was also entitled to taking that  conduct  into
    account as behaviour designed or likely to mislead.

15.  There is nothing in  the  determination  to  indicate  that  the  judge
    regarded  these  factors  as  automatically  damaging  the  appellant's
    credibility as the grounds assert.  She approached  her  assessment  of
    credibility in line with the guidance given by the Court of  Appeal  in
    JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State [2008] EWCA Civ 878 by taking  those
    factors into account in the light of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  when
    assessing credibility.

16.  The grounds also argue that the judge reached  conclusions  which  were
    not rationally sustainable on the issue of why the appellant's passport
    did not contain the  endorsement  describing  him  as  an  Ahmadi.  The
    different explanations are a little difficult to understand. Before  us
    it was submitted that the judge misunderstood that  the  appellant  was
    saying that the agents told him that the British High Commission  would
    not grant him a student visa if he declared  that  he  was  an  Ahmadi,
    presumably because if he did so declare they  would  think  he  was  an
    asylum claimant rather than a genuine student. It is possible that  the
    judge did not quite understand that this was being said, however,  that
    does not mean that there was a material  error  of  law.  Indeed,  this
    explanation might reinforce the overall conclusion that the  appellant,
    if he was Ahmadi at all, was not a prominent one given his  willingness
    to suppress any reference to his faith in order to obtain a visa.

17.  At the hearing  Mr  Khan  focused  his  submissions  primarily  on  the
    judge's finding that the appellant was not a genuine Ahmadi.   Although
    this issue was not directly raised in the grounds, we do have  concerns
    about whether the judge properly took into account the guidance  in  MN
    in  particular  at  [66]  that  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  is  highly
    organised and capable of providing sophisticated information about  its
    members.  Although the appellant was not described as an Ahmadi on  his
    passport, the letter from the Ahmadiyya Association described him as an
    Ahmadi from birth.  If  this  appeal  turned  on  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had established that he was at the time  of  the  hearing  an
    Ahmadi, we would have taken the view that the judge had erred in law in
    her assessment of that issue by failing to take relevant evidence,  the
    letter from the Ahmadiyya Association, into account.

18.  However, the judge went on  to  consider  in  the  alternative  if  the
    appellant  was  an  Ahmadi,  whether  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.  She found that he  had  not  been  involved  in
    Ahmadi activity in Pakistan to the extent  that  he  claimed.   We  are
    satisfied that that was a finding of fact properly open  to  her.   She
    had understandable concerns about why the appellant's passport recorded
    his religion as Islam and there was  no  declaration  that  he  was  an
    Ahmadi.  The fact that the appellant had obtained a  passport  in  this
    form tends to suggests that if in fact he is  an  Ahmadi,  he  did  not
    regard his  faith  as  compromised  by  obtaining  a  passport  in  the
    circumstances he  describes.   So  far  as  his  involvement  with  the
    Ahmadiyya community in the UK is concerned, she was  entitled  to  take
    the view that the letter did not specify when he was so involved and to
    note that his uncle did not give evidence that he had been involved  in
    the kind of activities set out in the country guidance determination in
    MN as likely to give rise to a real risk of persecution.

19.  The judge considered the  appellant's  evidence  about  the  events  of
    January 2013.  It was for her to decide what  weight  to  give  to  the
    evidence.  She was entitled to reject his evidence for the reasons  she
    gave.  She did not find it plausible that his friend would place him at
    risk as he described and she has explained why the document produced in
    support was not reliable.  She was also entitled to take  into  account
    the appellant's own  evidence  that  his  parents  had  not  faced  any
    problems with the authorities.   She  took  into  account  the  country
    guidance in MN, and in light of her findings of fact it was open to her
    to find that the appellant did not  come  within  the  risk  categories
    identified in that decision.

20.  In summary, we find that even if the judge erred in law in her  finding
    that the appellant was not an Ahmadi, her finding that he would not  be
    at risk on return was properly open to her for the  reasons  she  gave.
    Any error of law on whether  he  was  an  Ahmadi  does  not  affect  or
    undermine her findings on whether he  would  be  at  risk  and  is  not
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

Decision

21.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and the decision stands.

22.  There has been no application to vary or discharge the anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and that order remains in force.






Signed                                  Date: 17 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

