
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01833/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 20 August 2013                               |On 23 September 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          Sribraveekarah Sivakumar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, instructed by K Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sribraveekarah Sivakumar, was born on  6  December  1988
    and is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student in December 2010.  He returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    October 2012 and, when he subsequently returned to the  United  Kingdom
    on 1 November 2012, he  claimed  asylum.   On  12  February  2013,  the
    respondent decided to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and  refused
    him leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Birkby)  which,  in  a
    determination which is dated 14 April 2013, dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are  two  grounds  of  appeal.   The  second  ground  deals  with
    challenges to the factual findings of the judge at [34].  I shall  deal
    with  that  ground  subsequently.   The  first  ground  challenges  the
    handling of the medical evidence  by  the  judge.   There  are  medical
    reports by Dr Lord and also Dr  Nutt,  a  general  practitioner.   Both
    doctors dealt with the possibility that  the  appellant  was  suffering
    from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and dealt also with scarring
    marks on the appellant's back.  Dr Lord at [29] noted:

         "The scars on his back are diagnostic of healed  burns  made  by  a
         long straight hot object held against the  skin.   In  the  upright
         position one would expect a gap over the hollow over the spine  but
         if he was lying face down with his hands  pulled  tight  under  the
         bench then the hollow would be smoothed out and the  appearance  of
         the burn would be seen as in the photographs.  These are not  in  a
         position where he could have inflicted them himself.  It would have
         been extremely painful at the time and he must have been restrained
         in some way for so many symmetrical burns to be made."

 3. In his report, Dr Nutt concluded:

         "Because of the manner in which Mr Sribraveekarah  was  interviewed
         by myself I believe it highly  unlikely  that  he  would  have  the
         knowledge or the wit to fabricate some of his symptoms such as  the
         symptoms of hypervigilance and flashbacks.   In  summary,  I  found
         that Mr Sribraveekarah to be quite a plausible young man with  some
         clear cut, corroborative evidence of physical torture as  I  cannot
         perceive of any other means by which the scarring on his back could
         have occurred.  I also find his  mental  health  symptoms  fit  the
         diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder."

 4. The judge found that the evidence viewed as a whole indicated that  the
    appellant was not a witness of truth [36].  Dealing  with  the  medical
    evidence at [39], he wrote:

         "Clearly prior to coming  to  any  of  my  conclusions  as  to  the
         appellant's credibility I  carefully  considered  all  the  medical
         evidence, but I note  that  much  of  what  Dr  Lord  and  Dr  Nutt
         concluded was based on the appellant's own account.   There  is  no
         evidence that they have  in  any  way  attempted  to  question  the
         credibility of what the appellant has told them.  I do  not  accept
         the appellant suffers from PTSD for the reasons stated or at all."

 5. Mr Muquit submitted that that paragraph provided an inadequate analysis
    of the medical evidence.  Further, Dr Nutt in his report had  expressly
    dealt with the possibility  that  the  appellant  was  malingering  (as
    quoted above, the doctor considered  it  unlikely  that  the  appellant
    would be able to fabricate the symptoms of PTSD).  Mr Wardle,  for  the
    respondent, submitted that the  judge  had  adequately  considered  the
    medical evidence; the quotations which I have set out  above  from  the
    reports appear verbatim in the text of  Judge  Birkby's  determination.
    The judge also made detailed findings on other parts  of  the  evidence
    [at 34] which Mr Muquit acknowledged were "problematic" from the  point
    of view of the appellant's credibility.

 6. All the evidence should be considered as  a  totality  before  a  judge
    makes any findings of fact or assessment of credibility (Mibanga (2005)
    EWCA Civ 367)  I find that the judge was aware of the need to do so  at
    [38] ("clearly prior to coming to any  of  my  conclusions  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility  and  where  I  carefully  considered  all  the
    medical evidence ...").  The grounds assert that, notwithstanding  what
    the judge said at [38], he had already concluded that the appellant was
    not a credible witness before  turning  to  the  medical  evidence.   I
    disagree with that submission.  I  see  no  reason  to  go  behind  the
    judge's clear statement.  In any event, the judge's  analysis  was  not
    flawed simply because he dealt  with  the  medical  reports  after  his
    consideration of the other evidence; a judge must start his analysis of
    the evidence somewhere and it is clear that the judgment in Mibanga  is
    "not intended to place judicial fact finders  in  a  form  of  forensic
    straightjacket" (see HH (Medical evidence; effect of Mibanga)  Ethiopia
    [2005] UKAIT 00164).

 7. The question remains  whether  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  medical
    evidence was sufficient in the circumstances.  It is undeniably  brief.
    I accept that, certainly so far as PTSD  was  concerned,  Dr  Nutt  had
    considered the possibility that the appellant was malingering  arguably
    thereby lending his evidence  greater  weight.   However,  the  judge's
    findings of fact  in  relation  to  the  other  evidence  at  [34]  are
    extremely detailed and well-reasoned and, as  Mr  Muquit  acknowledged,
    present severe problems as regards the credibility  of  the  appellant.
    Further, I consider it significant that the judge has been  careful  to
    deal with (and to quote from) those parts of the medical reports  which
    most firmly support the appellant's case; his analysis would have  been
    weakened had he not done so.  In  addition,  the  judge  has  not  left
    hanging in the air the question as to how the scars were inflicted upon
    the appellant; without descending  into  speculation,  he  observed  at
    [35]:

         "I do not accept that  he  was  ever  arrested  or  tortured.   His
         vagueness and inconsistency as to what happened in order for him to
         be released have seriously undermined his claim  to  have  been  in
         detention to have escaped through the payment of a bribe.  I do not
         accept as reasonably likely his explanation for the  scars  on  his
         back namely that they were inflicted by the Sri Lankan authorities.
          I think there must be a serious possibility in this case that  the
         appellant returned to Sri Lanka in October 2010  and  arranged  for
         someone to inflict the scarring on him in order that his subsequent
         asylum claim would be more credible.  Whatever  the  explanation  I
         reject the whole of the appellant's assertions about being tortured
         in custody and that the scarring was perpetrated by the Sri  Lankan
         authorities."

 8. That passage of the judge's analysis deals, in my  opinion,  adequately
    with the observations of Dr Lord which I  have  quoted  above  and  the
    views of Dr Nutt.  The appellant's overall credibility was such that it
    was open to the judge to reject the appellant's claim  that  the  scars
    had been inflicted by the Sri Lankan authorities.  The  judge  did  not
    seek to contradict Dr  Lord  by  finding  that  the  scars  were  self-
    inflicted and the manner in which the judge considered it  likely  that
    the scars had been  inflicted  is  consistent  with  the  "evidence  of
    physical torture" observed by Dr Nutt.  To look at  the  issue  from  a
    different angle, it cannot be right that the judge should be  compelled
    by the observations of the medical experts to  accept  the  appellant's
    claim that he had been tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities when  all
    the remaining evidence in the appeal indicated that the  appellant  was
    an unreliable witness.  It follows from the judge's rejection  of  that
    claim that he should also attach limited weight to the medical evidence
    at least in part because the accounts  of  past  events  given  to  the
    doctors by the appellant had  been  unreliable.   In  my  opinion,  the
    judge's approach is entirely in line with the guidance provided by  the
    Upper Tribunal in JL (Medical reports - credibility) China [2013]  UKUT
    145 (IAC):



    (1) Those writing medical reports for use  in  immigration  and  asylum
    appeals  should  ensure  where  possible  that,  before  forming  their
    opinions, they study any assessments that have already been made of the
    appellant's  credibility  by  the  immigration  authorities  and/or   a
    tribunal  judge  (SS  (Sri  Lanka) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155 [30]; BN
    (psychiatric evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC) at
    [49], [53])). When the materials  to  which  they  should  have  regard
    include previous determinations by a judge, they should not  conduct  a
    running commentary on the reasoning of the  judge  who  has  made  such
    findings, but should  concentrate  on  describing  and  evaluating  the
    medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 [37].


    (2)   They should also bear in mind that when  an  advocate  wishes  to
    rely  on  their  medical  report  to  support  the  credibility  of  an
    appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about  it
    affords support to what  the  appellant  has  said  and  which  is  not
    dependent on what the appellant  has  said  to  the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,
    credibility and  psychiatric  reports)  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis  is  dependent  on  assuming
    that the account given by the appellant was to be  believed,  the  less
    likely it is that  significant  weight  will  be  attached  to  it  (HH
    (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).


    (3)   The authors of such medical reports also need to understand  that
    what is expected of them is a critical and objective  analysis  of  the
    injuries and/or symptoms displayed.  They  need  to  be  vigilant  that
    ultimately whether an appellant's account of the underlying  events  is
    or is not credible and plausible is a question of legal appraisal and a
    matter for the tribunal judge, not the expert  doctors  (IY [47];  see
    also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).


    (4)   For their part, judges should be aware that, whilst  the  overall
    assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports may well involve
    assessments of  the  compatibility  of  the  appellant's  account  with
    physical marks or symptoms, or mental condition: (SA  (Somalia) [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1302). If the position were otherwise, the central  tenets  of
    the Istanbul Protocol would  be  misconceived,  whenever  there  was  a
    dispute about claimed causation of scars, and judges  could  not  apply
    its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined to do by SA (Somalia).
    Even where medical experts rely heavily on the  account  given  by  the
    person concerned, that does not mean their reports lack or  lose  their
    status  as  independent  evidence,  although   it   may   reduce   very
    considerably the weight that can be attached to them.




 9. As the Tribunal in JL  noted,  the  question  of  the  credibility  and
    plausibility of an appellant's account  is  a  matter  for  a  Tribunal
    judge, not a doctor.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  the  judge  has
    rejected the reports because he did not consider them  as  "independent
    evidence" but, as JL acknowledges, the reliance of the doctors upon  an
    unreliable account from  the  appellant  was  likely  to  "reduce  very
    considerably the weight that could be attached to [the reports]".

10. In conclusion, I find that the judge  has  not  erred  in  law  in  his
    approach to or handling of the medical evidence.  He  has  not  ignored
    evidence which was relevant (indeed, he has engaged with  it  directly)
    and he has supported his findings by clear reasoning.

11. The remainder of the grounds criticise the judge's  findings  at  [34].
    The judge had prefaced his detailed findings of  credibility  with  the
    words, "[the appellant's]  evidence  was  at  times  vague  implausible
    evasive and inconsistent.  I shall cite some  examples  although  these
    are not exhaustive".   Mr  Muquit  submitted  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to know the basis upon which his claim had been  rejected  and
    the judge's selective approach had left this in doubt.  I do not agree.
     It is clear from the determination that the judge has dealt with those
    parts  of  the  appellant's  account  which  he  found  undermined  his
    credibility as a witness.  He was right to consider matters which  went
    to the core of the appellant's account rather than  peripheral  issues.
    I consider that anyone reading this determination would be left  in  no
    doubt as to the reasons why the judge had not accepted the appellant as
    a witness of truth.  It is also  trite  law  that  the  judge  was  not
    required to deal with and make findings in respect of  each  and  every
    item of evidence in his determination.

12. I find that the judge has not erred in law such that his  determination
    falls to be set aside and as a consequence this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 1 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
