

IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01591/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th October 2015                  |On 26th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                            Mr hashem esmaelzadh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik of Counsel, instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iran born 20th  March  1978,  appeals,  with
    permission, the decision of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Caswell),
    which in a decision promulgated on 31st March 2015 dismissed his appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision  of  15th  January  2015,  to
    refuse to grant him asylum and leave to enter the UK.



Background

 2. The Appellant first arrived in the UK in May 2001 and  claimed  asylum.
    His claim was refused and the subsequent appeal dismissed in 2002.  The
    Appellant remained in the UK and on 14th December 2009 he was granted a
    certificate of approval to marry  a  British  citizen,  Ms  Neal.  They
    married on 20th March 2010. In 2010 and 2012, according to Mr Karnik in
    his permission grounds, the Appellant made  further  submissions  under
    the Legacy and those further submissions have yet to be considered.

 3. In 2013 the Appellant was told that his father in Iran had  suffered  a
    serious heart attack and was dangerously ill. He therefore  decided  to
    leave the UK to visit his father, but before leaving on 5th April  2013
    he  approached  his  MP  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, seeking permission to re-enter the UK. This was refused.

 4. On 10th March 2014 the Appellant arrived at Heathrow and claimed asylum
    on arrival. On 15th January 2015 the Respondent refused the  claim  and
    made a removal decision. He appealed that decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Appellant's case before the  FtT  can  be  summarised  as
    follows. He remained living in the UK after his original  asylum  claim
    was refused. He became destitute and had to move in with a drug  addict
    in order to have a roof over his  head.  He  got  involved  with  drugs
    himself and committed a number of offences. In 2002 he met his wife and
    they married in 2010.

 5. The Appellant's wife is a British national. He made a family life  with
    her in the UK and spent time with her adult  children  from  her  first
    marriage and with her grandchildren. After his  most  recent  and  most
    serious offence in 2010, the Appellant decided he  wanted  to  get  off
    drugs. He asked to be sent on a  drug  treatment  programme,  completed
    this and has been drug free for about the last five years.

 6. After considering the Appellant's asylum claim, the FtT found it to  be
    not a credible one. The Judge the Appellant was not a witness of  truth
    and did not accept that he fled his country for the reasons, or in  the
    circumstances, claimed. She also did not  accept  that  he  is  of  any
    adverse interest to the Iranian authorities  on  political  grounds  or
    otherwise.

 7. Having found that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Refugee Convention, nor of Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR,  the  Judge
    turned to Article 8 ECHR. She first considered  whether  the  Appellant
    met the requirements of Appendix FM in terms of family/private life. At
    [48] she found, on the evidence before her, she could not be  satisfied
    that the Appellant demonstrated  he  would  meet  all  the  eligibility
    criteria of Appendix FM. Nor was she satisfied that  EX1  applied.  She
    therefore dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 8. The grounds seeking permission, on a renewed  application  to  the  UT,
    submit in essence;

       . There  were  material  errors  in  respect  of  the  FtT's  adverse
         credibility findings.

       . There has been no clear finding at [48] of  whether  the  Appellant
         meets the eligibility and suitability requirements of  Appendix  FM
         to the Rules.

       . This impacts on whether EX.1 applies, which in  turn  impacts  upon
         any Article 8 proportionality assessment.

UT Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Karnik kept very much
    to the lines of the grounds seeking permission and relied on  paragraph
    37 of the Respondent's Reasons for Refusal letter.  He  submitted  that
    this showed that the Respondent had not properly included all  relevant
    matters when considering whether the Appellant met Article 8 within the
    context of the Rules as  she  was  obliged  to  do.  The  paragraph  37
    consideration is a 'truncated' one and therefore defective.

10. This left the Judge, he said, in the  position  of  being  the  primary
    decision maker, and led her in to error. The only  way  that  EX.1  can
    properly be excluded, is if a fair and proper consideration of  factors
    in Appendix FM has been carried out. This exercise s has not been  done
    here. The consequences flowing from that, impacted  on  the  Article  8
    ECHR assessment.

11. In support of this he referred to [48] of the  Judge's  decision  which
    showed that she had not reached a 'settled' conclusion under the Rules.
    In the context of a removal decision such a conclusion  was  necessary.
    Neither the Secretary of State nor the Judge had reached a  sustainable
    complete decision on that aspect of the case. The Judge gave  no  clear
    reasons why the Appellant is ineligible under the Rules  and  seemingly
    went on herself to accept at [52] that the Secretary of State  had  not
    given the matter full consideration either.

12. He concluded by submitting, that  in  the  absence  of  clear  decision
    making by the Respondent, the Judge was rightly reticent to trespass on
    the grounds of the primary decision maker. The only proper  course  and
    the one which the Judge should have undertaken, would be to return  the
    matter to the Secretary of State for her to  make  a  full  and  proper
    consideration of the Appellant's case.

13. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the  Respondent  robustly  defended  the  FtT's
    decision. He submitted that the Judge had  extensively  considered  the
    Appellant's credibility, found that the Appellant  had  fabricated  his
    asylum claim,  considered  the  material  changes  in  the  Appellant's
    account of persecution in his second claim to asylum,  but  also  found
    them devoid of credibility. The Judge had  given  proper  and  thorough
    reasons for finding as she did. She  made  a  clear  finding  that  the
    Appellant was able to return to  Iran  and  reside  there  without  any
    adverse interests from the authorities.

14. He said that in considering Article 8 pursuant to Appendix FM the Judge
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated on  balance  that
    the relationship between him and Ms Neal was genuine and subsisting and
    therefore she was not required to consider EX.1.  In  the  alternative,
    the Judge had  considered  a  freestanding  Article  8  assessment  and
    concluded that any interference with family or private  life  would  be
    proportionate. The decision was well  reasoned,  bearing  in  mind  the
    overall credibility findings.

15. In any event he said, the Judge had gone on to consider EX.1 but  found
    that on the evidence before her the  Appellant  could  not  demonstrate
    there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life,  with  Ms  Neal,
    continuing in Iran.

Error of Law

16. I start my consideration by finding that so far as the Judge's decision
    relates to the Appellant's asylum claim, it  is  a  well  reasoned  and
    careful one. In [44] the Judge sets out clearly her reasons for finding
    the Appellant not to be a witness of truth when analysing  his  reasons
    for leaving Iran. She found, further, that he is  not  of  any  adverse
    interest to the Iranian  authorities,  such  as  to  bring  him  within
    Article 2 or 3 or the Refugee Convention. On  a  full  reading  of  her
    decision, I find no reason to disturb those findings. Those reasons are
    properly  evidenced  and  as  the  Judge  granting  permission   neatly
    observed;

         "The Judge's decision is clearly a detailed and thoughtful one  the
         ground in respect of the adverse credibility findings seems  doomed
         to failure in view of the careful and detailed conclusions  reached
         on  the  evidence,  including  with  reference  to   the   previous
         determination ..."

17. Mr Karnik's main argument centres around a  criticism  of  the  Judge's
    fact finding (or more precisely it would seem a lack of  fact  finding)
    on whether the Appellant satisfies the eligibility criteria in Appendix
    FM. Only once that exercise happens can there be a proper and  reasoned
    finding on whether EX.1 applies. If  EX.1  applies  then  this  can  be
    factored into the Article 8 proportionality assessment.

18. The Respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter  contains  the  following
    heading Leave to Remain as a Partner  under  Immigration  Rules.  Under
    that heading the Secretary of State acknowledges that the Appellant  is
    married to Karen Neal a British citizen. The next two  paragraphs  then
    deal, as they say, with the Appellant's relationship with  Karen  Neal.
    It goes into detail about Karen Neal's children, who are adults in  any
    event and then says;

         "It is noted that you were out of the UK from ... a period of  just
         over eleven months ... It is your account that you returned to  the
         UK when you did because you were fleeing. You do not claim to  have
         returned to the UK when you did so that you could be reunited  with
         Karen.

         It is therefore considered not unreasonable to refuse to grant  you
         leave under E-LTRP 1.2 of appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  It
         is considered that you and your wife can continue your relationship
         in Iran or maintain it between the UK and Iran by means  of  modern
         communication, as you have shown yourself to be willing and able to
         do so."

19. It has always been  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  does  fulfil  the
    requirements of EX1 because he and Ms Neal have a genuine  relationship
    and there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK. It is that issue which is at the heart of this  matter.
    However I see little or no merit in Mr Karnik's argument.  I  say  this
    for the following reasons.

20. Mr Karnik made much of criticising the Judge for her analysis  at  [52]
    and [53]. What she said there when discussing the merits of appendix FM
    was the following;

         "In any event, given my findings as to  the  Appellant's  potential
         failures under the Suitability and Eligibility requirements,  I  am
         not satisfied that EX.1 applies. As indicated above, the  appellant
         has not applied under Appendix FM and the matter has  not  received
         full consideration by the Respondent with all the evidence normally
         submitted on such an application.

         I was not addressed by Mr Karnik on the 276ADE point and  I  accept
         the Respondent's submissions in this regard, that is  he  does  not
         meet the private life provisions in the Rules. It  follows  that  I
         find the Appellant ... cannot succeed on Article  8  grounds  under
         the Rules."

21. I fail to see why Mr Karnik submits as he  does  that  this  shows  the
    Judge is equivocating. It seems to me that what the Judge is saying, is
    that she is not satisfied that the evidence before her showed that  the
    Appellant and Ms Neal are in a genuine and subsisting relationship. She
    has justified this conclusion by finding the Appellant did  not  submit
    the evidence which would normally be submitted on such an  application.
    In other words the evidence falls short of that  which  the  Respondent
    would expect to receive in any such application. It is a matter for the
    Appellant to produce the required evidence. The hearing before the  FtT
    was his opportunity to put forward the best evidence he had. The  Judge
    decided having considered all that evidence, there was a lacuna in  the
    documentary evidence, and this meant she wasn't  satisfied  as  to  the
    genuineness of the relationship. There  is  nothing  perverse  in  that
    finding. It was simply one which was  open  to  her  on  the  available
    evidence.

22. Having made that finding it is arguable that  that  was  sufficient  to
    dispose of the  matter.  The  Judge  decided  for  whatever  reason  to
    consider EX.1. Even so, she found that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life between the Appellant and Ms  Neal  continuing
    in Iran. She considered the available evidence, which I am bound to say
    in my judgment, falls far  short  of  what  is  required  to  establish
    insurmountable obstacles.

23. There is a second strand to Mr Karnik's criticism of the  decision.  He
    relies on 2 further  factors.  He  argues  that  the  Respondent's  own
    evidence from FCO shows it would not be safe for Ms Neal to follow  the
    Appellant to Iran and secondly the Judge made an unjustifiable  finding
    at [51] where she says "....... If she were joining him  as  his  wife,
    presumably Ms Neal would be granted Iranian  citizenship  derived  from
    her husband...." Dealing with the second factor first, I agree with  Mr
    Karnik that  the  presumption  at  [51]  appears  to  be  made  without
    evidential foundation and is therefore an error, but in the context  of
    the Judge's other findings the error is immaterial. In addition a  look
    at the COIR dated  November  2014,  and  which  was  submitted  in  the
    Appellant's bundle paragraph 2.11  says  under  the  heading  MARRIAGE:
    "Foreign woman who marries an Iranian man is entitled to citizenship"

24. What the Judge says when discussing the FCO guidance at [51] (which  it
    must be remembered is guidance to travellers) is the following;

         "There is an absence of evidence before me as to the prevalence  of
         British Iranians in Iran ... I was not addressed in any  detail  on
         the point and there was very little on it available to  me.  I  did
         not find that the evidence of the conventional and limited help she
         (Ms Neal) gives her  mother  and  daughter  is  so  significant  or
         necessary that it would form a good reason why she should remain in
         the UK, if her husband were to live elsewhere."

    On that basis she found that  she  could  not  be  satisfied  that  EX1
    applied. I see no reason to disturb those findings.

25. I am satisfied therefore that the  FtT's  decision  shows  that  proper
    consideration has been given, not only to the Appellant's asylum claim,
    but also to his article 8 claim through the prism  of  the  Rules.  The
    decision contains no error requiring it to be set aside.

Decision

26. For the foregoing reasons this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signature     Dated
Mrs C Roberts
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



The appeal is dismissed, therefore there is no fee award made.


Signature     Dated
Mrs C Roberts
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
