
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01964/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 7 November 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     bh
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the appellant has been granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings  and
after their conclusion, absent any  order  to  the  contrary  by  the  Upper
Tribunal or any other Court seised of relevant  proceedings.  No  report  of
these proceedings, in  whatever  form,  either  during  the  proceedings  or
thereafter, shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. Failure  to
comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


 1. The appellant, an Afghan citizen born in 1996 (now almost 17 years old)
    appeals with permission against the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese, who dismissed his challenge to  the  Secretary
    of State's decision that he is not entitled to the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention or to humanitarian protection.

 2. This is an upgrade appeal:  the appellant has  discretionary  leave  to
    remain, because of his age, and has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    since he was about 12 years old.

 3. The challenge to the determination is to the reasoning, principally  in
    paragraph 19.  Permission was granted on that basis.

 4. The Secretary of State's case is contained in a Rule 24 Notice in which
    she submits that the reasoning at paragraph 19 is adequate.

 5. That was the basis on which the appeal came before us for hearing.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 6. At the hearing, after a discussion with the parties, Mr Avery  for  the
    respondent  relied  on  the  Rule  24  Notice,  and  made  no   further
    submissions.

 7. For the appellant, Mr Chirico made submissions in line with his pleaded
    grounds of appeal; it is not necessary to set them out in full.

Discussion

 8. The analysis of the evidence and findings in the determination begin at
    paragraph  9  thereof,  by  setting  out  the  respondent's  case.   At
    paragraph 15, the  determination  notes  that  the  appellant  was  not
    called, then sets out the evidence  of  Miss  Antonia  Cohen,  and  the
    submissions made to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  respondent,  despite
    not having sought to cross-examine the appellant,  submitted  that  his
    account lacked credibility and had not been corroborated.

 9. Paragraph 19, which covers almost two pages of  the  determination,  is
    the only place where the judge makes any findings.  It  contains  broad
    negative  credibility  findings  based  on  the  appellant's  lack   of
    knowledge of his father's position in Hizb-i-Islami  before  his  death
    when the appellant was about 11 years old, and the  appellant's  flight
    to the United Kingdom, assisted by an uncle.  The  appellant's  account
    is dismissed with the formula 'I do not find it credible', although the
    respondent chose not to cross-examine him  at  the  hearing.    In  the
    decision at the end of  his  determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    asylum appeal, the humanitarian protection  appeal,  and  also  appeals
    under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, although given  his  discretionary  leave,
    the ECHR is not engaged.

10. The determination contains  no  reference  to  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance, in particular paragraph 10:3 thereof, which reminds
    judges that children may  give  less  clear  accounts  of  the  factual
    circumstances surrounding the index events in their younger lives.

11. The determination contains no consideration of the  best  interests  of
    this child pursuant to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009.

12. In addition, the judge relied upon outdated country guidance in HK  and
    Others (minors-indiscriminate violence-forced recruitment by Taliban  -
    contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  378  (IAC),
    failing to  take  account  of  modification  to  that  guidance  in  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  16  (IAC),  the  head
    note to which reads as follows:

         "(1) The evidence before the Tribunal does not alter  the  position
         as described in HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate  violence  -
         forced recruitment  by  Taliban  -  contact  with  family  members)
         Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC), namely that when  considering
         the question of whether children are disproportionately affected by
         the  consequences  of  the  armed  conflict   in   Afghanistan,   a
         distinction has to be drawn between children who were living with a
         family and those who are not.  That distinction has been reinforced
         by the additional material before  this  Tribunal.   Whilst  it  is
         recognised that there are some risks to  which  children  who  will
         have the protection of the  family  are  nevertheless  subject,  in
         particular the risk of landmines and the risks of being trafficked,
         they are not of such a level as to lead to the conclusion that  all
         children would qualify for international protection.   In  arriving
         at this conclusion, account has been taken of the necessity to have
         regard to the best interests of children.

         (2) However, the background evidence demonstrates  that  unattached
         children returned to Afghanistan, depending upon  their  individual
         circumstances and the location to which they are returned,  may  be
         exposed to risk of serious harm,  inter  alia  from  indiscriminate
         violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence,  trafficking  and  a
         lack of adequate arrangements for  child  protection.   Such  risks
         will have to be taken into account when addressing the question  of
         whether a return is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a  primary
         consideration when determining a claim to humanitarian protection."

13. We are quite satisfied that the findings at paragraph 19  do  not  meet
    the rationality standard set out in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  They are inadequate as to
    reasoning, and we are unable to understand from them why  the  Tribunal
    reached the conclusion which it did.

Decision

14. Accordingly, we set aside this determination for error of  law  and  it
    will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House)  for  re-
    making afresh with a time estimate of  two  hours  and  no  interpreter
    booked.  All other necessary directions will be made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal when it receives the file.

Signed                              Date 6 November 2013


Judith Gleeson
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

