
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2013                                |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                    T B A
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Fenney of Duncan Moghal Solicitors & Advocates

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Page) which allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to  remove  her  to  Nigeria  by  way  of
    directions made on 1 February 2013.  For convenience, I will  refer  to
    the parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 15  August  1979.
    She arrived in the UK sometime in 2000 and claimed in June 2011.  On 30
    January 2013, the Secretary of State refused her application for asylum
    and made a decision to refuse her leave to enter. She appealed  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.    Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that   the
    appellant was a victim of human trafficking.  In a determination  dated
    21 March 2013, Judge Page allowed her appeal on asylum grounds.  On  10
    April  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fisher)  granted   the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper  tribunal  on  the
    basis that Judge Page had arguably misapplied  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in PO(Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 132.  Thus,  the  appeal
    came before me.

 4. In refusing the appellant's application, the Secretary of State relied,
    inter alia, upon the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal's country guidance
    decision in PO (Trafficked women) Nigeria  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00046  to
    conclude: (1)  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked; and (2) that in any event the Nigerian authorities provided
    a 'sufficiency of protection' to victims of trafficking.

 5. By the time of the hearing  before  Judge  Page,  that  case  had  been
    appealed to the Court of Appeal who allowed that appellant's appeal and
    remitted the case back to the Upper Tribunal (the successor to the  AIT
    by that time).  In  PO(Nigeria),  the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  that
    appellant's appeal against the AIT's decision on two bases.  First, the
    AIT had erred in finding  that  a  sufficiency  of  protection  was  in
    general available in Nigeria, in particular through  shelters  provided
    by NAPTIP  (National  Agency  for  the  Protection  of  Trafficking  in
    Persons) by rejecting expert evidence on the basis of "email  evidence"
    obtained during the hearing which was not subject  to  a  statement  of
    truth and not subject to  cross-examination.   Secondly,  the  AIT  had
    misapplied  its  own  guidance  concerning  any  enhanced  risk  to  an
    individual who had been trafficked by a  "gang"  by  placing  upon  the
    appellant a burden of proof to establish that she had  been  trafficked
    by a gang.  The AIT view, expressed at [192] was that:

         "In the absence of evidence  that  a  trafficked  victim  had  been
         trafficked by an individual, it should be borne in mind that it  is
         likely that the  trafficking  will  have  been  carried  out  by  a
         collection of individuals, many of whom may not have  had  personal
         contact with the victim."

 6. In remitting the appeal, the  Court  of  Appeal  specifically  retained
    paras 191 and 192 of the AIT's decision as country guidance  (see  [58]
    per Carnwarth LJ with whom Maurice Kay and Thomas LJJ agreed).

 7. Before Judge Page, the appellant relied  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in PO in order to establish that  she  would  be  at  risk  on
    return from  those  who  had  previously  trafficked  her  to  the  UK.
    Allowing the appellant's appeal, Judge  Page  analysed  the  successful
    appeal of the appellant to the Court of  Appeal  in  PO  and  then,  in
    relation to the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter,  rejected  her
    reasoning as follows (at para 20):

         "20. The respondent's refusal letter dated 30  January  2013  found
             that this appellant could safely be returned to Nigeria on the
             basis that the Tribunal in PO (Nigeria)  had  found  that  the
             appellant could relocate  within  Nigeria  using  the  shelter
             facilities  that  are  available  and,  moreover,   that   the
             appellant had not proved that her traffickers were part  of  a
             gang.  Neither of those  conclusions  made  relying  upon  the
             Tribunal's determination in PO (Nigeria) CG [2009] UKAIT 00046
             can be sustained on appeal given the Court of Appeal  judgment
             above."

 8. Having  done  that,  Judge  Page  then  went  on  in  para  21  of  his
    determination to find that the appellant  was  at  risk  on  return  to
    Nigeria in the following terms:

         "21. Fresh country guidance is now  awaited  on  these  issues  and
             given the low standard of proof that  I  must  apply  in  this
             appeal it follows that the decision  under  appeal  cannot  be
             sustained.  The appellant has established to the low  standard
             of proof that she could not  safely  relocate  within  Nigeria
             using the shelters that  the  respondent  has  said  would  be
             satisfactory for her and she should not have been required  to
             demonstrate that her traffickers were part  of  a  gang.   Two
             points fall  to  be  determined  in  the  appellant's  favour.
             Firstly, there is a  serious  possibility  that  the  shelters
             would  not  offer  a  sufficiency  of  protection  should  the
             appellant wish to relocate and secondly  her  traffickers  may
             have been  part  of  a  gang.   Consequently  this  appeal  is
             allowed."

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Hibbs relied  upon  the  ground
    upon which permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.
     First, he submitted  that  Judge  Page  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's case against that part of the country guidance in paras 191
    and 192 of the AIT's decision in PO  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    expressly preserved.  Secondly, he submitted that Judge Page had failed
    in para 21 of his determination to give adequate reason as to  (1)  the
    basis upon which he found that any shelters available would not offer a
    sufficiency of protection; and (2)  in  finding  that  the  appellant's
    traffickers may have been part of a gang.  Mr Hibbs  reminded  me  that
    the evidence (which  was  accepted  before  the  judge)  was  that  the
    appellant had been trafficked by a "couple".

10. Ms Fenney, on behalf of the appellant submitted that the judge had been
    entitled to make the finding that he did and she relied  upon  [44]  of
    the judgment of Maurice Kay LJ in which he concluded that on the  issue
    of "internal relocation", the approach  of  the  AIT  in  PO  had  been
    "infected by its erroneous approach to gangs and its defective approach
    to shelters".  She submitted that in relation to the "gang" issue, para
    19(c) of the preserved paragraph in the AIT's decision in  PO  entitled
    the judge, in the absence of  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked by an individual, to  find  that  it  was  likely  that  the
    trafficking had been carried out by a gang.

11. In substance, I accept the submissions of Mr Hibbs.  Paragraphs 191 and
    192 of the AIT's decision in PO are in the following terms:

         "Ability and Willingness  of  the  Nigerian  Authorities  to  offer
         Protection to Victims of Trafficking

         191.  Our  consideration  of  the  background   materials   clearly
             demonstrates to us that in general the government  of  Nigeria
             is both able and willing to discharge its own duty to  protect
             its own nationals from people traffickers.  In particular:

             (a)  The Danish Information Service Report: The Protection  of
                  Victims of Trafficking in Nigeria: a Fact Finding  Mission
                  to Lagos, Benin City and Abuja, 9/26 September 2007 (April
                  2008) points out  that  the  government  of  Nigeria  have
                  recognised the problem of traffickers and, since 2003, the
                  legal   and   institutional   foundation   for   combating
                  trafficking and, equally important, support for victims of
                  trafficking, have been in place in Nigeria.

             (b)  The National Agency for the  Prohibition  of  Traffic  in
                  Persons  and  other  related  matters  (NAPTIP)   is   the
                  principal organisation created by the Nigerian  government
                  to  combat  trafficking.   The  Trafficking   in   Persons
                  (Prohibition) Law  Enforcement  Administration  Act,  2003
                  established NAPTIP and was enacted as a direct  result  of
                  Nigeria wishing to fulfil  its  international  obligations
                  under  the  Protocol  to  Prevent,  Suppress  and   Punish
                  Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.

             (c)  NAPTIP's own Legal and Prosecution Department  were  said
                  in the April 2008 report, to have concluded six cases  and
                  another five were said  to  be  pending.   58  victims  of
                  trafficking have been rehabilitated, while another 24 were
                  waiting rehabilitation.  We accept that with  more  funds,
                  NAPTIP could do more to help victims, but the  same  could
                  be said of any government agency with a finite budget.

             (d)  The US  State  Department  Report  suggests  that  whilst
                  Nigeria is not complying with  minimum  standards,  it  is
                  'making  significant   efforts   to   do   so'   and   has
                  'demonstrated   a   solid   commitment   to    eradicating
                  trafficking'.   It  also  spoke  of  NAPTIP  making  solid
                  efforts to investigate and  prosecute  trafficking  cases,
                  although the numbers  of  convicted  traffickers  remained
                  low.  There are clearly several reasons for that, but not,
                  on the evidence before us, any lack of governmental effort
                  or desire.

         Risk to Victims of Trafficking in being Re-trafficked on Return  to
             Nigeria

         192. It must be born in mind, however, that a  claimant  may  still
             have a well-founded fear of persecution if she can  show  that
             the  Nigerian  authorities  know   or   ought   to   know   of
             circumstances particular to her case giving rise to his  fear,
             but are unlikely to  provide  the  additional  protection  her
             particular circumstances reasonably required.  To that end:

             (a)  A very careful examination of the circumstances in  which
                  the victim was first trafficked  must  be  undertaken  and
                  careful findings made.  If a victim has been told that she
                  is required to earn a particular  sum  of  money  ('target
                  earnings') for the trafficker or gang, before  being  free
                  of any obligation to the trafficker or gang, then, if  the
                  victim should escape before earning the target sums, there
                  may well be a risk to the victim that on return to Nigeria
                  she may be re-trafficked if found.  The extent of the risk
                  of  the  trafficking  will  very  much   depend   on   the
                  circumstances  in  which   the   victim   was   originally
                  trafficked.

             (b)  It must always be remembered that  within  Nigeria  there
                  are gangs of people  traffickers  operating  who  generate
                  enormous  sums  of  money  from  their  activities.    The
                  evidence seems to us to  be  clear  that  where  a  victim
                  escapes the clutches of her traffickers before earning the
                  target earnings, then the traffickers are very  likely  to
                  go to extreme lengths in order to  locate  the  victim  or
                  members of the victim's family, to seek reprisals.

             (c)  In the absence of evidence that a trafficked  victim  has
                  been trafficked by an individual, it should  be  borne  in
                  mind that it is likely that the trafficking will have been
                  carried out by a collection of individuals, many  of  whom
                  may not have had personal contact with the victim.  Within
                  trafficking gangs, individual  members  perform  different
                  roles.  One might, for  example,  be  a  photographer  who
                  takes the photograph which is  used  within  the  victim's
                  passport, whether or not the passport is  a  genuine  one.
                  One gang member may, for  example,  be  a  forger  who  is
                  involved in the preparation of false  passports  or  other
                  documents for use by the victim; one might  be  a  corrupt
                  police official, or a  border  guard,  whose  role  is  to
                  assist in facilitating the victim's passage in  some  way.
                  Gang members may perform any number of different roles but
                  it is essential to bear in mind that if a victim has  been
                  trafficked by a gang  of  traffickers,  as  opposed  to  a
                  single trafficker, then the risk of re-trafficking may  be
                  greater for someone who escapes before earning the  target
                  earnings set by the  trafficker,  because  the  individual
                  gang members will have expected to receive a share of  the
                  target sum and will, therefore, be anxious to ensure  that
                  they do receive that share or seek retribution if they  do
                  not."

12. In allowing PO's appeal, the Court of Appeal simply set aside the AIT's
    conclusions in  relation  to  the  availability  and  effectiveness  of
    shelters provided to  traffic  victims  by  NAPTIP.   In  PO  that  was
    particularly important in relation to an  appellant  who  had  a  young
    child, where the evidence concerning the availability  of  shelters  to
    women with young children was in dispute.  That is not an issue in this
    appeal as the appellant does not have a young child.

13. Paragraph 191 of the AIT's decision sets out the country  guidance  and
    its conclusion that "in general the government of Nigeria is both  able
    and willing to discharge its own duty to protect its own nationals from
    people traffickers."  That  finding  survived  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    remittal of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Likewise,  para  192  of
    the preserved country guidance identifies that, despite that  "general"
    sufficiency of protection, a claimant may have a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if she can show that  the  Nigerian  authorities  "know  or
    ought to know of circumstances particular to her case  giving  rise  to
    fear", but "are unlikely to provide the  additional  protection"  those
    particular circumstances reasonably require.  As the sub-paragraphs  of
    para 192 make plain, a "very careful examination" is  required  of  the
    circumstances in which the claimant  was  first  trafficked,  including
    whether she was required to earn a particular sum for the trafficker or
    gang and whether she has achieved her  "target  earnings".   The  point
    being made is that the risk of being re-trafficked is likely to  depend
    upon those circumstances.  Likewise, the AIT accepted that there was an
    enhanced risk of being re-trafficked if the  original  trafficking  had
    been carried out  by  a  "collection  of  individuals".   The  guidance
    concludes that in the absence  of  evidence  that  a  person  has  been
    trafficked by an individual it is "likely"  that  the  trafficking  was
    carried out by a "collection of individuals".

14. In my judgment, Judge Page failed in para 21 of  his  determination  to
    give  a  "very  careful  examination"  to  the  circumstances  of   the
    appellant.

15. First, the Court of Appeal's decision in PO(Nigeria) did not  determine
    the outcome on the facts of this appeal without more.  Secondly, it was
    accepted that the  appellant  had  been  trafficked  and  it  was  also
    accepted that a "couple" had brought her to the UK.  The judge made  no
    further findings in respect of  the  circumstances  in  which  she  was
    trafficked.  He made no finding for example whether she was required to
    earn a particular sum of money and whether or  not  she  had  met  that
    target.  That, as the country guidance makes plain, was relevant to any
    risk of being re-trafficked  on  return.   Thirdly,  it  is  not  clear
    whether Judge Page found that the "couple" were, in  fact,  part  of  a
    gang or "collection of  individuals"  that  put  the  appellant  in  an
    enhanced risk category.  He merely stated that they "may have been part
    of a gang".  Finally, Judge Page failed to give any reasons  or  engage
    with the background evidence concerning the  availability  of  shelters
    and the "sufficiency of protection" that the Nigerian government  would
    be able and willing to provide her and whether, in  the  light  of  any
    particular risk  to  her,  it  would  provide  a  reasonable  level  of
    protection.  The AIT's finding in relation to the  "general"  level  of
    protection that the state is both able and willing to provide  set  out
    in para 191 was not referred to by the judge, perhaps on the  erroneous
    assumption that it had not survived the appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    which, of course, it had.

16. In short, despite the Court of Appeal's decision in PO, the  judge  was
    still required to consider and apply the country guidance in paras  191
    and 192 and to do so in the light of the background evidence  submitted
    in the appeal.  In this appeal, unfortunately, the  judge  did  neither
    and as a result his finding in favour of the appellant is flawed in law
    and cannot stand.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  That decision is set aside.

18. In light of the nature of the error, and the need to consider  for  the
    first time in this appeal  the  background  evidence,  the  appropriate
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. The fact that the appellant was trafficked to the UK is accepted.   The
    issues for the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  whether  the  appellant  has
    established (1) that she is at risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment on return; (2) that the Nigerian state  is  not  willing  and
    able to provide a sufficiency of protection against any such risk;  and
    (3) whether the appellant has the option of internal relocation.

20. For these reasons, the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and  this
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (other than Judge  Page).




                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
