
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01848/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th June, 2016                            |On 10th August, 2016          |
|Given extempore                               |                              |
|Signed 27th June, 2016                        |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     R Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Tower Hamlets Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P  Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a female citizen of  Bangladesh  who  claims  to  have
    been born on [ ] November, 1989.  She arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    from Dhaka with her husband using a passport in the name R  Z  and  was
    granted leave to enter as a visitor valid until 27th  September,  2011.
    She made application for asylum which was refused  by  the  respondent.
    She appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal  and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 23rd February, 2016.

2.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  5th  April,  2016,  Judge  Grice
    dismissed the appellant's appeal both under the Refugee Convention  and
    under the European Convention for the Protection of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental  Freedoms  and  also  on  the  basis  of  her  humanitarian
    protection claim.  In doing so, at paragraph 119 of  the  determination
    the judge found that there was no expert health  assessment  or  expert
    physical  assessment  of  the  appellant  which  might  assist  her  in
    assessing credibility of the appellant's account of abuse and  violence
    at the hands of her husband.

3.   However, earlier in the determination,  at  paragraph  115,  the  judge
    accepted that there was medical evidence both in the form of  a  report
    from her GP and in the form for evidence from a hospital, which was  to
    some extent corroborative of the appellant's arm and shoulder injury in
    2011.  The judge also noted that the  documents  from  the  appellant's
    general medical practitioner dealt with a history of domestic violence,
    injury and consequent mental health problems and describes burns on the
    appellant's arms and shoulders in line with marks caused  by  cigarette
    burns.

4.   During the course of the hearing the  judge  had  before  her  evidence
    from the appellant's uncle, A N,  in  the  form  of  both  his  written
    statement and oral evidence which, at least in part,  corroborated  the
    appellant's account of having been pushed down stairs by her husband in
    June 2011.   Unfortunately the judge makes no findings in  relation  to
    that evidence.

5.   The determination was challenged by the  appellant  on  three  grounds.
    At the hearing before me today, Mr Duffy  quite  rightly  in  my  view,
    accepted that the determination was far from satisfactory and could not
    stand, given that there were simply no  findings  in  relation  to  the
    evidence which the judge heard from the appellant's uncle.  I find that
    the judge has failed also to properly  consider  the  medical  evidence
    placed before him.  Medical evidence whether it is in  the  form  of  a
    detailed report from a specialist, from a general medical  practitioner
    or from another medical professional deserves  to  be  considered  very
    carefully and this determination does not disclose that  this  evidence
    was considered very carefully.

6.   As a result, I believe that  the  appellant  has  been  denied  a  fair
    hearing and consequently I have concluded  that  the  most  appropriate
    form of action is for the matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh by a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grice.  A Bengali interpreter will be required and two and a half
     hours should be allowed for the hearing.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh  by  a
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First Teir Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  I see  no  reason  why
it should not continue and do not therefore interfer with it.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
