
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/01498/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 February 2015                        |On 17 March 2015           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           ELMAHDI MUKTAR E BENALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Karnik counsel instructed by Jackson and Canter
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Gladstone after a hearing on 19 March 2013 which dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 23 February 1983 and is a national of Libya.
4. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 5  December  2008  with  a
   student visa valid until 30 September 2010.
5. On 3 December 2012 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  he
   would be killed on return by the family of a girl with whom he had had  a
   sexual relationship outside marriage as her family belonged  to  a  large
   and powerful tribe. He also complained that he would be at risk from  the
   general country situation.
6. On 29 January  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application giving a number of reasons:
   a) It was not accepted that the Appellant would be of adverse interest to
      his former girlfriend's family on return as he had lived and worked in
      Misrata for a year when her family know of their relationship and they
      had not found him.
   b) The Appellant's claim in the asylum interview that after a summons was
      issued in 2008 he had no further problems was  inconsistent  with  the
      documentary evidence submitted by his father.
   c) The Appellant's claim in the screening interview that his  father  had
      worked for the Gaddafi regime as a translator is inconsistent with his
      cliam in the asylum interview that he had no problems because  of  his
      father's work particularly given that his father had continued to work
      as a translator in Libya after Gaddafi's fall.
   d) The letter considered the circumstances in which Article 3 of the ECHR
      could be engaged in a situation of  armed  conflict  by  reference  to
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.  It  acknowledged  that
      there was sporadic fighting in Libya but stated that it did not extend
      to the whole country and was isolated to areas of  major  economic  or
      socio political importance. They stated that fighting was not at  such
      a level generally or a material part of it that the Appellant faced  a
      real risk of serious harm solely by being present as a civilian.
   e) The Appellant was not at risk as a failed asylum seeker.
   f) The Appellant's  credibility  was  damaged  by  issues  arising  under
      section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants)  Act
      2004 in particular his failure to claim asylum promptly.
   g) There  is  sufficiency  of  protection  as  the  charges  against  the
      Appellant were dropped for lack of evidence.
   h) The Appellant could relocate to Misrata.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Gladstone  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge set out in her decision at  some  length
   the law, the documentary evidence before her, the oral evidence  and  the
   submissions of both parties and found:
   a) There had been a  significant  delay  in  claiming  asylum  without  a
      satisfactory explanation and  while  this  was  not  determinative  of
      credibility she took this into account.
   b) There were contradictions in the documentary evidence before  her  and
      she did not find it reliable.
   c) There were inconsistencies between the Appellant's  witness  statement
      and his evidence in court.
   d) His claim now that he feared return because his father worked for  the
      Gaddafi regime  was  inconsistent  with  his  account  in  the  asylum
      interview that neither he nor his family had any  problems  after  the
      regime fell because of hsi father's work and the fact that his  family
      continued to live in Tripoli suggested that they had no problems.
   e) The Judge concluded that the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  for
      perceived political problems.
   f) Given her general findings of  credibility,  the  lack  of  any  other
      reliable  documentary  evidence,  his  confused  evidence  about   the
      summons, his reference to incidents in 2006 in his  witness  statement
      that he had not mentioned in his asylum interview, the fact  that  the
      was not located in Misrata although he claimed the girl's family  were
      looking for him  she  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  the
      relationship he claimed and concluded he had fabricated the account in
      order to claim asylum.
   g) On the facts as  found  she  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      entitled to asylum, humanitarian protection and would not  breach  his
      rights under Article 3. She considered the general  country  situation
      and did not find that this would subject  the  Appellant  to  risk  on
      return noting that his family continued to live in Tripoli.

8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge  had  erred  in  her
   approach to humanitarian protection as the  protection  afforded  by  the
   Qualification Directive  and  Article  15(c)  was  not  coterminous  with
   Article 3 and that she erred in her assessment of credibility.

9. On 18 April 2013  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Peart  refused
   permission to appeal stating that the grounds disclosed no arguable error
   of law.

10. The application was renewed and on 15  May  2013  Upper  Tribunal  judge
   Perkins refused permission stating that the overall  determination  dealt
   satisfactorily with the Appellant's case.

11. An application was made for a Judicial Review and in an order  dated  12
   September 2013 the decision Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins was  quashed  by
   His Honour Judge Pelling QC. The  Judge  granted  permission  limited  to
   Ground 1 in relation to Article 15(c) but refused in relation to Ground 2
   stating that the credibility findings were unarguable.

12. On 29 July 2014 permission to appeal was granted by C M G Ockelton  Vice
   President of the Upper Tribunal in the light of the decision of the  High
   Court.

13. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Karnik  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) The argument in relation to Article 15(c) was that the Judge's reasons
      were inadequate.

   b) The Judge spent a lot of time addressing the  credibility  issues  but
      did not make clear what she accepted and what she did not and  if  she
      accepted the brother was injured  that  raised  the  Appellant's  risk
      profile.

   c) There was evidence before the Judge of problems in Tripoli and that as
      someone not in a particular clan and with a brother that  was  injured
      in the way he described this added to the Appellant's profile.

   d) The  Judge  treated  Humanitarian  Protection  and  Article  15(c)  as
      coterminous with Article 3.

   e) The fact that there were no enforced returns  suggested  there  was  a
      risk on return.

   f) He sought to address  me  in  relation  to  the  credibility  findings
      although I suggested that did not appear to be  within  the  grant  of
      permission of the Administrative Court.

   g) He accepted that a challenge to the credibility findings was an uphill
      struggle but suggested that the judge had failed  to  distinguish  the
      difference between inconsistencies and differences in evidence.

   h) The Judges adverse findings arising out of delay were  unjustified  as
      the Appellant had given an explanation.

   i) The Judge drew an adverse inference from  the  Appellant's  faiure  to
      mention in the asylum interview that his brother was shot in  the  leg
      but this was corrected in correspondence from  his  solicitors  before
      the refusal letter was issued.

14. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

   (a)He relied on the Rule 24 response.

   (b) The Judge directed herself appropriately.

   (c)The Judge's decision was detailed and her  credibility  findings  were
   sustainable.

   (d)The Judge dealt adequately with the risk arising out  of  the  country
   situation and the Upper Tribunal in AT and Others  (Article  15(c):  risk
   categories0 Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC)

15. In reply Mr Karnik on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) The case of AT post dated this case.

   b) To return the Appellant in his particular  circumstances  would  place
      him at risk because of what happened to his brother.

   c) The documents examined by the Judge were photocopies and she may  have
      been mistaken.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. I remind myself in making this decision that I  am  looking  at  whether
   the Judge who made her decision after a hearing on 19 March 2013  made  a
   material error of law against the evidence of the  country  circumstances
   at that time.

18. In relation to Ground 2 which Mr Karnik sought to argue before  me  that
   the Judge erred in her assessment of credibility I note the limit of  the
   High Court's grant of permission on the basis  that  such  findings  were
   unarguable. I therefore do not propose to go behind that.

19. The  Judge  summarised  her  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  claim  at
   paragraph 119 and it is a summary  against  which  she  was  entitled  to
   assess his risk on return:

   "I do not accept any part of the appellants claim in relation  to  Isra's
   family. I find that he  has  fabricated  the  account  in  an  effort  to
   establish an asylum claim."

20. The Judge concluded that the Appellant was  of  no  interest  either  to
   Isra's family or because of any perceived political opinion.

21. In relation to the country situation in summarising the  refusal  letter
   the Judge had summarised their assessment of the situation  by  reference
   to Article 15(c) as in essence a categorisation of the situation  as  one
   of sporadic fighting that did  not  extend  throughout  the  country.  In
   paragraphs 91 and 92 she recorded the submissions made by Mr  Karnik  and
   recorded that she asked him to direct her to the specific passages in the
   bundle of background material that supported his argument in relation  to
   the country situation. These were recorded in her record  of  proceedings
   and indicated that she took them into account. There was  no  requirement
   for her to set out what was found in those passages.

22. The Judge's credibility findings led her to conclude that the  Appellant
   was not at risk over and above any other failed asylum seeker.  She  went
   on in paragraph 92  to  consider  the  general  country  situation  after
   finding that his rights under Article 3 were not breached  and  concluded
   that there was nothing in the material before her even allowing  for  the
   fact that there were no enforced returns to suggest  that  the  Appellant
   would face 'difficulties or problems ' on return.. I  am  satisfied  that
   this was a finding that was open to her in  March  2013.  The  background
   material relied on by the Appellant in his bundle at pages 1-83 could not
   reasonably have led to any other  conclusion;  Pages  1-13  were  witness
   statements, 13-18 was an article about combating terrorism in West Point,
   72-73 was about honour killings, 66-71 was material from 2011 which given
   the fluidity of the situation in Libya could carry little weight and  81-
   83 was an unreported Upper Tribunal Decision.

23. Great weight was placed by Mr Karnik before the Judge on  the  documents
   at pages 75-80 in relation to enforced returns and the Judge  made  clear
   she took that into account. Mr Karnik sought to argue  that  because  the
   res was no carrying out enforced returns and had not done so  since  2011
   that this was evidence of generalised violence at a level whereby Article
   15(c) was engaged. However I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled  to
   conclude that this was not determinative of the issue  as  there  was  no
   reported caselaw produced before  her  to  suggest  that  was  the  case.
   Moreover the Operational Instruction before her dated 29 march  2011  and
   21 February 2011 made clear that it was only enforced returns  that  were
   not being made, unescorted  returns  had  continued  and  indeed  Tripoli
   Airport did not close until July 20914. Although Mr  Karnik  argued  that
   the CG case of AT post dated this decision I note that the Upper Tribunal
   in that case had before them similar  material  confirming  the  lack  of
   enforced returns to Libya but nevertheless concluded that the  levels  of
   violence were not at Article 15(c) levels.

24. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge." I am therefore  satisfied  that  the
   Judge's decision when  read  as  a  whole  set  out  findings  that  were
   sustainable and sufficiently detailed . The background material  provided
   by the Appellant did not justify the Judge concluding that Article  15(c)
   levels of violence existed  nor  was  the  absence  of  enforced  returns
   determinative of that issue.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
16.3.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell















