
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 24 October 2014                            |On 13 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, aged 52. He  last  arrived  in
      the UK on 6 April 2003 with leave to enter as a visitor. He overstayed
      and was encountered  on  14  April  2009.  He  was  granted  temporary
      admission but did not report, as required. On 30 August 2010  he  made
      an application for leave on article 8  grounds.  He  was  subsequently
      encountered again and given fresh reporting conditions.  He  made  two
      further article 8 applications, the first of which  was  rejected  for
      lack of payment and the second of which was refused without a right of
      appeal. On 11 December 2013 the appellant requested an appointment  at
      the Asylum Screening Unit.


   2. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is that he has  converted  to
      the Ahmadi faith and he fears ill-treatment from his  family,  society
      in general and  members  of  Khatme  Nabuwat  ("KN").  The  respondent
      refused his  claim,  finding  he  had  not  genuinely  converted.  The
      appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Nightingale on 4 August  2014  at  Hatton  Cross.  The  judge
      accepted the appellant had converted to the Ahmadi faith but concluded
      nevertheless that the appeal had to be dismissed.  She  reasoned  that
      there was nothing in the appellant's evidence to suggest he  would  do
      anything more than continue to practise his faith by attendance at the
      mosque. There was no reason to believe he would preach publicly. There
      was nothing in the evidence to indicate that any form of preaching  or
      public activity was part of the appellant's identity  or  integral  to
      his faith. She did not accept that the documents indicating  animosity
      from the family and KN in Lahore  were  reliable.  She  dismissed  the
      appeal on all grounds.

   3. The appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on two grounds: (1) the judge had not considered whether  the
      appellant would be at risk as a result of manifesting his faith  other
      than by preaching; and (2) she  did  not  consider  the  fact  of  the
      appellant's apostasy as an additional risk factor.

   4. The respondent filed a response opposing the appeal, arguing the judge
      found there would be no suppression of  the  appellant's  identity  on
      return to Pakistan. The judge also found the appellant  would  have  a
      viable internal flight alternative.


   5. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether  the  judge
      made a material error of law. I have recorded them in full and  merely
      attempt to summarise them here. Mr Fripp developed his written grounds
      seeking permission to appeal. He referred to the most  recent  country
      guidance case of MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -  risk)
      Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389(IAC). He suggested  there  was  evidence
      showing the situation for Ahmadis  had  deteriorated  since  then.  He
      argued that the Upper Tribunal  had  set  the  test  wider  than  mere
      proselytising and the judge ought to have considered  other  means  of
      expressing the faith. If these matters were important to the appellant
      and he would refrain from practising them due to fear of  persecution,
      then he was entitled to refugee status.


   6. The judge had not considered the risks of apostasy, even  though  this
      was referred to in  counsel's  skeleton  argument  at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing. The judge appeared to have been applying the earlier
      guidance in cases such as  KK  (Ahmadis  -  Unexceptional  -  Risk  on
      Return) Pakistan [2005] UKIAT 00033 by looking for a record of  active
      preaching. Even that case had recognised that conversion could  be  an
      additional risk factor. Mr  Fripp  acknowledged  that  the  issues  of
      discretion and concealment of the faith were important. He argued that
      the appellant could not be expected to protect himself by taking on  a
      "hermit-like" existence or expected to lie (Hysi v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 711).


   7. Mr Shilliday agreed there were errors in the  judge's  assessment.  He
      accepted  counsel's  skeleton  argument  had  raised  the   issue   of
      conversion as a risk factor and the judge should have dealt  with  it.
      He also accepted the  judge  had  over-simplified  the  issue  of  the
      behaviour which would lead to risk on return as a result of  an  over-
      emphasis on preaching. However, the errors were not  material  on  the
      facts because this was not a case of concealment at all. The judge was
      entitled to find the appellant would be able to practise his faith  as
      he  currently  does.  MN  had  stressed  the  importance  of   adverse
      credibility findings in the assessment of future risk.


   8. Mr Fripp replied and argued that Mr Shilliday's  arguments  overlooked
      the Hysi factors and the fact that people enquire  about  religion  in
      everyday life.


   9. I have carefully considered all the submissions made, even if  I  have
      not set them all out here.


  10. I shall now consider in detail how  the  judge  approached  the  case.
      Having given reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  claims  regarding
      why he previously failed to return to Pakistan and also for  accepting
      his more recent conversion to the Ahmadi faith, the  judge's  relevant
      conclusions are as follows:


      "58.    I have found nothing in the appellant's  evidence  to  suggest
             that he would do more than to continue to practise his  Ahmadi
             faith by attendance at an Ahmadi mosque. He has not long  been
             initiated into this faith, and I can find no reason to suspect
             that he would be called upon to preach his faith given his new
             status as a convert. Whilst I accept that he  has  taken  some
             time to study, he has not had the benefit of the many years of
             study and involvement of those born into,  or  long  converted
             to, the Ahmadi faith. I can find no reason as to why, even  if
             he wanted to do so, he would be called upon by members of  the
             Ahmadi faith to preach publicly at the present time or that he
             would have the ability to do so.


      59. I am prepared to accept that the appellant has handed  out  a  few
             leaflets and, also, that he may have staffed a  stall  at  the
             mosque.  However  this,  once  again,  appears  to  have  been
             something which he has  done  only  recently  and  I  have  no
             evidence before me with regard to the contents of the leaflets
             which he has been handing out.  I  cannot  find  he  has  done
             anything  in  the  Untied  Kingdom  which  would   amount   to
             "preaching"  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  MN.  The
             appellant has said nothing to indicate that he would  wish  to
             hand out  leaflets  in  Pakistan.  There  is  nothing  in  the
             evidence which indicates that any form of preaching or  public
             activity is part of this appellant's identity or integrity for
             his faith as  he  current[ly]  practises  it.  There  are,  of
             course, Ahmadi mosques  in  Pakistan  and  a  sizeable  Ahmadi
             community still residing there. I find no  reason  to  suspect
             that the appellant would not, if his conversion is, indeed,  a
             genuine one, be welcomed into that community and  assisted  on
             his return to Pakistan by that community. He would be able  to
             practise his faith as he presently does in Pakistan.


      60. The appellant has chosen not to return to Pakistan since  2003.  I
             have not accepted that this choice has been the result of  his
             fearing harm during most of his stay in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Since the appellant has chosen to remain  outside  of  Lahore,
             and away from his family, for eleven years, I find  no  reason
             to suspect that he might want to return to Lahore if  he  went
             back to Pakistan. I have considered the  documentary  evidence
             with care and in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed. There is nothing on the notice said to come from the KN
             which identifies the document. There is also no explanation as
             to why the appellant's  family,  from  whom  he  has  absented
             himself  for  over  eleven  years,  should   issue   newspaper
             advertisements  about  him,  drawing  local  attention  to   a
             religious  conversion  which  must,  at  the  least,  have   a
             potential  for  family  embarrassment.  I  do  not  find   the
             documents to be of any weight in supporting this  appeal  and,
             rather, I find them to be  of  a  self-serving  and  contrived
             nature. In any event, I  have  considerable  doubts  that  the
             remaining relatives have any power there to cause him  serious
             harm if he were to return. I find no  reason  as  to  why  the
             appellant should need to return to Lahore. Even if, which I do
             not accept, the appellant is at risk from his family  and  the
             Mullahs  of  the  KN  in  Lahore,  there  are  clear  internal
             relocation options open to this appellant  in  Pakistan  which
             is, I remind myself, a  large  and  populous  country  with  a
             number of cities and urban  centres  to  which  the  appellant
             could relocate.


      61. I do not find that this appellant has established any difficulties
             in Pakistan prior to leaving. I accept that he  has  converted
             to the Ahmadi faith, and whilst I have some peripheral  doubts
             as to his genuine intentions on conversion, I am  prepared  to
             accept, on the lower standard applicable, that he  would  wish
             to continue to practise this faith  in  Pakistan.  However,  I
             find that he has not performed any preaching activities in the
             UK and I find no evidence  he  intends  to  do  so  if  he  is
             returned. There is nothing on the  evidence  before  me  which
             indicates  that  it  is  of  particular  importance  to   this
             appellant's religious identity to  practise  or  manifest  his
             faith openly in  Pakistan  in  defiance  of  the  restrictions
             placed on Ahmadi Muslims.


      62. I have taken into account the fact that there is little by way  of
             documentary evidence from the  UK  Ahmadi  headquarters.  Such
             evidence is often very helpful to  the  Tribunal  in  deciding
             cases which involve individuals of this faith. I do,  however,
             find it consistent with the generally helpful stance taken  by
             the Ahmadi organisations in the UK that they might not support
             new converts in appeals such as this until those persons  have
             shown themselves to be genuinely committed to the faith  after
             some time.  It  might  have  been  useful  to  the  appellant,
             perhaps, to have sought some confirmation of this stance  from
             the UK headquarters. Nonetheless, I do not find  this  in  any
             way determinative of the issues before me. Since I do not find
             that this  appeal  has  established  any  real  risk  that  he
             genuinely wishes to engage in the behaviour found at paragraph
             2(i) of MN, and given that the appellant has not practised his
             faith at all in Pakistan previously, I  cannot  find  that  he
             would be at any real risk there presently. He  is  a  fit  and
             healthy man who has taken employment in the United Kingdom.  I
             find no particular prominent social or business profile  of  a
             type which makes him reasonably likely to be targeted  by  any
             non-state actors. I would therefore find that the appellant is
             not entitled to international protection."


  11. It is also useful to set out the head note of MN and others (Ahmadis -
      country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT  00389(IAC),  which
      contains the general country guidance given at paragraphs 118 to 127:



        1. This country guidance replaces  previous  guidance  in  MJ  &  ZM
           (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, and IA &  Others
           (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088. The guidance we
           give  is  based in part on the developments in the law  including
           the decisions of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31,
           RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the CJEU decision in Germany  v.
           Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11).  The guidance relates  principally  to
           Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the legislation which is  the  background
           to the issues raised in  these  appeals  affects  Lahori  Ahmadis
           also, they too are included in the country guidance stated below.

        2. (i)  The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis  is  legislation
           that restricts the way in which they are able openly to  practise
           their faith. The legislation not  only  prohibits  preaching  and
           other forms of proselytising but also in practice restricts other
           elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs, such as  holding
           open discourse about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
           amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions  include  openly
           referring to one's place of worship as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
           religious leader  as  an  Imam.  In  addition,  Ahmadis  are  not
           permitted to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call
           themselves Muslims or refer to their faith  as  Islam.  Sanctions
           include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found,  there
           is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been carried
           out although there is a risk  of  lengthy  incarceration  if  the
           penalty  is  imposed.   There  is  clear   evidence   that   this
           legislation is used by non-state actors to  threaten  and  harass
           Ahmadis. This includes the filing of  First  Information  Reports
           (FIRs) (the first step in any  criminal  proceedings)  which  can
           result in  detentions  whilst  prosecutions  are  being  pursued.
           Ahmadis are also subject to  attacks  by  non-state  actors  from
           sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

          (ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis
          to practise their faith on a restricted basis either  in  private
          or in community with other Ahmadis, without  infringing  domestic
          Pakistan law.

        3. (i) If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate that it is of  particular
           importance to his religious identity to practise and manifest his
           faith openly in Pakistan in defiance of the restrictions  in  the
           Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and  298C,  by
           engaging in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i)  above,  he  or
           she is likely to be in need of protection, in the  light  of  the
           serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply as well as
           the risk of prosecution under section 295C for blasphemy.

          (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits the description
          just given to avoid engaging in behaviour described in  paragraph
          2(i) above ("paragraph  2(i)  behaviour")  to  avoid  a  risk  of
          prosecution.

        4. The need for protection applies equally to men and  women.  There
           is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole are at a
           particular or additional risk; the decision that they should  not
           attend mosques in Pakistan  was  made  by  the  Ahmadi  Community
           following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in 2010. There  is  no
           evidence that women  in  particular  were  the  target  of  those
           attacks.

        5. In light of the above, the first question the decision-maker must
           ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi.  As  with
           all  judicial  fact-finding  the  judge  will   need   to   reach
           conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such weight  to
           aspects of  that  evidence  as  appropriate  in  accordance  with
           Article 4 of the Qualification  Directive.   This  is  likely  to
           include an enquiry whether the claimant was  registered  with  an
           Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there  on
           a regular basis. Post-arrival activity  will  also  be  relevant.
           Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation from the  UK
           Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  on   in
           Pakistan and confirmation from the  local  community  in  the  UK
           where the claimant is worshipping.

        6. The next  step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
           intentions or wishes as to his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
           Pakistan.  This is relevant because  of  the  need  to  establish
           whether it is of particular importance to the religious  identity
           of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.
           The burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that  any  intention
           or wish to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that
           are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  is  genuinely
           held and of particular importance to the claimant to preserve his
           or her religious identity.  The decision maker needs to  evaluate
           all the evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may  also  be
           relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely  to
           be in need of protection.

        7. The option of internal relocation, previously  considered  to  be
           available in Rabwah, is not  in  general  reasonably  open  to  a
           claimant  who  genuinely  wishes  to  engage  in  paragraph  2(i)
           behaviour, in the light of the nationwide effect in  Pakistan  of
           the anti-Ahmadi legislation.

        8. Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised their  faith
           at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other than the
           restricted basis  described  in  paragraph  2(ii)  above  are  in
           general unlikely to be able to show that their genuine intentions
           or wishes are to practise and  manifest  their  faith  openly  on
           return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above.

        9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on  post-arrival  conversion
           or revival in belief and practice will require careful evidential
           analysis. This will probably include consideration of evidence of
           the head of the claimant's local United Kingdom Ahmadi  Community
           and from the UK headquarters, the latter  particularly  in  cases
           where there has been a conversion. Any adverse  findings  in  the
           claimant's account as a whole may be relevant to  the  assessment
           of likely behaviour on return.

       10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not  reasonably  likely
           to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i)  behaviour  is,  in
           general, not at real risk on return to Pakistan,  judicial  fact-
           finders may in certain cases need to consider whether that person
           would nevertheless be reasonably likely to be  targeted  by  non-
           state actors on return for religious  persecution  by  reason  of
           his/her prominent social and/or business profile.


  12. I do not find the judge made a material error of law in  her  decision
      such that it must be set aside. Having considered all the arguments, I
      have concluded that the judge's decision correctly applies the country
      guidance and should stand. My reasons are as follows.


  13. Whilst there are numerous references in the passages set out above  to
      the finding that the appellant would not preach, a fair reading of the
      determination as a whole shows the judge clearly had in mind the whole
      range of ways in which Ahmadis express their faith and  thereby  might
      fall foul of the restrictions contained in Pakistani  law.  These  are
      set out in paragraph 2(i) of MN. In paragraph 62 the  judge  makes  it
      clear that her finding is that the appellant would not wish to  engage
      in any practice or behaviour of a kind described in 2(i).  That  shows
      that her conclusion in paragraph 61 that the appellant  would  not  be
      prevented from doing  anything  which  would  infringe  his  right  to
      express matters going to his religious identity was not limited to  an
      inability to preach but went much wider. Even one of the paragraphs in
      which the judge makes her finding about preaching  (paragraph  59)  is
      expressed broadly enough to include other "public activity".


  14. It is plain from the judge's reference in the same  paragraph  to  the
      appellant's "identity or integrity for his faith" that the  judge  had
      in mind the correct test found in HJ (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)[2010]
      UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38.  Lord  Hope  analysed  the
      issues this way in HJ (Iran) at paragraph 35:
         "(b) The next stage is to examine a group of  questions  which  are
         directed to what his situation will be on return. ... The  question
         is how each applicant, looked at individually, will conduct himself
         if returned and how others will react to what he does. Those others
         will include everyone with whom he will come in contact, in private
         as well as in public. The way he conducts himself may vary from one
         situation to another, with varying degrees of risk. But  he  cannot
         and  must  not  be  expected  to  conceal  aspects  of  his  sexual
         orientation which he is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom
         he knows may disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a  result
         and that fear is  well-founded,  he  will  be  entitled  to  asylum
         however unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment  may  be.
         The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
         inquiry.
         (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able
         to do in the country of his nationality everything that he  can  do
         openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test. As
         I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was  not  directed  to
         reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
         be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
         Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that  he  can
         live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
         do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to  everyone  the
         human rights standards that are applied by  the  receiving  country
         within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
         happen in the country of origin."
  15. Concealment lies at the heart of the test (see also  paragraph  75  of
      MN). I agree with Mr Shilliday that  the  principles  set  out  in  HJ
      (Iran) and the other cases do not  assist  the  appellant  because  he
      failed to satisfy the judge that on return to Pakistan he  would  have
      to conceal his faith in any way which would amount to an  infringement
      of his right to express any aspect of his core identity. He  would  be
      able to attend an Ahmadi mosque. The judge  found  there  was  nothing
      else amounting to paragraph 2(i) behaviour which the  appellant  would
      be prevented from doing. As such, the judge was entitled  to  conclude
      that the appellant did not fall within the class of  Ahmadis  entitled
      to protection by virtue of paragraph of the head note of  3(i)  of  MN
      and he fell within paragraph 8. That conclusion was open to the  judge
      on the evidence and there was no error in her approach.


  16. In terms of the issue of conversion as a risk factor, I note there  is
      no reference to as being a risk factor it  in  the  judge's  findings.
      This point was argued by  counsel  at  the  hearing  in  her  skeleton
      argument and the judge should have considered it. Moreover,  paragraph
      9 of the head note of MN refers to conversion in terms of the need for
      careful evidential analysis. The difficulty for the  appellant  is  in
      showing that any error on the part of the judge was  material  to  the
      outcome of the appeal. It is not the case that she  did  not  approach
      the evidence with care and she expressly rejected some aspects of  the
      appellant's account. She also considered the absence of any supporting
      evidence from the UK Ahmadi community without holding this against the
      appellant.


  17. In my view this ground fails for the  same  reason  the  first  ground
      failed. Unless the appellant can show that  his  conversion  would  be
      disclosed through his public activity as  an  Ahmadi  then  he  cannot
      reach the requisite threshold of risk. He has not established this for
      the same reasons he has  not  established  he  would  engage  in  2(i)
      activities.


  18. I also heard arguments about the judge's findings on  internal  flight
      but, in the circumstances that her primary finding that the  appellant
      would not be at risk can  be  left  undisturbed,  I  do  not  need  to
      consider these arguments.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and her decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

     Anonymity direction made.

                               Signed                 Date 10 November 2014




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
