
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01386/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|on 1st August 2013                            |on 18th September 2013       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                             SHAHID RIZWAN KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs G Patel instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Reed, promulgated following a hearing  at  Bradford  on  18th
        March 2013, in which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
        grounds. The determination is challenged on  a  number  of  grounds
        which I shall discuss in more detail below.  Permission  to  appeal
        was granted by another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  23rd
        April 2013.



Background


     2. The appellant, who was born on 26th April 1955,  is  a  citizen  of
        Pakistan. He arrived in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  27th
        July 2002 and his leave was extended thereafter as  a  Work  Permit
        holder until 22nd July 2009. An application for indefinite leave to
        remain was refused on 19th August 2010, against which  he  did  not
        appeal, although on 29th November 2012 he claimed  asylum  alleging
        that his return from the United Kingdom will breach  the  terms  of
        the  Refugee  Convention,  the  Qualification   Directive,   and/or
        European Convention on Human Rights.


     3.  Having  considered  the  evidence,  which  is  summarised  in  the
        determination, together with the relevant country guidance case law
        the Judge set out his findings of fact and credibility at paragraph
        23 of the determination. It is accepted that  the  appellant  is  a
        Pakistani national and of the Ahmadi faith.


     4. The appellant did not attend the hearing as he is unwell.  This  is
        supported by medical evidence although as the  hearing  was  listed
        for an Initial (error of law) hearing only, and he was represented,
        it was agreed the hearing can proceed in his absence.




Discussion



     5. Ground 1 challenges the Judge's reasoning for dismissing the asylum
        claim alleging the Judge provided no reasons for why the  claim  on
        asylum grounds was dismissed. I find this  claim  has  no  arguable
        merit for in paragraph 25 of the judgment Judge Reed states:


              25. Having carefully considered all of  the  evidence  in  the
   round, I find that the                appellant  has  not  shown  to  the
   lower standard that if  returned  to  Pakistan                  he  would
   either  demonstrate  his  religion  openly  or  would  wish  to  do   so,
   only being dissuaded from this through fear of the consequences.  I  also
          find that the appellant has failed to show that he has any profile
   which will                   draw adverse attention upon himself  outside
   the Ahmadi community. I                    therefore  conclude  that  the
   appellant     is     not     outside     the     country      of      his
   nationality    owing to a well founded fear of persecution either  for  a
              Convention reason or at all. I therefore dismiss  his  appeals
   under the                    Refugee Convention, under the  Qualification
   Directive (in relation  to                      Humanitarian  Protection)
   and under the Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.


     6. In paragraph 20 Judge Reed summarises the guidance provided by  the
        Upper Tribunal in the  country  guidance  case  of  MN  and  others
        (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk)  Pakistan  CG  [  2012]  UKUT
        00398 which I accept he applied to the findings made when assessing
        risk on return.


     7. Mrs Patel in her submissions referred to the oral evidence given by
        the appellant at the hearing and claimed that  the  Judge  had  not
        mentioned the same.  It is not a requirement for a  judge  to  make
        findings on each and every aspect of the evidence and  the  general
        approach to be adopted was recently confirmed by the Upper Tribunal
        in the case of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set  aside)  [2013]
        UKUT 85 (IAC) Blake J) in which the Tribunal held that (i) Although
        there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by  the  judge;
        (ii) Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
        requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
        Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
        Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
        finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  Country
        Guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
        judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
        or her.


     8. I accept the Judge was aware of the appellant's  evidence  and  the
        basis of his case which is summarised in the determination. I  find
        no merit in the claim the Judge did not  consider  the  appellant's
        evidence which would have included  his  claim  regarding  what  he
        would do in relation to his faith if returned to Pakistan. The fact
        the Judge may not have made a finding in relation  each  and  every
        element of the evidence does not mean  that  the  determination  is
        infected by legal error.  As all the evidence  was  considered  the
        grounds must, in essence, be a challenge to the weight given by the
        Judge to that evidence when weight is a matter for the Judge  -  SS
        (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 refers.  It has not been shown that
        the Judge failed to consider the evidence with the degree  of  care
        required in an appeal of this nature, that of  'anxious  scrutiny',
        or failed to give adequate reasons for findings made.


     9. The Judge accepted that the appellant had demonstrated an  interest
        in his faith and had undertaken activities in the  United  Kingdom.
        In paragraph 23 (ix) there is a reference to various  cards  and  a
        letters relating an  Ahmadi  charity  walk  and  a  certificate  of
        achievement relating to the walk in June 2003 and a letter from the
        Ahmadiyya Association in the UK  dated  June  2013  appointing  the
        appellant to a named position in  that  organisation.  The  Judge's
        conclusions that the documents did nothing  more  than  demonstrate
        his involvement with his own religion but said  nothing  about  his
        openly demonstrating or  practising  his  faith  within  the  wider
        society is a finding in accordance with the evidence which has  not
        been shown to be perverse or irrational.


    10. In paragraph  23  (xiv)  the  Judge  expressed  surprise  that  the
        appellant had not provided a letter from the Ahmadiyya  Association
        in the UK setting out his activities as  an  Ahmadi  both  in  this
        country and in Pakistan. The Judge notes the  appellant  was  asked
        about this and gave oral evidence to the effect he had not told the
        Association about his asylum claim as he was not proud  of  it.  He
        claimed he could get a letter if one was needed.  The  Judge  found
        there had been ample opportunity to obtain  this  evidence  and  in
        such circumstances did not find it credible that the appellant  had
        not provided a letter about his activities from the Association  in
        the United Kingdom. The absence of the  letter  was  stated  to  be
        significant particularly bearing in mind guidance in MN.


    11. Mrs Patel referred  me  to  documents  and  translations  contained
        within the appellant's appeal bundle and marked  SRK  2/09  and  so
        forth. There was reference to a poem published in a book which  was
        accepted by the Judge and other activities in  the  United  Kingdom
        prior to the appellant's move to Doncaster, two months prior to the
        hearing, after which he did not attend the mosque in Sheffield as a
        result of alleged financial constraints.


    12. The documentation in the  bundle  appears  to  be  an  exchange  of
        commentary which is not in the form of the content of letters  from
        the  UK-based  Association  often  seen   by   the   Tribunal   and
        specifically referred to in MN.  I accept that such  a  letter  has
        now been obtained but it was not before Judge Reed and cannot be  a
        legal error to fail to take into  account  evidence  that  did  not
        exist at that time.


    13. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that even taking into
        account factors found in his favour by the Judge, had the
        principles of MN been properly applied, he would have succeeded in
        any event. The grounds challenge the reasoning given for
        credibility findings made and allege it is not clear what evidence
        has been considered and which parts of the case have been deemed to
        bolster a genuine claim and which undermined the claim.  Again I
        find this to be in substance a mere disagreement as the Judge
        clearly considered the evidence and it has not been shown
        inadequate reasons were given or that the Judge legally misdirected
        himself when considering the question of which aspects of the claim
        were accepted as being credible and which were not. A judge does
        not have to accept or reject all an account. In Karanakaran. At
        [2000] Imm A R 282 there are set out the four categories of
        evidence that decision makers may have to take into account when
        assessing the future risk facing an appellant on return to his home
        country:

        1) evidence they are certain about;
        2) evidence they think is probably true;
        3) evidence to which they are willing to attach some credence, even
        if they could not go so far as to say it is probably true;
        4) evidence to which they are not willing to attach any credence at
        all.


    14. The Judge set out which parts of the evidence was accepted and that
        rejected and, against this, his conclusions. I find  this  argument
        is more a disagreement with  such  findings  made  and  conclusions
        flowing from those findings than a challenge  which  identifies  an
        arguable legal error.


    15. Having considered the submissions, the evidence  available  to  the
        Judge, the contents of the determination and reasons  for  findings
        made, I accept there are aspects of  the  determination  which  are
        capable of being criticised but not to the extent  they  amount  to
        material legal errors.  I find the Judge did considered  the  claim
        in context.  I accept having considered the documents to  which  my
        intention  was  specifically  drawn  by  Mrs  Patel,  the  document
        appearing at SK 2/11 refers to preaching but there was  no  further
        evidence from the named individuals and the Judge was  entitled  to
        form the view that he did, namely that having  considered  all  the
        evidence it was insufficient to discharge the burden of proof  upon
        the appellant to prove he was able to satisfy the required tests.


    16. In relation to the evidence from the Ahmadi Association  in  United
        Kingdom I note Mrs  Petersen's  submission  that  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter made reference to the Association and so this was  a
        matter of which the appellant would have been made aware, in  terms
        of its importance, yet he failed to obtain such evidence.


    17. I accept that the situation for an Ahmadi who comes to the  adverse
        attention of the  authorities  or  extremist  religious  groups  in
        Pakistan has been recognised as being sufficient  to  entitle  such
        individuals to a  grant  of  international  protection  in  certain
        circumstances. This does not take away from  such  individuals  the
        need for them to ensure that sufficient evidence is made  available
        to support their case and prove they are entitled  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.  On the basis of the evidence  the  Judge
        was asked to consider he was not satisfied that sufficient evidence
        had been provided.  That is the key finding which is  supported  by
        adequate reasons.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to
        show that any legal error that may have been made by the  Judge  is
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.  I  note  there  is
        now in existence a letter from Ahmadi Association  which  may  give
        rise to a fresh claim. That is a matter which the appellant will no
        doubt discuss with his legal representatives.


Decision

    18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand




   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008)  application  for
   anonymity was made and neither        have the grounds warranting such in
   order been established.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th September 2013


