
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01065/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 16 September 2014                          |On 25 September 2014         |
|Oral Determination                            |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                    K T R
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro who in a determination promulgated
    on 21 May 2014 dismissed the appellant's claim against the decision  of
    the respondent made on 20 December 2012 to refuse to grant him leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom consequent upon a refusal of  a  grant  of
    asylum.

 2. The appellant's case is broadly that he is an ethnic Tamil  serving  in
    the LTTE as a combatant right up until the latter part of the civil war
    in Sri Lanka.  When that ended he surrendered  voluntarily  to  a  camp
    where he was seriously ill-treated.  He was able to  obtain  a  release
    from the camp by bribery but fears  that  he  will  be  persecuted  and
    subjected again to further ill-treatment by the authorities on  return.
    He was able to enter the United Kingdom as a student but did not  claim
    asylum immediately.

 3. The respondent did not accept his claim for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter.  There is no purpose served in reciting these here  but
    in summary the respondent rejected the appellant's claim as implausible
    and lacking in credibility.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Del Fabbro sitting at Taylor House on
    19 March 2014 he heard evidence from the appellant.    The judge  found
    parts of the claim to be proved in that he accepted that he was a young
    Tamil man and that it was more likely than not (sic)that he had  served
    with the LTTE.  He accepted that he had been ill-treated  in  detention
    but that this had not amounted to torture.  He did not, however, accept
    the appellant's account of what happened after detention.

 5. The appellant then appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds are  in
    summary that the findings of Judge Del Fabbro involved the making of an
    error of law as they are inconsistent  with  the  evidence  given,  are
    internally contradictory and lacking in adequate reasoning.   There  is
    no purpose in rehearsing the grounds in detail.

 6. When the matter came before me Mr Bramble said that  he  would  not  be
    resisting the application on the basis  that  there  are  a  number  of
    features within the determination which indicate  deficiencies  in  the
    reasoning  of  the  judge.   Ms  King  did  not  resist  any  of  those
    submissions.  I agree with the concession made by Mr Bramble and  I  am
    satisfied that the grounds of appeal are made out.

 7. It is worrying that at paragraph 30 that the judge appears to be  using
    an incorrect standard of proof.  It is unclear also  why  he  concluded
    that somebody who  had  been  beaten  seriously  in  detention  by  the
    authorities had not been tortured.  It is also unclear why he  referred
    to the appellant not having mentioned being sexually abused when he had
    in fact done so. All of these cast significant doubt on his  assessment
    of the evidence.  As is  set  out  in  the  grounds,  there  are  other
    indicators that the judge has not fully taken  on  board  the  evidence
    which was before him and it is not at all clear how  having  found  the
    appellant's claim to be for the most part  made  out  and  thus  to  be
    credible that he could rationally not accept the account of  subsequent
    re-arrest and detention.

 8. Taking all of these errors together I am satisfied that the decision of
    Judge Del Fabbro did involve the making of an error of law in that  his
    findings with respect to  the  appellant's  credibility  and  thus  the
    findings of fact are not sustainable.

 9. On that basis the determination must be  set  aside.   Given  that  the
    error of law  identified  in  this  case  relates  to  the  finding  on
    credibility and thus undermines all findings of fact as made I consider
    that as both representatives accepted this is  a  matter  which  should
    properly be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision
    to be made on all issues and I so order.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to make a fresh  decision
    on the basis that none of the findings of fact are preserved.

 3. The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.






Signed                                  Date; 18 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


