
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     sh
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Francis Gaskin, Counsel, instructed by Elder
Rahimi Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 9 January 2015 refusing to grant asylum and
    to remove the appellant from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Azerbaijan born in 1979. He has worked as
    a chemist at a [ - ] bottling plant owned by [ - ] since about 2007. He
    claims that he has also worked as a journalist for [ - ] and [ - ].  As
    a journalist, the appellant wrote articles that were  critical  of  the
    government or members of the government. That  drew  adverse  attention
    towards him and in May 2010 his editor was  warned  that  the  articles
    should cease or there would be consequences. [ - ]  was  shut  down  in
    2010. The appellant ceased to  write  articles  between  May  2010  and
    September 2010 but resumed after that by writing articles on a  website
    operated by [ - ]. In September or October 2010 there was a  threat  to
    his  mother  who  had  answered  a  telephone  call  intended  for  the
    appellant. During April 2012 some bullets in an envelope were placed at
    the gate of his house as a warning. He then ceased writing.

 4.  However,  in  February  2013  the  appellant  was  the  target  of  an
    assassination attempt when a lorry deliberately drove into and  damaged
    his car. In April 2013 the appellant was attacked and beaten  by  three
    people when his car was being repaired.  While  he  was  recovering  in
    hospital his house was set on fire and his son died in  the  blaze.  In
    June 2013 the appellant was detained for a day at a police station  and
    was beaten. He started writing again in August or  September  2013.  In
    September 2013 he was arrested from a political meeting  which  he  was
    attending as a journalist. He was detained and on the second day of his
    detention he paid a bribe to a person  to  inform  his  family  of  his
    predicament. His uncle then paid  a  bribe  of  $3000  to  procure  the
    appellant's release. The appellant signed some blank  documents  before
    he was released. The appellant was then assisted by an agent to  obtain
    a UK multiple entry visit visa and left with his wife and two surviving
    children. They arrived in the UK on 9 November 2013 and  the  appellant
    claimed asylum on 12 November 2013.

 5. The respondent did not accept that the appellant worked as a journalist
    or that he had problems with the government. The appellant  had  failed
    to show that the car crash and the April 2013 attack had anything to do
    with the government. The claimed injuries were  not  substantiated  and
    could have been caused in other ways. The appellant was able to  travel
    twice to Turkey in 2013 with no difficulties.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 May 2015. The judge rejected his claim  to
    be a journalist. His work record  documents  showing  employment  as  a
    chemist and a correspondent with [ - ] could not be reconciled and  his
    claim that [ - ] was shut down in 2010 was  not  substantiated  because
    the [ - ] work record showed continued employment until  October  2013.
    There was no record of employment by [ - ], despite the fact  that  the
    press badge produced by the appellant showed that he was employed by  [
    - ]. The reference from [ - ] states that the employment  commenced  in
    May 2007 whereas the work record shows that the employment commenced in
    July 2007. The letter was written after the appellant fled the  country
    but makes no mention of the closure of [ - ].  There  was  no  evidence
    that the son said to have been killed in the fire was ever  born,  much
    less  that  he  died.  The  appellant  was  equivocal  about  who   was
    responsible for the fire. He did not tell police that he believed  that
    the fire was linked to his writing.

 7. The judge found that the  damage  to  the  front  of  the  car  in  the
    photographs produced was irreconcilable with the appellant's  statement
    in the screening interview that he was struck from  the  back  and  the
    damage did not appear consistent to an experienced lawyer and  judicial
    officer with a  head-on  or  glancing  collision  with  a  large  lorry
    travelling at speed. There was no clear and consistent chronology as to
    when the appellant might have ceased to write and when  he  might  have
    resumed journalism (May-September 2010 in  the  witness  statement  but
    2011 in the asylum interview). If there was a threat in September  2010
    then it was surprising that the  appellant  persisted  in  his  writing
    between 2011 and 2013.  The  appellant  also  claimed  to  have  ceased
    writing in April 2012 before starting again in August or September 2013
    and therefore there was  no  reason  for  the  persistent  threats  and
    assaults alleged between those dates. It was highly unlikely  that  the
    appellant would continue to write critical articles  in  his  own  name
    after a series of potentially fatal attacks. The judge found  that  the
    appellant had failed to prove the core of his account.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal but that was refused by First-
    Tier  Judge  Shimmin  on  25  June  2012.  The  appellant  renewed  his
    application to the Upper Tribunal and permission to appeal was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 24 August 2015. It  was  arguable  that
    the  judge  had  misunderstood  aspects  of  the  appellant's  evidence
    relating to his employment as a journalist  and  that  the  credibility
    findings were therefore undermined. The grounds were arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 10 September 2015, the respondent sought to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that  there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant was qualified or indeed a  trained  journalist.  The
    judge gave sustainable reasons for finding that the employment  records
    were not reliable and there were a number of discrepancies between  the
    appellant's account and the information contained in the documents. The
    appellant's account was neither consistent or plausible.

10. The appellant made an application at the oral  hearing  on  23  October
    under rule 15 (2A) to adduce new evidence,  namely  country  background
    information regarding employment history books in Azerbaijan.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

12. If the Upper Tribunal identifies a  material  error  of  law  then  the
    appeal should be remitted for a fresh hearing.



Discussion

13. Mr Gaskin submitted that the cumulative effect of a series of errors by
    the judge is a misunderstanding of the appellant's case.  The  evidence
    from the  Labour  Code  is  only  capable  of  interpretation  that  an
    individual may have separate work books for each employment.  Employers
    must store and keep the registration book and give it to  the  employee
    when the contract is terminated. There is a very  poor  translation  at
    page 18 of the appellant's bundle and  holding  that  document  against
    another document was too dangerous. [ - ] and  [  -  ]  were  the  same
    entity. The press badge (D20  in  the  respondent's  bundle)  has  both
    organisations on the face of the document. The judge has  not  referred
    to the photograph at page 11 of the appellant's bundle which shows  the
    appellant working as a press journalist. There is a photograph  of  the
    damage to the car  at  page  12  of  the  appellant's  bundle  and  the
    reference in the screening interview to damage at the back of  the  car
    was just a mistake. The damage appears to the front and  the  remainder
    of the car cannot be seen. The judge appears to  be  giving  an  expert
    opinion from a limited photograph and that is not permissible.  It  was
    unfair to describe the answer  at  Q134  of  the  asylum  interview  as
    evasive.

14. Ms Savage submitted that  the  findings  at  paragraphs  15-16  of  the
    decision were properly open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge
    considered the documents in the round. It was open to the judge to find
    that the work  records  were  inconsistent.  The  documents  cannot  be
    reconciled. The Labour Code is of very limited  assistance  because  it
    does not expressly support what the appellant is asserting and does not
    explain the discrepancies. The judge was aware that [ - ] was linked to
    [ - ] as shown in paragraph 4 of the decision. There is no  requirement
    for the judge to refer to every piece of evidence. The judge considered
    the evidence in the round and was entitled to consider the articles  as
    a whole. The judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusions  stated  in
    relation to Q134 of the asylum interview. The grounds are no more  than
    a disagreement with findings that the judge was entitled to reach.

15. The appellant asserts that employment history books or work records can
    be issued simultaneously for different employments in  Azerbaijan.  The
    employment history books submitted by the appellant  confirm  that  the
    appellant worked as  a  journalist.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
    submitted one work record for each employment and the judge has  failed
    to give adequate reasons for the finding in paragraph 16 that the  work
    records submitted by the appellant cannot  be  reconciled.  That  is  a
    material error of law. I have not found it necessary  to  consider  the
    fresh evidence although that will be relevant at the de novo hearing.

16. The appellant asserts that the judge failed to understand that [ - ] is
    part of [ - ]. I find that the judge failed to mention that  the  press
    badge stated both [ - ] and [ - ] and did not mention the  photographic
    evidence that appears to show the appellant working as a journalist. At
    paragraph 4 of the decision, the judge referred to [ - ] as a successor
    of, or former owner of, [ - ]. However,  at  paragraph  17,  the  judge
    expressed concern that the [ - ] work record extended to  October  2013
    and that there was no record of employment by [ -  ].  The  judge  then
    stated that, "Weight is added to that conclusion by  the  circumstances
    that the appellant purports to produce a press badge showing that he is
    employed by [ - ]. This, as an employer, ought to  be  reflected  in  a
    work record."

17. I find that the judge has not properly considered the consequences of [
    - ] being in effect, part of the  same  organisation  as  [  -  ].  The
    absence of a separate work record  from  [  -  ]  was  not  an  adverse
    credibility factor that could properly be taken  into  account  by  the
    judge. I also find that the judge has failed to consider the apparently
    highly relevant photographic evidence showing the appellant working  as
    a journalist or to mention that the press badge refers to both  [  -  ]
    and [ - ]. I find that the judge has failed to  properly  consider  the
    weight of the evidence indicating that the  appellant  did  work  as  a
    journalist in Azerbaijan and that is a material error of law.

18. The appellant asserts that the judge materially erred by purporting  to
    have expert knowledge in relation to the causation of the car accident.
    I find that the judge was entitled to consider all of the  evidence  in
    relation to the car accident and to make findings. However,  the  judge
    has not given any reasons for the finding that the damage  to  the  car
    shown in the photographs does not appear to be consistent with  a  head
    on or glancing collision with a lorry travelling at speed. There  might
    have been something from the photographic evidence that was clear to an
    experienced lawyer and judicial officer but the judge has not explained
    what it was. That finding was  important  in  terms  of  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility and the failure to give reasons for the finding
    is a further material error of law.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

20. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 20 November 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
