
                                    [pic]
St
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01142/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
| on 4th January 2017               |on 9th January 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     M.M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hussain, Kube Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Iran and is Kurdish. He claimed
      protection on the basis he would be at risk if returned to Iran
      because of his smuggling activities across the Iran Iraq border. His
      claim was refused as not being credible.


   2. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Cope and was dismissed. The
      judge gave numerous reasons for not finding the appellant credible and
      concluded at paragraph 106 of the decision that he was not a smuggler
      as claimed and was not wanted by the Iranians authorities.
      Furthermore, the judge did not accept he had exited the country
      illegally.

   3. The judge went on to consider if the appellant would face any risk
      simply on the basis he had claimed protection in the United Kingdom.
      Furthermore, although the judge did not accept the appellant had left
      illegally, the position in the alternative was considered.

   4. Relying on the country guidance decision of SB (Iran) [2009] UKAIT
      0005 the judge concluded that he could safely be returned and the most
      he would face would be a fine. The appellant's representative Mr
      Hussain had sought to challenge the extant country guidance decision,
      arguing that it was outdated. He cited various unreported Upper
      Tribunal decisions and applications made in cases for judicial review.
      The judge however was not persuaded.

   5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the sole
      basis that it was arguable the judge may have erred in law in
      consideration of the risk on return simply as a failed asylum seeker.

   6. First-tier Judge Cope heard the appeal in May 2015. On 26 June 2016
      the country guidance decision of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed
      asylum seeker) Iran [2016] UKUT 00308 was issued. It affirmed the
      guidance given in SB (Iran). The first appellant was a Kurdish Iranian
      who claimed involvement with the PJAK and was not found to be
      credible. The second appellant was also Kurdish who claimed he had
      been distributing information about Kurdish rights which would place
      him at risk. He was not found to have a profile which would place him
      at risk. At paragraph 34 of the decision the tribunal stated that it
      was not argued that being Kurdish in itself presented a risk on return
      but it was relevant as to how the person would be treated. However
      there was no evidence of any increased risk absent further features
      beyond Kurdish ethnicity.

   7. In this appeal the appellant's representative has sought to argue that
      his circumstances can be distinguished from the guidance of SSH and HR
      (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran [2016] UKUT 00308. His
      primary point was that the appellant, as a Kurd, was at an enhanced
      risk on return as a failed asylum seeker. However, as Mr McVeety
      points out both appellants in the country guidance decision where
      Kurds and the decision specifically addresses their position as such.

   8. The second point advanced relates to what he described as the risk at
      the `pinch point 'of Teheran airport. The final point related to the
      risk on return because, in the absence of a passport, the appellant
      would be travelling on a laissez passport. However both of these
      points have been extensively covered in the country guidance decision.
      The country guidance decision specifically considered what would be
      involved in obtaining travel documentation. It was noted an appellant
      would have to attend at the Embassy and the respondent would have to
      give information to the Embassy about their standing in this country.
      Nevertheless, the conclusion was that alone would not place individual
      at risk. Similarly, the situation at the point of return was
      considered with the guidance case dealing with Internet activities
      being distinguished.

   9. First-tier Judge Cope did not have the benefit of the latest country
      guidance decision. However it reaffirms the previous position. The
      appellant's representative has failed to distinguish this appellant's
      situation from that covered in the latest country guidance.

  10. The sole issue on which leave was granted has been the question of the
      potential risk on return as someone who had left the country illegally
      and who had unsuccessfully claimed protection here. At hearing the
      representatives confirmed this was the only issue. Bearing in mind the
      latest country guidance decision I see no material error of law.
      Consequently the decision of First-tier Judge Cope dismissing the
      appellant's appeal shall stand.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Cope dismissing the appellant appeal
does not contain a material error of law and shall stand. The appellant's
appeal is dismissed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.












