
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01127/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 26 June   2013                             |On 27 June 2013              |
|Prepared 26 June   2013                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                                   Between

                                Ejaz Hussain
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D.Lemer, of Counsel instructed by Rashid and
                    Rashid    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, born  on  8  September    1969
       appeals with permission against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
       tier tribunal Onoufriou  who  in  a  determination  dated  17  April
       dismissed his appeal  against the refusal of asylum.
    2. The respondent accepted, in a letter of 21 May 2013, that there were
       material errors of law in the determination.
    3. the respondent was correct to do so. It is clear that the Judge  had
       ignore documentary evidence from Pakistan supporting  his  assertion
       that he was an Ahmadi.
    4. Both representatives considered that this would  be  an  appropriate
       case to be remitted to the first -tier.  I agree that the errors  in
       the determination are such that it is appropriate that none  of  the
       findings of the Judge should be preserved and that  the   appeal  be
       heard afresh.
          5.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  an  appeal   in  which   the
       requirements  of  the    Senior   President's   Practice   Statement
       paragraph 7.2(a)  are met.
         6.  I therefore allow the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  to  the
       limited extent that it is remitted to the First -tier Tribunal to be
       heard  afresh.






Signed                                  Date: 26 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
