
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V6

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01316/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd January 2016                     |On 15th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               [G P] (a minor)
                                                                  Respondent


                               ANONYMITY ORDER

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms P Chandran (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Claimant  is  a  citizen  of  North  Korea  born  on  [  ]  2001.
    Consequently the Claimant is a minor.  The Claimant  claimed  that  her
    approximate arrival date in the UK was 20th August 2012.   She  claimed
    asylum on 30th August 2012 on the basis that  she  had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in North Korea on the basis of her religion  namely
    that she is a Christian.  That application was refused by the Secretary
    of State on 7th January 2015.  The Claimant was however granted limited
    leave to enter until 6th July 2017.

 2. The Claimant appealed and the appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andonian sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  15th  May  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd June 2015 the  Claimant's  appeal  was
    allowed and an anonymity direction was made.

 3. On 9th June the Secretary of State lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The principal thrust of the  Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    that the Immigration Judge had materially erred in law  by  failing  to
    follow the country  guidance  case  of  GP  and  Others  (South  Korean
    citizenship) North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 00391 (IAC).

 4. On 19th June 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted
    permission to appeal considering that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had erred in law by failing to follow the country guidance case  of  GP
    and in allowing the appeal under Article 8, that the Claimant had  been
    granted discretionary leave until July 2017 and the appeal was  brought
    under Section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. On 3rd July 2015 the  claimant's  solicitors,  through  their  Counsel,
    lodged a Rule 24 response.  It was on that basis that the  appeal  came
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  further  noted  at  the
    time that neither the Claimant nor her foster  mother  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal nor appeared before me on the  hearing  of  the
    error of law.  I was quite content however to note  that  the  Claimant
    was aware of the proceedings and excused her attendance, something that
    is maintained for today's hearing.

 6. Country guidance is  now  provided  by  GP  and  Others  (South  Korean
    citizenship) North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 00391 (IAC).   Suppositions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 6 and  7  are  in  conflict
    with the findings in GP in particular  with  regard  to  the  grant  of
    protection that would be  provided.   Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge cannot be criticised for not having made reference to GP  he  has
    in fact made no reference to any case law in particular  the  authority
    that was that extant at that time namely KK  and  Others  (nationality:
    North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC).  GP is authority for saying
    that, with the exception of certain paragraphs, that  country  guidance
    still stands.  However in such circumstances the failure to address  GP
    created a material error of law.

 7. I therefore set aside the decision but made certain  findings  and  set
    them out:

      a) The findings of fact are to stand.

      b) The issues outstanding are legal issues namely:

          i) should a minor's case be distinguished from GP;

         ii) does the fact that the minor has been granted limited leave to
             remain affect the decision; and

        iii) the inherent complexity of the issues in this particular  case
             and whether in these circumstances the overall question of the
             returnability of the Claimant to South Korea.

 8. Both legal representatives asked me to give  due  consideration  as  to
    whether the matter should remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  I  was
    satisfied that it should be rather  than  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The reason for this was that:-

          i) findings of fact were not challenged,  i.e.  the  findings  of
             fact stand;

         ii) the only outstanding issue was an issue of law best dealt with
             within the Upper Tribunal; and

        iii) the practical basis due to the fact that it  was  more  likely
             with the current waiting lists that the appeal would be  heard
             quicker in the current listing climate if reserved  to  myself
             in the Upper Tribunal rather than being remitted to the First-
             tier.  I did however acknowledge that in one respect there was
             no great urgency to the hearing,  bearing  in  mind  that  the
             Claimant has discretionary leave to remain until  2017  but  I
             took the view that the case having a substantial  history  and
             for the benefit of all concerned, prompt resolution  would  be
             helpful.

 9. I consequently gave directions for the rehearing of this matter.  Leave
    was granted that the Claimant did  not  need  to  attend  the  restored
    hearing but the Claimant's instructed solicitors were granted leave  to
    obtain an additional expert's report from Pillkyu Hwang limited to  the
    issue surrounding the protection of young children in South  Korea  and
    the prospective risks that the  Claimants  could/would  be  exposed  if
    returned.  I gave leave to the Claimant's solicitors to file an  up-to-
    date bundle of documentation  and,  that  in  the  event  that  he  was
    available, Dr Pillkyu Hwang attend court  for  the  purpose  of  cross-
    examination on his addendum report.

10. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me.   Fortunately
    the legal representatives who  were  present  before  me  when  I  gave
    directions are again available to attend and the Claimant's  instructed
    solicitors have fully complied with my directions.  Ms Chandran  refers
    me to the additional documents that she has  produced.   These  consist
    of:-

       . a skeleton argument;

       . the addendum report of Dr Pillkyu Hwang; and

       . a bundle of additional objective evidence.

The History

11. The facts of this case are not in dispute.  The Claimant was born on  [
    ] 2001.  She was separated from her mother in 2011 and arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom to seek asylum in 2012.  She is aged  just  14  and  has
    been granted temporary discretionary leave until July  2017,  when  she
    will be rising 16.

12. The claimant is a minor and  a  vulnerable  person  and  previously  an
    anonymity direction has been made.  She is a North Korean national whom
    the Secretary of State seeks to remove to South Korea, of which,  as  a
    matter of law, she is also a citizen.

13. The Claimant has expressed her views about not wishing to be removed or
    go to South Korea and her reasons why, including that she will not feel
    safe in South Korea; that she does not know anyone who has  gone  there
    and knows no-one there, that she fears discrimination and being treated
    badly for being from North Korea.  The Claimant's previously  expressed
    views have been if removed she feels that she would have  the  need  to
    hide the fact that she is from North Korea but  fears  that  she  might
    disclose that she is from North Korea by accident.  She  has  indicated
    that she can speak freely about North Korea whilst in the UK  with  her
    foster carer but that she would not be able to  do  so  if  removed  to
    South Korea.

14. I also note that the Claimant has expressed her view about not  wanting
    to give up her North Korean nationality and that her foster carer,  for
    the course of the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal,  provided
    two witness statements dated 2nd December  2013  and  28th  April  2015
    wherein she explained the Claimant's anxieties and beliefs about  being
    sent to South Korea.  I note that the Claimant was diagnosed with  PTSD
    by a clinical specialist from the London and South Maudsley  NHS  Trust
    Child and Adolescent Mental  Health  Service  Department.   Within  her
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Claimant's  distress  on
    arrival in the UK was noted, including the fact that when  placed  with
    her foster carer  she  wore  the  clothes  she  arrived  in,  including
    sleeping in them for over three weeks.  She was 12 years  old  and  had
    indicated that she "wanted to keep her clothes  on  as  they  had  been
    bought by her mother as this was the last remaining memory she  had  of
    her mother".

15. The Claimant was thereafter assessed by an independent  social  worker,
    Rosaleen Brown.  Miss Brown in her report of 15th March 2014, which was
    also before the First-tier Tribunal, reports on the significant  amount
    of loss that the Claimant had already  experienced  in  her  life,  the
    number of transitions she had had to comprehend and the ongoing reality
    that her life is in a state of limbo.  The expert had  found  that  the
    Claimant was "scared and confused and understandably  unable  to  fully
    articulate how she would feel about an unknown set of  procedures  such
    as removal from the UK and repatriation".  The report  notes  that  the
    Claimant was very clear she did not wish to leave the UK.



Expert Evidence

16. She relies upon her mental health issues and on the written reports  of
    the clinical specialist Gill Allen from the London and  South  Maudsley
    NHS Trust and the independent social worker's report of Rosaleen Brown.
      Those  reports  are  not  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of   State.
    Consequently it is accepted that the Claimant has ongoing PTSD.

Gill Allen

17. Gill Allen notes the Appellant was referred to her by the Unaccompanied
    Minors  Team  of  the  Child  and  Adolescent  Mental  Health   Service
    Department at Croydon.  Following a course of therapeutic work Ms Allen
    diagnosed her with post-traumatic stress disorder and concluded she had
    been traumatised by her past.  She considered if a decision was made to
    return the Appellant to South Korea this should be over  time  and  she
    should be included in the decision making process.

Rosaleen Brown

18. Ms Brown relies on Dr Hwang's comment on the impact of detention on the
    Claimant and on children  generally  and  considers  that  her  further
    development is likely to be affected.  In so doing, she is  not  giving
    her own opinion, but relying upon his report.  She has emphasised  that
    the Claimant has made it very clear she does not wish to leave the  UK.



19. Ms Brown notes the significant amount of loss  that  the  Claimant  has
    already experienced in her life, the number of transitions she has  had
    to comprehend and the ongoing reality that her life is in  a  state  of
    limbo.  Ms Brown records that the Claimant can  no  longer  recall  the
    names of her parents and sister or other extended family and  that  she
    is scared, confused and unable to fully articulate how she  would  feel
    about an unknown set of procedures such as  removal  from  the  UK  and
    repatriation.  She  notes  that  the  Claimant  finds  it  increasingly
    difficult to recall her fluency in speaking the Korean  language,  that
    she struggles to understand her North Korean identity  and  feels  that
    she would be stigmatised in South Korea.

Dr Pillkyu Hwang

20. The Claimant relies on the expert's report of  Dr  Pillkyu  Hwang,  who
    attended court to give evidence.  He has produced two reports, both  of
    which he adopts and confirms as his evidence-in-chief, these being  his
    reports of 22nd November 2013 and his addendum report of  15th  January
    2016.  Dr Hwang is an expert in  the  relationship  between  North  and
    South Korea.  He has previously given evidence in the country  guidance
    authority of GP and Others (South Korean citizenship)  North  Korea  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00391 (IAC).  His credentials and evidence are set  out  at
    paragraphs 78 to 95.  The report in the current case is  of  a  generic
    nature based on instructions by the Claimant and her solicitors.

21. His report concludes with the view that South  Korean  nationality  for
    North Korean escapees is in  essence  a  political  construction  which
    inevitably involves  "the  protection  procedure"  with  serious  human
    rights violations that a Tribunal may find  amount  to  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.

22. Dr Hwang states that  children  are  no  exception  to  the  protection
    procedure and that what is even worse is that during the  detention  of
    protection and  social  integration  process  for  several  months,  no
    regular schooling is provided and there  are  no  legal  guardians  for
    these children.  Most unaccompanied North Korean child escapees are  to
    go either  into  group  homes  only  for  North  Koreans  with  regular
    schooling  or  alternative  schools  only  for   North   Koreans   with
    dormitories.  He considered that young North Korean escapees face  very
    serious challenges such as gaps in their  physical  health  and  socio-
    economic status, psychological health  issues  such  as  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and bias against the North  Korean  escapees  that  are
    widely prevalent in schools and workplaces.  Further he states that  to
    date there have been no known incidents where a  North  Korean  escapee
    unaccompanied child has been forcibly removed (by a third country where
    they have sought asylum) to South Korea if the child had never been  to
    South Korea before and he believes that this case raises  grave  issues
    of the highest importance in terms of  the  Claimant's  protection  and
    wellbeing.

23. Dr Hwang made reference to the most recent evidence of the  Korean  Bar
    Association that applicants are demanded to  write  down  every  detail
    they remember about their lives in North Korea, whether they are public
    or private, whether they are family related or workplace/school related
    using a few volume of notebooks and that he had mentioned  this  within
    the first paragraph of his report.

24. Under cross-examination from Mr Duffy, Dr Hwang stated that there  were
    separate facilities provided for North Koreans in  detention  and  that
    there had been a number of surveys but that once somebody  was  in  the
    process there was no right to cancel and the person would  be  kept  in
    solitary confinement.  After that they would be placed in a  room  with
    others and he gave evidence of an example of a  Chinese  lady  who  had
    been placed in solitary confinement for six months and emphasised  that
    such confinement could also take place for children.

25. Mr Duffy pointed out that in the Claimant's case  she  had  left  North
    Korea when very young and had then gone to China.  He  enquired  as  to
    how could she be distinguished from a Chinese national of North  Korean
    descent and what process would be  followed  by  the  authorities.   Dr
    Hwang replied that in general a detained person would be asked to write
    down everything that they state and in response to questions twice  and
    if there are any discrepancies in the  two  versions  of  events,  then
    interrogation would take place.  When asked as to how regularly  people
    are sent back to China he responds that if someone is of Chinese origin
    they will be sent back but the  problem  does  arise  when  the  person
    interviewed denies that they are Chinese.  Reference was made to a case
    where fishermen had been returned  having  strayed  into  South  Korean
    seas.  Dr Hwang responds that these  fishermen  were  interrogated  and
    returned to North Korea but that is the  only  situation  he  knows  of
    where such events have taken place.

26. Mr Duffy takes Dr Hwang to part 7 of his addendum report  -  that  part
    dealing with the effect of the Claimant's leave to remain  in  the  UK.
    He notes that at 7.1.1 Dr Hwang contends that it is highly likely  that
    if the Claimant goes to South Korea her leave to remain in the UK would
    have an adverse effect on her  eligibility  for  a  government  support
    package and that she would probably be excluded from it.  When asked as
    to whether her legal status is defined he  replies  no,  nor  does  the
    Protection and  Settlement  Act  of  South  Korea  distinguish  between
    indefinite and limited leave granted to an Claimant in the UK.

27. Mr Duffy notes that Dr Hwang has stated at 7.1.2  that  the  Claimant's
    leave to remain in the UK would probably result in a more  thorough  or
    harsher "protection procedure"  because  her  refugee  application  and
    legal stay permit implies she does not have the desire or intention  to
    come to South Korea in the first place although  he  acknowledges  that
    once she applies for "protection" to the South Korean's authorities and
    successfully goes through "the protection procedure" that  there  would
    not be any obstacle for her to be recognised as a South Korean national
    and to reside in South Korea.  Mr Duffy enquires if Dr Hwang means that
    it would not be possible therefore for the Claimant to go  through  the
    protection procedure and he responds by stating that  if  the  Claimant
    were voluntarily returned and  applied  for  protection  she  would  be
    accepted into the process.  Mr Duffy enquires as to  whether  Dr  Hwang
    has any knowledge of children not being sent back by other countries to
    South Korea and Dr Hwang indicates that he has no knowledge of this.

Secretary of State's submissions

28. For the Secretary of State Mr Duffy relied on the  Notice  of  Refusal,
    pointing out that, applying GP and Others all those born on the  Korean
    Peninsula  have  South  Korean  nationality.   He  submits   there   is
    insufficient evidence to show the Claimant would not be  accepted  into
    the protection programme and that return would not constitute a risk of
    serious harm.  However he does accept that the Secretary of  State  has
    not completed his enquiries as to whether she would be so accepted  and
    acknowledges that the Claimant is a child.  The  Secretary  of  State's
    position is that the burden of proving that the protection programme is
    not open to this claimant is upon her, with the assistance of her legal
    representatives.

29. He contends that the Claimant is not  a  refugee  and  looking  at  the
    guidance in GP and what was said in KK , she has not shown a real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm in South Korea and is  not  outside  the
    country of her  nationality  for  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian
    protection reasons.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Claimant's submissions

30. For the claimant, Ms Chandran reminds me of the claimant's status as an
    unaccompanied minor and a vulnerable person, with  discretionary  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom until July 2017.

31. Ms Chandran submits that the issue for  the  Tribunal  is  whether  the
    Claimant is entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection  and  reminds
    me that the date of assessment is based on a  hypothetical  removal  to
    South Korea today, the date of the hearing.

32. Her principal submission is that the impact of  removing  the  Claimant
    from the UK to South Korea would amount to  "persecution"  or  "serious
    harm" on account of her past experiences, her vulnerabilities  and  the
    future conditions in South Korea that await her.  Ms Chandran relies on
    her skeleton argument.  She points out that the Claimant  is  of  North
    Korean  nationality  and  she  wishes  to  retain  that  and  that  the
    protection procedure of South Korea embraces a wish to enter into  that
    process which the Claimant does not seek to do.

33. Ms Chandran asserts that on removal to South  Korea,  if  the  Claimant
    were to enter into the protection procedure, she  would  be  forced  to
    denounce and rescind her North Korean nationality and that she would be
    forced  to  enter  into  the  protection  procedure  and  undergo   the
    protection procedures including  immediate  detention  for  an  average
    period of six months, no schooling during that time and the lack of any
    guardian.  She submits that for someone in  the  Claimant's  vulnerable
    state of mind, those events would  amount  to  persecution  or  serious
    harm.

34. Ms Chandran  asserts  that  South  Korea  chooses  whom  to  accept  as
    citizens, that in all cases people who have gone to  South  Korea  have
    gone willingly and that in the Claimant's situation she  would  not  be
    accepted by the South Koreans as she does not willingly wish  to  enter
    into the  protection  procedure.   That  is  not  consistent  with  the
    findings in GP that South Korean  citizenship  is  in  practice  always
    granted. She  points  out  that  there  has  not  been  a  case  of  an
    unaccompanied child being returned to South Korea and when  looked  at,
    the conditions that the Claimant would face on return, the impact is to
    reach, she submits, the threshold of persecution.

35. Ms Chandran submits that the Claimant's age, gender, health  etc.  must
    be taken into account and the individual facts of  this  case  must  be
    considered.  She emphasises she is  not  making  a  general  point  but
    referring specifically to the facts of this  case,  reminding  me  that
    this was a young vulnerable child whose mother did not  come  back  one
    day from the fields and that she was brought by a pastor to the UK from
    China.  She submits that the Secretary of State has decided  to  remove
    the Claimant to South  Korea  without  any  evidence  and  that  it  is
    relevant that the Claimant has no papers and  cannot  prove  her  North
    Korean heritage.  However, the  claimant  currently  has  discretionary
    leave and there are no rds.

36. Ms Chandran asserts that the Claimant left North Korea when she  was  5
    years old and that there is no reason to believe that the South Koreans
    would accept her return. Again, in the light  of  GP,  that  submission
    cannot succeed.

37. Ms Chandran emphasises the Claimant's vulnerability and that in fact at
    all times since she arrived in the UK she  has  been  in  a  vulnerable
    state and that this is relevant to her position on return.  Her case is
    that the Claimant has very little identity  left  and  that  her  North
    Korean identity is the only link the Claimant has with her  mother  and
    she submits that for her to  be  required  to  undergo  the  protection
    procedure would be harmful to her and would amount to persecution.

38. Ms Chandran submits that GP is distinguishable as it did not  focus  on
    the rights of asylum-seeking unaccompanied children and the  impact  of
    the protection procedure on such minors  if  they  are  to  be  removed
    involuntarily.   She  refers  me   to   the   recent   United   Nations
    International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights dated 3rd December
    2015 paragraph 38, pointing out there is no exception  for  immigration
    detention of children and that Dr  Hwang  has  said  that  children  do
    suffer as adults.  She asked me to accept Dr Hwang's evidence and  that
    of the claimant's doctor and the independent social  worker,  that  the
    psychological effect on the Claimant would be such that  the  threshold
    of serious harm is reached.  Ms Chandran asserts that the objv evidence
    supports a finding that the claimant would  be  denied  schooling,  and
    that no legal guardianship would be available nor  access  to  Counsel.
    Ms Chandran reminded me of the claimant's evidence  that  she  did  not
    know how the protection procedure worked.   For all these  reasons  she
    asked me to allow the appeal.

The Law

39. The law is set out in:

      1) The judicial headnote in KK and Others (nationality:  North  Korea)
         Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC), so far as relevant, is as follows:
             "...2.   Korea

                  (a)  The law and the constitution of South Korea (ROK)  do
                      not recognise North Korea (DPRK) as a separate State.
                  (b)  Under South Korean law, most nationals of North Korea
                      are nationals of South Korea as  well,  because  they
                      acquire that nationality at birth by descent  from  a
                      (North) Korean  parent,  and  fall  therefore  within
                      category (i) in 1(a) above.
                  (c)  South Korea will make rigorous  enquiries  to  ensure
                      that only those who are its nationals are  recognised
                      as such but the evidence does not show that it has  a
                      practice of refusing to recognise its  nationals  who
                      genuinely seek to exercise the rights of South Korean
                      nationals. ..."

      2) The judicial headnote in GP and Others (South  Korean  citizenship)
         North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 00391 (IAC) is as follows:

                  "(1) The Upper  Tribunal's  country  guidance  in  KK  and
                      others (Nationality: North  Korea)  Korea  CG  [2011]
                      UKUT  92  (IAC)  stands,  with   the   exception   of
                      paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e)  thereof.   Paragraphs  (2),
                      (3) and (4) of this guidance replace  that  given  in
                      paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) respectively of KK.
                  (2)  South Korean law makes  limited  provision  for  dual
                      nationality under the Overseas Koreans  Act  and  the
                      Nationality Act (as amended).
                  (3)  All North Korean citizens are also citizens of  South
                      Korea.  While absence from the Korean Peninsula  for
                      more than 10 years may entail fuller enquiries as  to
                      whether a person has acquired another nationality  or
                      right  of  residence  before  a  travel  document  is
                      issued, upon return to South Korea all  persons  from
                      the Korean Peninsula are treated as  returning  South
                      Korean citizens.
                  (4)  There is no evidence that North Koreans  returned  to
                      South Korea are sent back to North Korea or  anywhere
                      else, even if they fail the  'protection'  procedure,
                      and however long they have been  outside  the  Korean
                      Peninsula.
                  (5)  The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea
                      is now set out  in  the  United  Kingdom-South  Korea
                      Readmission  Agreement  (the  Readmission  Agreement)
                      entered into between the two countries on 10 December
                      2011.  At present,  the  issue  of  emergency  travel
                      documents under the Readmission Agreement is confined
                      to  those  for  whom  documents  and/or   fingerprint
                      evidence establish that they  are  already  known  to
                      South Korea as citizens, or who  have  registered  as
                      such with the South  Korean  Embassy  in  the  United
                      Kingdom.
                  (6)  Applying MA (Ethiopia) v Secretary of State  for  the
                      Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  289,  North  Koreans
                      outside the Korean Peninsula who object to return  to
                      South Korea must cooperate with  the  United  Kingdom
                      authorities in seeking to establish whether they  can
                      avail  themselves  of  the  protection   of   another
                      country, in particular South Korea.  Unless they  can
                      demonstrate that in all of the countries  where  they
                      are entitled to citizenship they have a  well-founded
                      fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason,
                      they are not refugees.
                  (7)  If they are not refugees, it  remains  open  to  such
                      persons  to  seek  to  establish  individual  factors
                      creating a risk for them in South Korea  which  would
                      engage the United Kingdom's international obligations
                      under the EU Qualification Directive or the ECHR.
                  (8)  There is no risk of refoulement of any  North  Korean
                      to North Korea from South Korea, whether directly  or
                      via China.  South Korea does  not  return  anyone  to
                      North Korea at all  and  it  does  not  return  North
                      Koreans to  China.   In  a  small  number  of  cases,
                      Chinese nationals have been  returned  to  China.   A
                      small number  of  persons  identified  by  the  South
                      Korean  authorities  as  North  Korean   intelligence
                      agents have been prosecuted in South Korea.  There is
                      no evidence that they were subsequently  required  to
                      leave South Korea.
                  (9)  Once the 'protection' procedure has  been  completed,
                      North Korean migrants have the same rights  as  other
                      South Korean citizens save that they are not required
                      to perform military service for  South  Korea.   They
                      have access  to  resettlement  assistance,  including
                      housing, training and financial  assistance.   Former
                      North Koreans may have  difficulty  in  adjusting  to
                      South Korea and there may be some  discrimination  in
                      social integration, employment and housing,  but  not
                      at a level which requires international protection."

Discussion

40. I remind myself that as a North Korean and South  Korean  national  the
    Claimant must show that she is outside 'the country of her nationality'
    as defined in the Refugee Convention and in the Qualification Directive
    (that is to say, both North Korea and South  Korea)  for  a  qualifying
    reason under the Convention or the Directive.

41. The factual matrix of the case is accepted.  The Claimant  is  a  minor
    and has an additional vulnerability, because  there  is  clear  medical
    evidence to show that she suffers from post-traumatic stress  disorder.
    There are no removal directions in place. Having regard to the lack  of
    evidence as to the location of the Claimant's family members  in  South
    Korea and the Claimant's age, the Secretary of State has concluded that
    there are  not  adequate  reception  arrangements  available,  and  the
    claimant has been granted discretionary leave.   That  leave  has  been
    granted under the Home Office policy that no unaccompanied  child  will
    be removed from the United Kingdom unless the  Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied that safe and adequate reception arrangements  are  available
    in the country of origin.

42. It is against that background that I  am  now  asked  by  the  Claimant
    through her legal representatives to upgrade the grant of discretionary
    leave valid until July 2017  to  a  grant  of  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.  In this case, the key question is  whether  this  claimant
    has discharged the burden upon  her  of  showing  that  the  impact  of
    removing her from the United Kingdom to South  Korea  would  amount  to
    persecution or serious harm for her on account of her past experiences,
    her vulnerabilities and the future conditions in South Korea that await
    her.

43. I have had the benefit of consideration of Dr Hwang's reports  and  his
    oral testimony.  Dr Hwang's evidence before me is good  insofar  as  it
    addresses general principles.  However, I am  not  persuaded  that  his
    evidence can assist me beyond that.  In particular, I place  no  weight
    on the assertion that the claimant  objects  to  renouncing  her  North
    Korean citizenship.  I remind myself that the claimant has  left  North
    Korea and does not wish to return there or  assert  or  rely  upon  her
    North Korean citizenship by  so  doing:  if  her  appeal  succeeds  she
    proposes to live in the United Kingdom, not return to North Korea.   At
    [33] in the GP decision, the expert evidence of Dr Hwang, who also gave
    evidence in the present appeal, was  that  no  formal  renunciation  of
    North Korean citizenship is required by South Korea, although new South
    Koreans had to pledge allegiance to South  Korea  at  the  end  of  the
    protection procedure.

44. The general principles on North Korean cases are to  be  found  in  the
    country guidance set out above, in KK and Others and in GP and  others.
    In particular, the Upper Tribunal found that all persons  born  on  the
    Korean Peninsula are citizens of South Korea, even  if  born  in  North
    Korea, and will be treated as citizens of South Korea  on  return.   If
    such persons cannot demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution  for
    a Refugee Convention reason in South Korea, then they are not refugees.
     Similar considerations apply to humanitarian protection.

45. The Upper Tribunal found that the protection procedure did  not  amount
    to persecution or serious harm and it did so on the basis  of  evidence
    similar to that given before me.  It  also  found  that  reluctance  to
    return to South Korea  did  not  exempt  a  claimant  from  seeking  to
    exercise return to  South  Korea  as  a  country  of  nationality,  and
    cooperating with the United Kingdom authorities  in  that  process.   I
    have not been shown any proper reason to  depart  from  the  Tribunal's
    guidance on this point.

46. The Claimant is a South Korean citizen by birth.  There is no immediate
    intention to remove her to South Korea  and  she  is  not  outside  the
    country of her nationality  (South  Korea)  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason.  The claimant has not discharged the burden of showing that she
    is entitled to refugee status in relation to return to South Korea.

47. At sub-paragraph (7) of its guidance in GP, the Upper  Tribunal  stated
    that:

         (7)  If they are not refugees, it remains open to such  persons  to
         seek to establish individual factors creating a risk  for  them  in
         South Korea which would engage the United  Kingdom's  international
         obligations under the EU Qualification Directive or the ECHR.

48. In this case, the factors advanced  relate  to  the  claimant's  health
    problems and her status as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child.   The
    Claimant has the benefit of limited leave to remain until 2017.  Whilst
    her mental and physical health problems are noted,  they  do  not  come
    close to the gravity of the Article 3 ECHR standard required by N v  UK
    (2008) 47 EHRR 39 or GS (India), & Ors v The Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  The claimant cannot succeed  under
    the ECHR.

49. For all the above reasons the Secretary of State's appeal succeeds.   I
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision  dismissing
    the appeal on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

 1) The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

 2) The Claimant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

 3) The Claimant's claim is dismissed on human rights grounds.

The Claimant has previously been granted anonymity in the appeal  procedure.
 No application is  made  to  vary  that  status  and  the  previously  made
anonymity direction is maintained.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

