
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01594/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal         |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 1 June 2015                           |           On 7 July 2015           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     f m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Khan, instructed by Howells, Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, FM, is a female citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1974.  She
    entered the United Kingdom as a student in 2010 and claimed  asylum  in
    September 2014.  Her application was refused  and  the  appellant  also
    took a decision on 19 January  2015  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent appealed against that decision to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a determination promulgated on  2
    April 2015, allowed the appeal on asylum and human  rights  (Article  3
    ECHR) grounds.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
    appellant and to the appellant as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The Secretary of State  now  appeals  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There are two grounds  of  appeal.   First,  the  respondent
    asserts that the judge failed to take proper account of  Section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.
    The appellant had delayed in  claiming  asylum,  having  entered  as  a
    student in 2010 at a time when she subsequently claimed she had been in
    fear of return to Sri Lanka.  Secondly, the judge had  failed  to  take
    account of political changes in Sri Lanka.  The appellant claimed fear,
    inter alia, the former president's brother; the respondent argues  that
    the judge failed to take account  of  the  fact  (referred  to  in  the
    refusal letter at [58]) that the government of Sri  Lanka  had  changed
    since 2010.

 3. As regards ground 1, I  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    established any error of law in the judge's decision.   The  judge  did
    not refer in terms to Section 8 of the 2004 Act but she did  record  at
    [39] that she accepted "That when [the appellant] first came to the  UK
    as a student she did not initially claim  asylum  because  she  thought
    that things might calm down and she would be able  to  return  [to  Sri
    Lanka]."  Further, at [40] the judge found it,

         troubling that [the appellant] did not claim asylum on  her  return
         from Sri Lanka in 2013 after it became apparent  that  the  threats
         were still ongoing.  It is hard to  accept  an  intelligent  highly
         educated woman who had by this stage lived  in  the  UK  for  three
         years would be unaware of the asylum system  or  that  her  details
         would remain confidential.  Having accepted the crux of  her  claim
         and finding her credible, on balance I accept her evidence that she
         had health problems and did not know what to do at that stage.  She
         was under stress and she still had a current visa, it  is  credible
         that she only decided to address the problem when her visa  expired
         and she had no choice but to act.

    In my opinion, that passage of the judge's  decision  deals  adequately
    with the Section 8 factors arising in this appeal.

 4. As regards the second ground of appeal,  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    failed to deal adequately with the matters concerning  risk  on  return
    which were not only referred to in the refusal letter but recorded  (in
    a paragraph dealing with submissions) by the judge in her own  decision
    at [29].  Recording the respondent's submission before her,  the  judge
    noted that, "Even if her account was accepted, there has been a  change
    of government in Sri Lanka and therefore there would be sufficiency  of
    protection and if she wanted she would be able to internally relocate."
     Having accepted the appellant's account as credible, the judge went on
    at [41] to find as follows:

         Having found it credible it follows that I  accept  she  would  not
         have sufficiency of protection or be able to  relocate  on  return.
         The  respondent  raises  the  point   that   the   corruption   and
         embezzlement was already subject  of  international  publicity  and
         therefore it lacks credibility that efforts would be made  to  shut
         the appellant up  as  in  effect  it  is  already  too  late.   The
         appellant's rebuttal is credible in my judgment; she  is  perceived
         as a threat by those with powerful interests to protect because she
         is Sri Lankan and  can  give  first  hand  evidence.   Furthermore,
         because of her profile she would be unable to relocate.

 5. It was the appellant's case that she had  become  involved  (after  the
    Tsunami in 2004) with relief work in Sri Lanka but that she had  become
    aware that international other funds donated for that relief  work  may
    have been embezzled  by  individuals  in  Sri  Lanka.   These  "whistle
    blowing" activities also led to tensions with her husband from whom she
    is  now  divorced.   The  refusal  letter  [58]  noted  the  change  in
    government in the recent election of January  2015.   The  letter  also
    dealt [60-68] at length with the possibility of internal flight  within
    Sri Lanka.  Miss  Khan  submitted  to  me  that  the  individuals  with
    "powerful interests to protect" identified  by  the  judge  still  have
    power  and  influence  in  Sri  Lanka  notwithstanding  the  change  of
    government.  That may be the case but I find that the judge has  failed
    to deal with that aspect of  the  appeal  adequately.   Had  the  judge
    believed that the appellant was still at threat  from  elements  within
    the previous government, then she should have said  so  and  identified
    those items of evidence  which  might  support  such  an  opinion.   On
    reading the decision and reasons, one is left with the impression that,
    although she has recorded the  respondent's  submission  at  [29],  the
    judge has omitted taking into account the change of government  in  her
    assessment of risk on return.  Likewise, her analysis of  the  internal
    flight alternative ("because of her profile ...") is also brief to  the
    point of being inadequate.  I consider that  risk  on  return  and  the
    internal flight alternative need to be looked at in greater detail  and
    it is for that reason that I set aside the decision and reasons of  the
    judge and remit this appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
    Myers) to consider  the  matter  afresh.   Having  said  that,  I  have
    rejected the  respondent's  submissions  as  regards  Section  8  I  am
    satisfied that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant should stand.  The new Tribunal will need to consider risk on
    return and internal flight on the basis  of  the  credibility  findings
    made by Judge Myers.  Miss Khan told me that, in  the  event  that  the
    decision was  set  aside,  the  appellant  would  seek  to  adduce  new
    background evidence concerning the change of government.  The appellant
    will be at liberty to do so subject to the standard  directions  as  to
    the notice she will need to give of new evidence to  the  Tribunal  and
    the respondent.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  2  April
2015 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Myers) to  remake  the  decision.   The  findings  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal regarding the credibility of the appellant's account shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 1 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
