

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01076/2015
     AA/01078/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31st March 2016                       |On 8th April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                    [I A]
                                    [A R]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, counsel, instructed by Broudie
                  Jackson Canter solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds that the
      judge had inadequately dealt with the expert report of  Dr  George  in
      regard to the adequacy of protection  available  in  Baghdad  and  the
      level of indiscriminate violence.


   2. There was a cut and paste error by Dr George in one paragraph where he
      referred to one person with a different name rather than  to  the  two
      appellants. As a consequence of this  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      concluded  that  Dr  George  was  not  suggesting  that  the   Baghdad
      authorities would be unable to assist the appellants.

   3. Paragraph 37 of the First-tier Tribunal decision considers the country
      guidance before  the  Tribunal  at  that  time.  The  judge  makes  no
      significant reference to Dr George's report and how and to what extent
      it differs or may call for a  different  conclusion  to  that  in  the
      country guidance cases. There is  no  assessment  of  the  appellants'
      particular circumstances; a failure  to  engage  with  the  particular
      factual matrix for these appellants.

   4.  The  judge  refers  to  'anecdotal'  evidence.  It  is  difficult  to
      understand on what basis Dr George's expert report can  be  dismissed,
      with no attendant reasons, as 'anecdotal'. Dr George is an experienced
      expert who has provided  the  Tribunal  with  considerable  recognised
      expert assistance in country guidance cases in the past. Save for  one
      typographical error the report called for legitimate  and  significant
      consideration, a consideration that the judge has failed to employ.

   5. Mr Harrison did not seek to persuade me that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge had engaged with material evidence  and  as  a  consequence  the
      findings were not fundamentally flawed.

   6. For these reasons I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      erred in law and I set aside the decision to be remade.

     7. In the light  of  the  error  of  law  found,  there  has  been  no
        legitimate hearing of the substance of the appeal  at  all  and  no
        preserved findings of any kind. The scheme of the  Tribunals  Court
        and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
        fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. In these circumstances  s.12(2)
        of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to  the  First  tier
        with directions.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

         I set aside the decision and remit the hearing  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for hearing before a First-tier Tribunal judge other  than
         Judge Smith.

[pic]
                                    Date 31st March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
