
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 November 2014                              |On 14 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Kochar Khurshid Hassan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Kochar Khurshid Hassan,  date  of  birth  1  December
    1978, is a citizen of Iraq.  Having considered the facts  there  is  no
    need for an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 1st May June 2014,  whereby
    the judge found  that  the  decision  by  the  respondent  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and purportedly remitted the case back  to  the
    respondent for further consideration and a lawful decision.

 3. The judge in the determination relies upon the respondent's operational
    guidance note of  the  31  December  2013  specifically  paragraph  6.3
    concerning returns to  Iraq  of  individuals  were  recognised  medical
    conditions. The judge ruled that in considering  the  appellant's  case
    and in making a decision the respondent had failed to take  account  of
    the  policy  identified  and  accordingly  the  decision  was  not   in
    accordance with the law, specifically the respondent had failed to take
    account of the up-to-date medical evidence in respect of the appellant.

 4. In coming to that conclusion judge refers to a  previous  determination
    in respect of this appellant and seems to conclude that the  respondent
    has only taken account of the evidence, which was before  the  Tribunal
    on that previous occasion.

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on an unknown date. He made
    an application for asylum  on  3  August  2008.  That  application  was
    refused on 20  April  2010  and  the  appellant  appealed.  The  appeal
    appeared  before   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Frankish,   who   by
    determination of 9 July 2010 dismissed the appellant's appeal. At  that
    time before the judge has noted in paragraphs 9 to 14 the substance  of
    the appellant's case related to his  psychiatric  condition.  There  is
    reference to the medical  support  that  the  appellant  was  receiving
    together with psychiatric reports obtained for the purpose of the court
    hearing. The judge referred  to  the  reports  and  to  the  fact  that
    Asperger's syndrome and some level of autism may be the conditions  the
    appellant was suffering from. The  judge  acted  upon  the  psychiatric
    reports, which were before him.

 6. Since that date further reports have been  obtained.  The  reports  are
    listed in paragraphs 3 and 17 of the reasons  for  refusal  letter.  At
    paragraph 13 of the reasons for refusal letter it is  stated  that  the
    letter is in response to the further submissions made by the  appellant
    on 8 March 2013 on 18 January 2014. A further immigration decision  was
    taken in respect of the appellant, by which decision the appellant  was
    to be removed from the United Kingdom.

 7. There is a  letter  of  refusal.  The  letter  considers  the  original
    determination and the diagnosis of  the  appellant  as  suffering  from
    autism spectrum disorder. It refers to the  original  findings  by  the
    first judge.  It  then  sets  out  the  additional  evidence  to  which
    consideration is being given.

 8. Paragraph 17 concludes by referring to the Medical Foundation report of
    1 December 2011.  That  makes  reference  to  torture.  Before  me  the
    representative for the appellant is  suggested  that  the  comments  in
    paragraph 19 of the reasons for refusal letter were misplaced.  However
    it is clear that those comments are directly related to the report from
    the Medical Foundation. Having considered the Medical Foundation report
    the letter refers to the availability of treatment and medicines within
    Iraq itself.

 9. At paragraph 24 reference  is  made  to  all  of  the  medical  reports
    including specifically the report by Dr P  Joshi,  which  is  dated  15
    August 2012. There appears to be a further report by Dr Schalker. There
    is some level of divergence as to the  exact  diagnosis  but  there  is
    sufficient to be satisfied that the appellant is  suffering  from  some
    form of condition on the autistic spectrum or  pervasive  developmental
    disorder. It is clear that the author  of  the  letter  has  considered
    further psychiatric  reports  submitted  post  the  decision  of  Judge
    Frankish.

10. Having referred  to  in  the  availability  of  treatment  and  medical
    services the letter concludes in paragraphs 32 and  33  that  treatment
    would be available; that there was no evidence that the appellant would
    be denied treatment; and that there was no evidence that the  appellant
    would be at risk on  return  to  Iraq.  In  that  regard  paragraph  33
    specifically important  in  that  refers  to  the  medical  information
    available and specifically states that the appellant would  not  be  at
    risk on return to Iraq.

11.  It  is  clear  and  evident  from  the  paragraphs  referred  to   and
    specifically paragraph 24 that the diagnosed condition in the appellant
    within the reports was considered  by  the  respondent  in  making  the
    decision.

12. At paragraph 35 it is determined that the appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on return to Iraq by reason  of  being  a  failed  asylum  seeker.
    Thereafter consideration is given to other aspects  of  the  appellants
    claim to asylum or humanitarian protection or other relief.

13. At paragraph 43 it is stated that in light of  the  above  case  it  is
    considered that it would be safer the appellant to return to  Iraq  but
    it also makes clear that further consideration is being  given  to  the
    appellant's medical condition as to whether  the  appellant  should  be
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom on other grounds.

14. For the reasons set out it is clear that the reasons for refusal letter
    does consider the up-to-date medical evidence. Accordingly there  is  a
    material error of law within the original determination and I  set  the
    decision aside. All the parties agreed that in the light  of  that  the
    proper course with this matter to be remitted back to the first-tier to
    be heard a fresh.

15.  There is a material error of law in  the  determination.   I  set  the
    decision aside and remit the matter for a fresh hearing to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 14 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
