
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01755/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 29 September 2016                         |On 04 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President,

                                   Between

                                     RS
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair, of Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice

For the Respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION

 1. The decision of the Secretary of State underlying this appeal  was  one
    refusing the application of the Appellant, a  national  of  Afghanistan
    aged 30 years, for asylum on the basis  of  his  religious  persuasion.
    The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") dismissed the ensuing appeal.


 2. The thrust of the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  is  that  the  FtT
    arguably erred in  law  by  failing  to  make  any  finding  about  the
    Appellant's religious persuasion.


 3. In considering whether a material error of law has been demonstrated, I
    adopt two main starting points.  The first is that the Judge did indeed
    fail to make any finding of the aforementioned  kind.   The  second  is
    that given the  centrepiece  of  the  Appellant's  case,  this  was  an
    undeniably material issue.  The main facts and factors bearing on  this
    issue are what the Appellant said at his screening  interview;  how  he
    dealt with the discrete screening interview issue at the  hearing;  the
    consideration that the Appellant speaks Punjabi; the non-Muslim  nature
    of his first name; the detailed  evidence  which  he  gave  during  the
    asylum interview (proper)  relating  to  the  elements  and  tenets  of
    Sikhism; and the "COI" evidence of the close  approximation  of  Hindus
    and Sikhs in both  Russia  and  Afghanistan,  without  any  distinction
    between the two groups.


 4. As explained in my  ex  tempore  judgment  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing, I conclude that the FtT made a material error of  law  in  two
    inter-related respects.  First, I consider that it was  incumbent  upon
    the Judge to make a clear and positive finding  about  the  Appellant's
    religious persuasion. Second, the Judge was further required to  engage
    positively and clearly with the various pieces of  evidence  summarised
    above and to deal with these in  the  findings  and  conclusions  made.
    View through this prism, it may be said that there was probably a third
    material error of  law,  namely  a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning.  The
    determination does not demonstrate  that  the  subtleties  and  nuances
    identified above were properly appreciated and addressed.


 5. My analysis and conclusions above are  made  in  a  context  where  the
    Tribunal was under a duty to scrutinise anxiously all material  aspects
    of the Appellant's case.


DECISION

 6. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision  of  the  FtT  is
    hereby set aside.  I remit the case to a  differently  constituted  FtT
    for fresh consideration and decision.







                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 29 September 2016

