
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01049/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2016                  |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                     j j
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco instructed by Mandy Peters Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

I order that the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely  to  lead
members of the public to identify the Appellant is prohibited.   Any  breach
of this order may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, whom I shall refer to as  JJ,  appeals  with  permission
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese,  promulgated
    on 10th September 2015, dismissing on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to remove her to The Gambia.

 2. In the Grounds of Appeal to this Tribunal  it  is  contended  that  the
    Judge at first instance erred in a failure to refer to  or  to  analyse
    two expert reports from a psychiatrist, Dr Lars Davidsson, even  though
    there had earlier been an adjournment  of  the  proceedings  for  these
    reports to be obtained and that the Judge found the Appellant not to be
    credible at one point on the basis that she had not been mentioned in a
    claim for asylum made by her uncle but his  claim  had  been  made  far
    earlier and on a different basis at a time when the Appellant  was  not
    facing difficulties.  Finally it is said that the Judge failed to  give
    sufficient weight to supporting evidence from a former mayor, for  whom
    the Appellant had worked, who had himself been granted  asylum  status.
    The grounds also mention that the Appellant was wrongly referred to  in
    the decision on various occasions as being male.  The Respondent  filed
    a notice and Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 opposing the  appeal  but
    no details could be given as the writer of that response had  not  been
    provided with a copy of the Judge's decision and reasons.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr  Franco  elaborated  upon  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  He pointed out  firstly  that  in  the  Judge's  decision  the
    Appellant's representative was stated to be a Ms Jones of  Counsel  but
    Mr Franco informed me that he himself had represented the Appellant  on
    that occasion.  He also mentioned that at various points the  Appellant
    was wrongly referred to as male or by the pronoun "he".  He  said  that
    there had been adjournment of an earlier hearing  for  further  medical
    reports to be obtained and two reports had been obtained from  Dr  Lars
    Davidsson but the Judge made no mention of them.  He  said  submissions
    had been made specifically upon those  reports.  Ms  Everett  confirmed
    that the reports did appear to have been before the First-tier Tribunal
    as copies were on the Respondent's file.

 4. Mr Franco continued that the Judge had turned his mind to  some  degree
    to medical issues as was apparent from paragraph 25  of  the  decision.
    He said the medical reports also had a bearing upon the credibility  of
    the Appellant's asylum claim and might explain her delay in making that
    claim.  He referred in particular to a sentence in paragraph 25 of  the
    decision dealing with rejection of the Appellant's claim, which he said
    was unclear to the point of being impenetrable.  He read that  sentence
    which states

         "The Tribunal does not accept that there has been a breach  of  the
         Appellant's moral or physical integrity in  respect  of  her  claim
         that she is suffering from PSTD (sic) and little  weight  has  been
         given to her evidence on this point because of  the  background  of
         her claim.  This aspect of her claim lacks credibility".

    He said that the assessment was accordingly unsafe.  Mr Franco went  on
    to refer to the asylum claims of the Appellant's uncle and of the mayor
    for whom she had worked and said that the  Appellant's  case  was  that
    they were both still at risk and the mayor had written  in  support  of
    her claim.  The fact that he had not been present for cross-examination
    was insufficient wholly to discount that evidence.

 5. Ms Everett accepted that there were  problems  with  the  decision  and
    reasons, notably the failure to stick to one gender reference  for  the
    Appellant but she said it was clear that the facts did  relate  to  the
    Appellant and not to a different person.  However she said that  cogent
    reasons had been given why the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return.  The  mayor  had  indicated  that  he  had  been  acquitted  in
    proceedings in the Gambia and there was some relevance to the weight to
    be accorded of the fact that the person was not  available  for  cross-
    examination.  There had not been an adjournment for a request to enable
    him to be present.   She  accepted  that  the  medical  reports  of  Dr
    Davidsson had not been specifically referred to but  it  appeared  that
    the Appellant was not suffering from PTSD.  The second report  appeared
    to have been prepared after submission of  detailed  instructions  upon
    the Appellant's claim from the solicitors.  Her point was that even  if
    the Judge had referred to the reports in detail  they  could  not  have
    made a difference to the outcome.

 6. Finally Mr Franco said his  recollection  was  that  Dr  Davidsson  had
    stated that his overriding duty had been to the court and he  had  said
    that the Appellant was unlikely to have access to adequate treatment in
    her home country.

 7. Having heard those submissions I came  to  the  view  that  there  were
    errors of law in the decision to the extent that I was required to  set
    it aside entirely.  It was a matter of considerable  concern  that  the
    Judge stated explicitly in the first paragraph  of  his  decision  that
    "the Appellant born on 10th September 1977 is a citizen of  Gambia  and
    is male".  In reference to the Appellant the Judge  used  the  pronouns
    "he" and "his" throughout paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and  parts  of  6  of  the
    decision and reasons but he then referred to the  Appellant  as  "she".
    However he reverted to masculine pronouns at paragraphs 8 and 9.  As Ms
    Everett accepted this does raise real problems as to whether the  Judge
    can be seen to have exercised anxious scrutiny in his  assessment.   Of
    additional concern is the fact that the Appellant's representative  was
    referred to as Ms Jones.  Mr Franco said that he had been  Counsel  for
    the Appellant at the hearing in question and that is borne out  by  the
    Judge's handwritten notes.  Those points raise general  concerns  which
    would raise doubts in the mind of  any  appellant  as  to  whether  the
    appeal had been adequately considered.

 8. At paragraph 25  of  the  decision  Judge  Abebrese  addressed  certain
    medical aspects but he made no reference at all to the two  reports  of
    the consultant psychiatrist Dr Lars Davidsson.  It was  incumbent  upon
    the Judge to have regard to all of the expert evidence.  It is  correct
    that Dr Davidsson did not consider that  the  Appellant  was  suffering
    from PTSD but he found that she did suffer from an adjustment  disorder
    and stated that she  was  in  need  of  continuing  treatment  and  her
    condition was likely to worsen if she were removed to Gambia, where she
    was unlikely to have access to adequate treatment.  The Judge  did  not
    address those two reports in any way.  That psychiatric assessment,  if
    considered, might have had some impact  upon  the  significance  placed
    upon the delay by the Appellant in making her claim,  which  the  Judge
    relied upon at paragraph 18 of his decision.  One cannot  say  if  that
    would have been the case.  It does  therefore  appear  that  the  Judge
    reached his conclusions without having regard to all of  the  evidence.
    It has been made abundantly clear in  cases  such  as  Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 that evidence has to be considered as a whole.  The
    failure to address the evidence as a whole amounts to a material  error
    which undermines the decision.  I cannot say with confidence  that  the
    outcome would have been the same had the Judge considered  all  of  the
    evidence as should have been  done.   This  is  apart  from  the  other
    matters of concern which I have referred to above.

 9. In the circumstances I set the decision aside in its entirety.   I  was
    of the view that the case would need to be re-heard in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before a different Judge.  Having regard to paragraph  7(2)(b)
    of the Tribunal Judiciary Practice Statements I accordingly decided  to
    remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is  set  aside.   I  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
accordance with the directions set out below.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  direction  for  anonymity  and  I
therefore make an order to the same effect as set out above.


Signed   Date 17 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



Directions for Re-Hearing in the First-tier Tribunal

(1)  The appeal is to be re-heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge Abebrese.

(2)  None of the findings made by  Judge  Abebrese  are  preserved  and  the
    appeal is to be heard afresh.

(3)  The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.  The time  estimate  is
    3 hours.  No interpreter has been requested for the two witnesses.

(4)  Each party shall serve upon the other party  and  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal copies of all witness statements and other documents which are
    sought to be relied upon at least seven days before the hearing.


Signed   Date 17 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
