

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01879/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Sent           |
|On 25 June 2013                               |On 27 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                               BELJOZA BEQUIRI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     S. Kerr  instructed by Karis Law
For the Respondent:    G Saunders Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is an Albanian national born in 1986. In December 2006
      she met her partner (the sponsor) in Albania.   He  has  travelled  to
      Albania on several occasions thereafter and a  relationship  developed
      between them.
   2.   The sponsor was born in 1986 in Kosovo,  then  part  of  Serbia.  He
      arrived in the UK in September  2000  aged  14  with  his  sister  and
      brother in law.  He was in due course granted discretionary  leave  to
      remain until December 2007. On a date unknown, but presumably in 2008,
      he was granted indefinite leave to remain.  By June 2009 he  had  been
      naturalised as a British citizen and been issued a  British  passport.
      He lives and works in London.


   3.   The appellant made two entry  clearance  applications  to  join  the
      sponsor as his partner: in September 2007 and December 2007. Both were
      refused in November 2007 and February 2008 respectively.   The  second
      refusal was because the ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
      intended to live with the sponsor in a permanent  relationship.  There
      was no appeal against either decision; the appellant told  the  First-
      tier judge that she was advised on the second  occasion  by  a  lawyer
      that there was nothing more than could be done.

   4.   In January 2010 the sponsor visited Albania  again  and  the  couple
      went through a Muslim marriage ceremony in the local mosque,  although
      the marriage was not registered under Albanian civil law.

   5.   Thereafter, the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  irregularly;
      she started cohabiting with the sponsor at once, and has  given  birth
      to two sons by him in May 2011 and September 2012.  Both children  are
      British citizens. The Home Office  accepts  that  the  couple  have  a
      genuine relationship.

   6.    In January 2013, the appellant first made  contact  with  the  Home
      Office to regularise her status ;  she  sought  asylum  and  leave  to
      remain as a partner/mother of British citizen. Then asylum  claim  was
      without substance and has not been pursued. She does not  qualify  for
      variation of leave as a spouse but her case was considered  under  the
      Immigration Rules Appendix FM in force  9  July  2012  that  apply  to
      applications made after that date.

   7.   Her application was refused by reference to these Rules in  February
      2013. The respondent concluded that given the age of the two  boys  it
      would not be unreasonable to expect them to leave the  United  Kingdom
      (see Appendix FM EX 1 (a) (ii)).

   8.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Her  appeal  came
      before  Judge  Kaler  on  2  April  2013.   It  was  dismissed  by   a
      determination signed on 6 April.  The judge was referred to  a  number
      of relevant decisions on Article 8 including the decision of the Upper
      Tribunal  in Sanade and others [2012] UKUT 848 IAC; Izuazu [2013] UKUT
      IAC ; Ogundimu (Article 8- new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60.

   9.    The judge recorded that it was common  ground  that  the  appellant
      could not succeed under the Immigration Rules. She  concluded  in  the
      circumstances of the appellant's case that it was not unreasonable for
      the children to relocate to Albania with their mother and  accordingly
      there was no violation of Article 8.
  10.  The appellant now appeals with  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      Three questions arise:


                  i) Did the judge make an error of law in  her  assessment
                     of the case?
                 ii) If so should the decision be remade?
                iii) If so with what result?

  11. At the outset of the hearing we drew the attention of Mr  Saunders  to
      paragraphs [108] to [114] of Ogundimu building on what had  been  said
      earlier in the case of Sanade. The relevant extracts are reproduced as
      Annex 1 and 2 to this determination.   This  was  a  deportation  case
      where the question arose whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant's British citizen partner and her British  child  to  follow
      the appellant to Nigeria on deportation for  a  sequence  of  criminal
      offences.


  12.   The  Tribunal  first  referred  back  to  its  decision  in   Sanade
      (promulgated before Appendix FM had been published) and noted:-

                  i) The decision of the Court of Justice in Ruiz  Zambrano
                     had no application to a case where  one  parent  faced
                     removal but the other British parent and British child
                     did not, as the removal of the parent  did  not  force
                     the child to leave the European Union.
                 ii) However in considering Article 8, the  Tribunal  noted
                     the reply of the  Secretary  of  State  formulated  in
                     response to an enquiry  that  where  the  child  is  a
                     British and therefore an EU citizen 'it  will  not  be
                     logically possible when assessing the compatibility of
                     their removal ...with  the  ECHR  to  argue  that  any
                     interference with  Article 8 rights could  be  avoided
                     by the family  unit  moving  to  a  country  which  is
                     outside of the EU'.
                iii)  The  Tribunal  concluded  in  Sanade  at  [95]   that
                     accordingly it would not be possible to submit that it
                     would be  reasonable  for  the  children  to  relocate
                     outside the EU.

  13. The Tribunal then noted:


                  i) The same response continued to apply after Appendix FM
                     had
                         come into force.
                 ii) The response only applied  where  there  were  British
                     citizen children under 18 and did not follow if  there
                     was a British citizen partner but no children.
                iii) Accordingly where a human rights claim under  Appendix
                     FM of the Rules depended on whether it was  reasonable
                     to expect a  child  to  relocate  outside  the  United
                     Kingdom to be with  the  child's  parent  and  primary
                     carer,  it  could  not  be  contended  that   it   was
                     reasonable for a British child to leave the EU.

  14.  Mr Saunders accepted that there had been no change in the Home Office
      position since Ogundimu, and applying the reasoning of that  decision,
      it could not be contended that it was reasonable for a  British  child
      to leave the EU on an indefinite basis to enjoy family life  with  the
      child's mother. He contended that the position was  different  if  the
      departure from the United Kingdom was  only  for  a  short  period  to
      enable the mother to obtain entry clearance to return as a partner.


  15.  As to the first issue, before us, we are  satisfied  that  the  Judge
      made a material error of  law.  She  failed  to  understand  that  the
      decision in Ogundimu was directed to the issue of whether it could  be
      said to be reasonable to expect a British child to relocate outside of
      the European Union, as opposed  to  the  issue  whether  there  was  a
      violation of European Union law  by  taking  a  decision  against  the
      mother that forced the child to leave the EU.

  16.  As to the second issue, the error of law was material.  The  decision
      maker considered Article 8 by applying EX 1 of  Appendix  FM.    EX  1
      applies where a person seeks leave to remain as a partner but does not
      meet the requirements for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a  partner
      under D-ILR P.1.3 but does meet the requirements of  EX  1,  then  the
      applicant will be granted thirty months leave  to  remain.  The  first
      requirement  of  EX  1  was  met  (genuine  and  subsisting   parental
      relationship with a child under 18;  the  second  requirement  is  met
      because the child is in the UK; the third requirement is  met  because
      the child is a British citizen and the alternative  limb  of  7  years
      residence is inapplicable; the final requirement is whether  it  would
      be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The
      decided Tribunal cases show that  present  practice  accepts  that  it
      cannot be submitted that it is reasonable for the child to  leave  the
      UK where to do so would be to invite the child to leave the  EU,  when
      such a child cannot be required to leave the territory of the EU.

  17.  We will accordingly set aside the decision of the judge and remake it
      for ourselves.

  18.  There were two factors that carried weight with the judge  but  carry
      no weight with us when we remake the decision under appeal.

  19.  The first was that the judge suspected  that  the  sponsor  might  in
      truth have been from Albania rather  than  Kosovo,  and  so  may  have
      entered the United Kingdom on false pretences. We raised  this  matter
      with Mr Saunders. He did not rely  on  such  an  observation.  If  the
      Secretary of State was satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that
      the sponsor had indeed  been  granted  leave  to  remain  and  British
      citizenship on a false basis  he  could  have  been  deprived  of  his
      status. No such action has been taken and such matters cannot arise as
      a result of suspicion or conjecture.

  20.  The second is that the  judge  observed  that  the  sponsor  did  not
      encourage the appellant to regularise her status  for over  two  years
      and that  'the couple has made the choice to have children in what  is
      clearly an attempt to entrench their  position  in  the  UK  prior  to
      making a clearly unfounded application for asylum'.  We recognise that
      the fact of illegal entry  after  rejection  of  the  entry  clearance
      applications means  the  appellant  has  a  discreditable  immigration
      history but there is nothing in the history, the  decision  letter  or
      the evidence adduced before the judge to indicate that the decision to
      have children was done to boost  an  immigration  claim.  The  genuine
      nature of the family life between appellant,  sponsor  and  their  two
      children was not doubted by the decision maker. With  the  benefit  of
      hindsight it can be said that this was  a  genuine  relationship  that
      preceded the appellant's entry into the United Kingdom for the purpose
      of  cohabitation;  this  was  not  a  relationship  that  began  after
      irregular entry when the appellant was in a precarious position.   The
      appellant had failed to satisfy the entry  clearance  officer  of  her
      intentions to cohabit with her partner,  but  her  subsequent  actions
      have satisfied the Secretary of State.

  21.  We accept that if this was a case where either the appellant and  the
      sponsor had no children or the children were not British, the  Article
      8 analysis would almost certainly have reached an  adverse  conclusion
      to her claim.  But there are children  and  they  are  British.  Their
      welfare is a primary albeit not paramount consideration, and the  sins
      of their mother in entering without leave to be with her  partner  are
      not to be visited on the children. British nationality  is  a  weighty
      factor in the Article 8 claim  for  the  reasons  stated  in  both  ZH
      Tanzania [2011] UKHL 4 and the Tribunal's case law cited  above  where
      the relevant passages from ZH Tanzania are  set  out.   Despite  their
      young age and their absence of  an  independent  social  life  in  the
      United Kingdom, we do not consider it reasonable  to  expect  them  to
      grow up outside their country of nationality and indeed  the  European
      Union of which they are also citizens.

  22. It is clear that they should be with their mother who cares  for  them
      as well as their father who supports them.

  23.  In our judgment, both the analysis under EX 1 of the  Rules  and  the
      general principles of Article 8 case law developed without reliance on
      the Rules indicate that this claim should succeed unless:-

                  i) The appellant's conduct has been such a threat to  the
                     public order of the United Kingdom that she should  be
                     removed irrespective of the impact on the human rights
                     of her family.


                 ii) This is a case where the exceptions to Chikwamba apply
                     and it would be reasonable to expect the appellant  to
                     go abroad and apply for entry clearance.

  24. As to the first,  of these questions, we note  that  the  Home  Office
      decision maker  in full knowledge of the material facts of  the  case,
      did not conclude that the appellant fell to  be  refused  leave  under
      section S-LTR of Appendix FM  (suitability of leave to  remain)   (see
      decision   letter    paragraph    26).    Potentially    disqualifying
      characteristics under S-LTR include being the subject of a deportation
      order, serious criminal convictions  for  which  a  sentence  of  over
      twelve months has been imposed, repeated offending makes it  conducive
      to the public good to remove the person concerned, character  conduct,
      associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow the  person
      top remain, false representations have been made to  obtain  leave  to
      remain or material non disclosure.  It has, therefore,  been  accepted
      that a wide ranging set of factors spelt  out  by  the  rules  do  not
      defeat this claim.


  25.  Looking  outside  the  rules  although  the  appellant's  conduct  is
      discreditable and her immigration history is poor, it was not of  such
      an abusive nature as that of the applicant in  the  case  of  Nunez  v
      Norway [2011] ECHR 1047, 28 June 2011 whom the European Court of Human
      rights found nevertheless at [84] should not be expelled having regard
      to the interests of her child.


  26.  Performing the balance as between the competing interests and factors
      for ourselves, we do not find that the conduct is of such a nature  to
      require her removal irrespective of the outcome on the children.

  27.  We now turn to  the  submission  advanced  by  Mr  Saunders,  that  a
      temporary interruption  of  stay  may  be  justified  in  all  of  the
      circumstances of the cases applying the decision in  Chikwamba  [2008]
      UKHL 40 at [44] as elucidated by the Court of Appeal in  Hayat  [2012]
      EWCA Civ 1054 at [30]. On this hypothesis, this would be to insist  on
      a  procedural  requirement  causing  some   undetermined   period   of
      separation between one parent  of  the  two  and  their  children.  No
      sensible reason has been advanced why the procedural requirement makes
      the interference with family life proportionate  and  justified.   Our
      conclusions on the gravity of the appellant's conduct are set  out  in
      the  preceding  paragraphs.  They  do   not   justify   the   proposed
      interference.  We observe by contrast with some other cases, that  the
      appellant had twice sought entry clearance as a  partner  and  on  the
      second occasion at least the reasons for the  refusal  have  now  been
      shown to be unwarranted. The relevant facts have all been  identified.
      There are no procedural advantages for examining the case  again  from
      abroad.  We conclude that to insist on the procedural  requirement  in
      this case would be disproportionate.


  28. In the circumstances we remake the decision by allowing the appeal. It
      will be for the Secretary of State to decide what leave to  remain  to
      grant the appellant.


                               Signed




                               Date 26 June 2013




                                Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal






Appendix 1 Extract from Sanade and others

6. The interests of the child

59.       ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 concerned a mother  who  was  a
    national of Tanzania and formed a relationship with a British  citizen.
    They had two children, a daughter, T, born in 1998  (who  was  then  12
    years old) and a son, J, born in 2001 (who was then  9).  The  children
    were both British citizens, having been born here to  parents,  one  of
    whom was a British citizen. They had lived here with their  mother  all
    their lives, nearly all of the time at the same address.  The Court  of
    Appeal upheld the Tribunal's finding that the children could reasonably
    be expected to follow their mother  to  Tanzania.   The  Supreme  Court
    considered: "in what circumstances  is  it  permissible  to  remove  or
    deport a non-citizen parent where the effect will be that a  child  who
    is a citizen of the United Kingdom will also have to leave?

60.        Lady Hale giving the leading judgment  said at [25]-[33]
             ....it  is  clear  from  the  recent  jurisprudence  that   the
             Strasbourg Court will  expect  national  authorities  to  apply
             article 3(1) of UNCRC and treat the best interests of  a  child
             as "a primary consideration". Of course, despite the  looseness
             with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes  used,   "a   primary
             consideration" is not the same as "the primary  consideration",
             still less as "the paramount consideration". Miss Joanna Dodson
             QC, to whom we  are  grateful  for  representing  the  separate
             interests of the children in  this  case,  boldly  argued  that
             immigration and removal decisions might be covered  by  section
             1(1) of the Children Act 1989:
             "When a court determines any question with respect to -
             (a)  the upbringing of a child; or
             (b)   the  administration  of  a  child's   property   or   the
               application of any income arising from it,
             the  child's   welfare   shall   be   the   court's   paramount
             consideration."
             However, questions with respect to the upbringing  of  a  child
             must be distinguished from other  decisions  which  may  affect
             them. The UNHCR, in its  Guidelines  on  Determining  the  Best
             Interests of the Child (May 2008), explains the matter  neatly,
             at para 1.1:
             "The term 'best interests' broadly describes the well-being  of
             a child. . . . The CRC neither offers a precise definition, nor
             explicitly outlines common factors of the best interests of the
             child, but stipulates that:
               o       the best interests must be  the  determining  factor
                  for specific actions, notably adoption (Article  21)  and
                  separation of a child from  parents  against  their  will
                  (Article 9);
               o       the best interests must be a primary  (but  not  the
                  sole)  consideration  for  all  other  actions  affecting
                  children, whether undertaken by public or private  social
                  welfare  institutions,  courts  of  law,   administrative
                  authorities or legislative bodies (Article 3)."
              This seems to me accurately to distinguish between  decisions
              which directly affect the child's  upbringing,  such  as  the
              parent or  other  person  with  whom  she  is  to  live,  and
              decisions which may  affect  her  more  indirectly,  such  as
              decisions about where one or both of her parents are to live.
              Article 9 of UNCRC, for example, draws a distinction  between
              the compulsory separation of a child from her parents,  which
              must be necessary in her best interests, and  the  separation
              of a parent  from  his  child,  for  example,  by  detention,
              imprisonment, exile, deportation or even death.
           26.   Nevertheless, even in those decisions, the best  interests
              of the child must be a primary consideration. As Mason CJ and
              Deane J put it in the case of Minister  for  Immigration  and
              Ethnic Affairs v Teoh [1995] HCA 20, (1995) 183 CLR 273,  292
              in the High Court of Australia:
              "A decision-maker with an eye to the principle  enshrined  in
              the Convention would be looking to the best interests of  the
              children as a primary consideration, asking whether the force
              of any other consideration outweighed it."
              As the Federal Court of Australia further explained in Wan  v
              Minister for Immigration and  Multi-cultural  Affairs  [2001]
              FCA 568, para 32,
              "[The Tribunal]  was  required  to  identify  what  the  best
              interests of Mr Wan's children required with respect  to  the
              exercise of its discretion and then  to  assess  whether  the
              strength of any other consideration, or the cumulative effect
              of other considerations, outweighed the consideration of  the
              best interests  of  the  children  understood  as  a  primary
              consideration."
              This did not mean (as it would do  in  other  contexts)  that
              identifying their best interests would lead inexorably  to  a
              decision in conformity with those  interests.  Provided  that
              the  Tribunal  did  not  treat  any  other  consideration  as
              inherently more significant than the best  interests  of  the
              children, it could conclude that the strength  of  the  other
              considerations  outweighed   them.   The   important   thing,
              therefore, is to consider those best  interests  first.  That
              seems, with respect, to be  the  correct  approach  to  these
              decisions in this country as well as in Australia.
           27.   However, our attention was also drawn to  General  Comment
              No 6 of the United Nations Committee on  the  Rights  of  the
              Child (2005), on the Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated
              Children  Outside  their  Country  of  Origin.  The  context,
              different from ours, was the return of such children to their
              countries of origin even though they could not be returned to
              the care of their parents or other family members (para  85).
              At para 86, the Committee observed:
              "Exceptionally, a return to the home country may be arranged,
              after careful balancing of the  child's  best  interests  and
              other considerations, if  the  latter  are  rights-based  and
              override best interests of the child. Such may be the case in
              situations in which the child constitutes a serious  risk  to
              the security of the State or to the society. Non-rights based
              arguments  such  as  those  relating  to  general   migration
              control, cannot override best interests considerations."


           28.   A similar distinction  between  "rights-based"  and  "non-
              rights-based" arguments is  drawn  in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines
              (see, para 3.6). With respect, it is difficult to  understand
              this distinction in the context of article 8(2) of the  ECHR.
              Each  of  the  legitimate  aims  listed  there  may   involve
              individual as well as community interests. If the  prevention
              of disorder or crime is seen  as  protecting  the  rights  of
              other individuals, as it appears that the CRC would do, it is
              not easy to see why the protection of the economic well-being
              of the country is not also protecting  the  rights  of  other
              individuals.  In  reality,  however,  an  argument  that  the
              continued presence of a particular individual in the  country
              poses a specific risk to others may more easily outweigh  the
              best interests of that or any other child  than  an  argument
              that his or her  continued  presence  poses  a  more  general
              threat to the economic well-being  of  the  country.  It  may
              amount to no more than that.


              Applying these principles
           29.   Applying, therefore, the approach in Wan to the assessment
              of proportionality under  article  8(2),  together  with  the
              factors identified in Strasbourg, what is encompassed in  the
              "best interests of the child"? As the UNHCR says, it  broadly
              means the well-being of  the  child.  Specifically,  as  Lord
              Bingham indicated in EB  (Kosovo),  it  will  involve  asking
              whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
              another country. Relevant to this will be the  level  of  the
              child's integration in this country and the length of absence
              from the other country; where and with whom the child  is  to
              live and the arrangements for looking after the child in  the
              other country; and the strength of the child's  relationships
              with parents or other family members which will be severed if
              the child has to move away.


           30.   Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of
              particular importance in assessing the best interests of  any
              child. The UNCRC recognises the right of every  child  to  be
              registered and acquire  a  nationality  (Article  7)  and  to
              preserve her identity, including her nationality (Article 8).
              In Wan, the Federal Court of Australia, pointed out  at  para
              30 that, when considering the  possibility  of  the  children
              accompanying their father to  China,  the  tribunal  had  not
              considered any of the  following  matters,  which  the  Court
              clearly regarded as important:
              "(a) the fact that the children, as  citizens  of  Australia,
                 would be deprived of the country of  their  own  and  their
                 mother's citizenship, 'and of its protection  and  support,
                 socially, culturally and medically, and in many other  ways
                 evoked by, but  not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept  of
                 lifestyle' (Vaitaiki v Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic
                 Affairs [1998] FCA 5, (1998) 150 ALR 608, 614);
              (b) the resultant social and linguistic disruption  of  their
                 childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;
              (c) the loss of educational opportunities  available  to  the
                 children in Australia; and
              (d) their resultant isolation from  the  normal  contacts  of
                 children with their mother and their mother's family."


           31.    Substituting  "father"  for  "mother",   all   of   these
              considerations apply to the children in this case.  They  are
              British children; they are  British,  not  just  through  the
              "accident" of being born here, but by descent from a  British
              parent; they have an unqualified right of  abode  here;  they
              have lived here all their  lives;  they  are  being  educated
              here; they have other social links with the  community  here;
              they have a good relationship with their father here.  It  is
              not enough to say that a young child  may  readily  adapt  to
              life in another country. That may well be so, particularly if
              she moves with both her parents to a country which they  know
              well and where they can  easily  re-integrate  in  their  own
              community (as might have been the case, for example, in Poku,
              para 20, above). But it is very  different  in  the  case  of
              children who have lived here all their lives  and  are  being
              expected to move to a country which they do not know and will
              be separated from a parent whom they also know well.


           32.   Nor should the  intrinsic  importance  of  citizenship  be
              played down. As citizens these  children  have  rights  which
              they will not be able to exercise if  they  move  to  another
              country. They will lose the  advantages  of  growing  up  and
              being educated in their own country, their  own  culture  and
              their own language. They will have lost all  this  when  they
              come back as adults.  As  Jacqueline  Bhaba  (in  'The  "Mere
              Fortuity  of  Birth"?  Children,  Mothers,  Borders  and  the
              Meaning  of  Citizenship',  in  Migrations  and   Mobilities:
              Citizenship, Borders  and  Gender  (2009),  edited  by  Seyla
              Benhabib and Judith Resnik, at p 193) has put it:
              'In short, the fact of belonging to a  country  fundamentally
              affects the manner  of  exercise  of  a  child's  family  and
              private life, during childhood and well beyond. Yet children,
              particularly young children,  are  often  considered  parcels
              that are easily movable across borders with their parents and
              without particular cost to the children.'


           33.   We now have a much greater understanding of the importance
              of these issues in assessing the overall  well-being  of  the
              child. In making the proportionality assessment under article
              8, the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be  a  primary
              consideration. This means that they must be considered first.
              They can, of course, be outweighed by the  cumulative  effect
              of other considerations. In  this  case,  the  countervailing
              considerations were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
              immigration control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
              immigration history and the precariousness  of  her  position
              when family life was created. But, as  the  Tribunal  rightly
              pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that. And
              the inevitable result of removing their primary  carer  would
              be that they had to leave with her. On the facts,  it  is  as
              least as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State for  the
              Home Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ  held
              that "there really is only room for one view" (para  26).  In
              those circumstances, the Secretary of State was clearly right
              to concede that there could be only one answer."


61.       Lord Hope concurring added at [41]:


           The fact of British citizenship does not trump everything  else.
           But it will hardly ever be less  than  a  very  significant  and
           weighty factor against moving children who have that  status  to
           another country with a parent who has no right to  remain  here,
           especially if the  effect  of  doing  this  is  that  they  will
           inevitably lose those benefits and advantages for  the  rest  of
           their childhood.


    He concluded at [44]:


           There is an obvious tension  between  the  need  to  maintain  a
           proper and efficient  system  of  immigration  control  and  the
           principle that, where children are involved, the best  interests
           of the children must be  a  primary  consideration.  The  proper
           approach, as was explained in Wan v Minister for Immigration and
           Multicultural Affairs [2001] FCA 568, para 32, is, having  taken
           this as  the  starting  point,  to  assess  whether  their  best
           interests  are  outweighed  by  the  strength   of   any   other
           considerations. The fact that the  mother's  immigration  status
           was precarious when they were conceived may lead to a  suspicion
           that the parents saw this as a way of strengthening her case for
           being allowed to remain here. But considerations  of  that  kind
           cannot be held against the children in this assessment. It would
           be wrong  in  principle  to  devalue  what  was  in  their  best
           interests by something for which they could in no way be held to
           be responsible.


62.       Lord Kerr agreed and added his own observation at [46-47] that  'a
    primacy of importance' that must be accorded to the best interests of a
    child of which United Kingdom nationality formed a significant part:
           The significance of a child's nationality must be considered  in
           two aspects. The first of these is in its role as a  contributor
           to the debate as to where the child's  best  interests  lie.  It
           seems to me self evident that to diminish  a  child's  right  to
           assert his or her nationality will not normally be in his or her
           best interests. That consideration must therefore feature in the
           determination of where the  best  interests  lie.  It  was  also
           accepted by the respondent, however, (and I  think  rightly  so)
           that if a child is a British citizen, this  has  an  independent
           value, freestanding of the debate in relation to best interests,
           and this must weigh in the balance  in  any  decision  that  may
           affect where a child will live. As Lady Hale has said,  this  is
           not an inevitably decisive factor but the benefits that  British
           citizenship brings, as so aptly described by Lord Hope and  Lady
           Hale, must not readily be discounted.


63.        ZH  (Tanzania)  was  a  removal  case.  Poor  as   the   mother's
    immigration history was assessed to be, she had not been convicted  for
    criminal offences  disturbing  the  general  public  order.  Lady  Hale
    recognised that a rights based approach to factors that outweighed  the
    interests of the child as a primary consideration  would  more  readily
    find weight in protecting the public from  dangerous  individuals.   We
    conclude that preventing crime by deporting  individuals  in  cases  of
    particular seriousness would  also  be  a  legitimate  aim  that  could
    outweigh the best interests of  children,  particularly  when  combined
    with other aspects of the public interest.

64.       As already noted the case of Lee (supra para 49) was such  a  case
    where the Court of Appeal considered the impact of ZH (Tanzania)  in  a
    revocation  appeal  by  someone  sentenced  to  a   lengthy   term   of
    imprisonment for drug related offending.  Although the Court talked  of
    permanent separation, we do not understand that it was excluding future
    revocation  after  the  expiry  of  an  appropriate  passage  of  time,
    particularly where some contact could be maintained between parent  and
    child[3]. Although it may have been unreasonable to expect  the  family
    to live in Jamaica, there was no suggestion  that  it  was  practically
    impossible for them to do so or  that  cultural  differences  or  other
    factors prevented visits there.

65.        The  Upper  Tribunal  has   considered   these   cases   in   its
    determination in Omotunde (best  interests)  [2011]  UKUT  00247  (IAC)
    where it set out the current approach to proportionality in the context
    of deportation. We summarise the learning relevant to deportation cases
    as follows:-

          a.     Article 8 is to be interpreted in a manner consistent  with
             Article 3 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child  and
             the statutory duty to  have  regard  to  guidance  designed  to
             promote the best interests or welfare of the child set  out  in
             s.55 the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
          b.     The welfare of the child is a primary but not  a  paramount
             consideration in immigration decision making. That is to say it
             is a consideration of the first order and not merely a  factor,
             but not the only consideration or necessarily  a  determinative
             consideration.
          c. The welfare principle applies irrespective of  the  nationality
             of the child,  but  where  the  child  is  British  that  is  a
             particular pointer to the place where the child's future  lies.
             British nationality imposed a  significantly  higher  threshold
             when a decision-maker was considering whether a child should be
             expected to join a parent abroad.
          d.     Factors that may outweigh the welfare of  the  child  in  a
             particular case are rights based considerations such  as  those
             contained in Article 8 (2)  in  particular  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime or the protection of the health and rights of
             others.
          e.     Weighty reasons are required to justify separating a family
             who are legitimately resident together in the United Kingdom.
          f.     Even where it is not reasonable to expect the other partner
             to a relationship or  the  children  to  accompany  the  person
             subject to immigration action to reside abroad the interference
             with family life may be justified.
          g.     Notwithstanding the distress caused to a child and the loss
             of advantage to the  child  of  (in  these  cases)  a  father's
             presence guidance and  support,  the  conduct   of  the  person
             facing deportation may be so contrary to the public interest as
             to make such separation proportionate and justified.




66.       We further note that in respect of children (foreign  or  British)
    in the United Kingdom  there  is  the   statutory  guidance  on  making
    arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children   issued
    by  the  Secretary  of  State  under  s.55  the  Borders,   Citizenship
    Immigration  Act  2009  "Every  Child  Matters  Change  for  Children."
    Paragraph 1.4 states:

           Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children is defined in
           the guidance to section 11 of the 2004 Act as:
           .             protecting children from maltreatment;
           .             preventing  impairment  of  children's  health  or
               development (where health means 'physical or mental  health'
               and development means  'physical,  intellectual,  emotional,
               social or behavioural development');
           .              ensuring  that  children  are   growing   up   in
               circumstances consistent with  the  provision  of  safe  and
               effective care;
           .            and undertaking that role so  as  to  enable  those
               children to have optimum life chances and to enter adulthood
               successfully.


67.       In re-making these decisions we give particular importance to  the
    fact the children are British as a strong  pointer  to  the  fact  that
    their future lies in the United Kingdom. If their fathers  are  removed
    each child will suffer the loss of the presence of a  father  from  the
    household in which they now are growing up. We shall  consider  whether
    there is evidence that such an event would cause maltreatment, loss  of
    safety or impairment of health or development.

......
93.  Finally, we note that a further question on  which  we  asked  for  the
    respondent's assistance was in these terms:

           "Does the respondent agree that in a case where  a  non-national
           parent is being removed and claims it is  a  violation  of  that
           person's human rights to be separated from a child with whom  he
           presently enjoys family  life  as  an  engaged  parent,  that  a
           consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not open to the
           respondent to submit that an interference can be avoided because
           it is reasonable to expect the child (and presumably  any  other
           parent/carer who is not facing deportation/removal) to join  the
           appellant in the country of origin?  If not why not?"

94.       To this Mr Devereux replied on 24 November 2011:


           "We do accept, however, that in a case  where  a  third  country
           national is unable to claim a right to reside on the  basis  set
           out above it will not logically be possible, when assessing  the
           compatibility of their removal or deportation with the  ECHR  to
           argue that any interference  with  Article  8  rights  could  be
           avoided by the family unit moving to a country which is  outside
           of the EU".


  95. We shall take this helpful submission into account  when  we  consider
      the application of Article 8 to each appellant's case. We  agree  with
      it.  This means that where the child or indeed the remaining spouse is
      a British citizen and therefore a citizen of the European Union, it is
      not possible to require them to relocate outside of the European Union
      or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so.  The  case
      serves to emphasise the importance of nationality  already  identified
      in the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania). If interference
      with the family life is to be justified, it can only be on  the  basis
      that  the  conduct  of  the  person  to  be  removed  gives  rise   to
      considerations of such weight as to justify separation.

.....

105.    However Mrs Sanade and both children are now British  citizens.  The
    nationality of the children is an important factor as  to  where  their
    best interests lay:  ZH (Tanzania). If their nationality, domicile  and
    place of future residence is to be the United Kingdom,  their  "optimum
    life chances to enter adulthood successfully" point  to  the  need  for
    continuity of their residence  and  education  during  their  formative
    years in the United Kingdom.

106.    Further as  British  citizens,  Mrs  Sanade  and  her  children  are
    citizens of the European Union and as such entitled to  reside  in  the
    Union. The respondent properly accepts that they cannot be required  to
    leave the Union as a matter of law, and that as a  matter  of  relevant
    consideration they cannot reasonably be expected to relocate outside of
    the European Union. Accordingly, the question  is whether  Mr  Sanade's
    conduct is so serious as to make it proportionate to the legitimate aim
    in his case to require him to leave his wife and young children for  an
    indefinite period  unless  and  until  the  deportation  order  can  be
    revoked?



Appendix 2 extract from Ogundimu


108. In Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]
    UKUT 48 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal [Blake P and  UTJ  Jordan]  asked  the
    following question of the Secretary of State (recorded at paragraph  93
    of the decision):

           "Does the respondent agree that in a case where  a  non-national
           parent is being removed and claims it is  a  violation  of  that
           person's human rights to be separated from a child with whom  he
           presently enjoys family  life  as  an  engaged  parent,  that  a
           consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not open to the
           respondent to submit that an interference can be avoided because
           it is reasonable to expect the child (and presumably  any  other
           parent/carer who is not facing deportation/removal) to join  the
           appellant in the country of origin?  If not why not?"

109.  Mr Devereux, at that time the Assistant  Director  UKBA  and  Head  of
    European Operation Policy, responded as follows:


           "We do accept, however, that in a case  where  a  third  country
           national is unable to claim a right to reside on the  basis  set
           out above it will not logically be possible, when assessing  the
           compatibility of their removal or deportation with the  ECHR  to
           argue that any interference  with  Article  8  rights  could  be
           avoided by the family unit moving to a country which is  outside
           of the EU".

110.    Having considered the Secretary of  State's  response  the  Tribunal
    concluded (paragraph 95):


           "This means that where the child or indeed the remaining  spouse
           is a British citizen and therefore a  citizen  of  the  European
           Union, it is not possible to require them to relocate outside of
           the European Union or to submit that it would be reasonable  for
           them to do so..."


111.    The Tribunal further clarified,  when  looking  at  the  particulars
    facts of the case before it, that:


           "...as  British  citizens,  Mrs  Sanade  and  her  children  are
           citizens of the European Union and as such entitled to reside in
           the Union. The respondent properly accepts that they  cannot  be
           required to leave the Union as a matter of law..."


112.    In the case of Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) the  Secretary  of  State
    has confirmed that the  response  continues  to  apply,  subject  to  a
    clarification that it only extends to the  British  citizen  spouse  or
    partner where there is  in  addition  a  British  citizen  child.  This
    approach is consistent with the recent decisions of the Court of Appeal
    in DH (Jamaica) [2012] EWCA Civ 1736, and of  the  CJEU  in  O,  S  -v-
    Maahanmuuttovirasto [C -356/11 and 357/11: 6 December 2012].


113.    Thus, in this appeal, TS cannot be required to  leave  the  European
    Union to join the appellant in Africa. She needs her mother in order to
    exercise her residence rights in the Union. To require  her  mother  to
    join the appellant in Nigeria (a country with which she has no ties  of
    any sort and has never visited) is either to require the child to leave
    the European Union, or the mother to leave the  child.  In  the  latter
    eventuality there is no evidence of anyone else able to adequately care
    for the child and  so  the  first  issue  would  be  reopened.   It  is
    certainly unreasonable to  expect  either  TS  or  JD  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria.

