
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01976/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2016                  |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                               mr prasath [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heatherington who, in a decision promulgated on  11  May
    2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal.



Background facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  11  July  1986.  The
    appellant applied for a student visa to enter the United Kingdom  on  6
    January 2010.  He applied to extend his visa and was granted  leave  to
    remain until 7 February 2014.  The appellant claimed asylum on  6  June
    2013.

 3. On 26 January 2015 the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
    for asylum because she did  not  accept  that  he  had  been  arrested,
    detained and ill-treated as asserted or that he was a Tamil activist in
    the UK and therefore considered that the appellant would not be at risk
    of persecution on return to Sri Lanka.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
    refused  the  appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').  The  appellant  appealed  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  The Tribunal did not accept that the appellant had ever  been
    a supporter of the LTTE, that he had ever  been  tortured  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities or that  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  have  any
    continuing interest in him.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant is not actively supporting the Tamil diaspora in  the  United
    Kingdom and found that there  is  no  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant will be detained by the security forces when  he  returns  to
    Sri Lanka.  The First-tier Tribunal also found that the  appellant  has
    no family life in the United Kingdom.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 14 July 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Holmes  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal came before me.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal

Summary of Submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to engage  with  and
    consider properly the medical evidence.  It is submitted that the judge
    should have attached more weight to the expert medical report  than  he
    did.  Ms Allen referred to paragraph 42 of the decision where the judge
    set out that three points in the medical  report  cause  concern.   The
    first  concern  was  that  the  doctor  was  unable  to  rule  out  the
    possibility that the appellant's scarring was not  caused  by  a  third
    party at the appellant's request.  At  page  8  of  Professor  Lingam's
    report she submitted this is a general observation  not  particular  to
    this appellant and it says that no medical expert can  say  whether  or
    not the injuries might have been caused by a third party at the request
    of an appellant. She submitted that  Professor  Lingam  had  considered
    alternative causes for the scars but found that there was no reason  to
    dispute the  history  given  by  the  appellant.   She  submitted  that
    Professor Lingam had considered the case of  KV  (scarring)  Sri  Lanka
    [2014] UKUT 230 and the Istanbul Protocol.  She submitted there was  no
    feature or issue in the evidence to raise self-infliction by proxy.

 7. With regard to the second concern,  which  was  that  Professor  Lingam
    states that he trusts what the patient  says,  she  submitted  that  he
    considered the appellant's account but he was  not  simply  relying  on
    what the appellant told him.

 8. With regard to the third concern she submitted that the  report  by  Dr
    Lingam was a scarring report, not a psychiatric report.  Therefore, the
    judge's concern as recorded in paragraph 42 is misplaced.  She  further
    submitted that if the  judge  had  concerns  about  Professor  Lingam's
    report those ought to have been put to the appellant which  gives  rise
    to a procedural fairness point.


 9. In respect of ground 2 it is submitted that the judge  gave  inadequate
    reasoning in support of his findings  with  regard  to  the  sur  place
    activities.  At paragraph 45 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  the
    judge accepts that the appellant attended and can be  seen  at  rallies
    for Remembrance Day and Heroes Day but the judge failed to  assess  the
    risk on return  in  light  of  his  sur  place  activities.   Ms  Allen
    submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal  with  the  evidence,  in
    particular why little weight has been given to the diaspora activities.
     She submitted that paragraphs 36 to 40 contain what is  a  very  short
    analysis of the evidence and that even with that analysis there are  no
    conclusions reached.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to state
    why weight cannot be attached to the  letter  from  the  British  Tamil
    Forum.  It is asserted that the judge found that the appellant  is  not
    actively supporting the Tamil diaspora but no  reasons  are  given  for
    this finding - this is contradictory  given  the  acceptance  that  the
    appellant did  have  some  sur  place  involvement.  She  submitted  in
    relation to the diaspora activities that as set out in GJ it  is  known
    that   the   authorities   have   surveillance   and   intelligence-led
    information.  She submitted that the authorities would be aware of  the
    appellant and that would represent a continuing interest  in  him  that
    would put him at risk.

10. In relation to ground 3 it is submitted that the judge failed to  apply
    the country guidance and gave inadequate reasoning. Ms Allen  submitted
    that there are no findings or conclusions in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision so that it is very difficult for the  appellant  to  know  the
    basis of why his appeal was  dismissed.  She  submitted  there  was  no
    proper analysis of the witness statements and the letter from  the  Red
    Cross or of the continuing interest of the  authorities  shown  in  the
    appellant's family.  It is also asserted that the judge has  failed  to
    give reasoning as to why the appellant does not come within one of  the
    current risk categories as identified in GJ.  It  is  insufficient  for
    the judge, at paragraph 48 of the determination, to just state no.   It
    is also asserted that the judge has  failed  to  make  findings  as  to
    whether the appellant's name appears on a stop list at the airport  and
    that the judge has failed to  give  adequate  reasoning,  at  paragraph
    48(i) of the determination, as  to  why  the  appellant  would  not  be
    considered a Tamil activist.  The judge states  that  the  details  are
    woolly but does not give any  reason  for  this.   It  is  asserted  at
    paragraph 47 of the decision the judge states that he  has  substantial
    doubts about the explanations given by the appellant in  his  screening
    interviews and statements but does not  give  any  reasoning  for  that
    finding.  She submitted that there  was  no  actual  conclusion  as  to
    whether or not the judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    uncle.  There was no  consideration  of  the  appellant's  own  witness
    statement.  She submitted that there was no evidence that the judge put
    any of his doubts to the appellant during the hearing.

11. Ground 4 asserts that the judge failed to make findings in relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge accepts that the appellant has an uncle in the United Kingdom but
    apart from that the judge has not given any reasons  as  to  why  there
    would  not  be  very   significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration into society in Sri Lanka. It is also asserted  that  the
    judge has failed to give any reasons as to why  the  appellant  is  not
    considered to have a private life in the United Kingdom.

12. Ms Allen submitted that  the  judge  has  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence.  She submitted that little of the evidence has been  set  out
    by the judge.  There was a letter from the Red Cross  with  regards  to
    the appellant's first detention that has not  been  considered  by  the
    judge.  She also submitted that the  judge  has  failed  to  take  into
    account the recent country information.

13. Mr Tufan submitted that the medical report, in essence, says that there
    are scars present but nobody can conclude  whether  or  not  they  were
    inflicted by proxy but that  this  was  all  part  of  the  credibility
    assessment.  He referred to the case of RR (challenging  evidence)  Sri
    Lanka [2010] ULUT 274.  In this case it is suggested that the appellant
    should be asked questions as to whether or not  the  scars  were  self-
    inflicted.  Mr Tufan asserted that this clearly would not take  matters
    any further as it is unlikely that an appellant  would  ever  admit  to
    self-infliction by proxy. He submitted that what is required is for the
    evidence to be considered in the round.

14. With regard to the appellant's uncle's evidence he submitted that it is
    clear at paragraph 43 that all of the evidence that the uncle gave  has
    been derived from the appellant's account.  The  judge  concluded  that
    the uncle could not be treated as an independent witness- this  finding
    was open to the judge.  He submitted that with regard to  the  diaspora
    activities it is clear from the case of GJ that in order to  give  rise
    to a risk on return mere attendance at demonstrations is  insufficient.
    The appellant would have to be a leader or play a significant role.  He
    submitted the evidence of the appellant does not go anywhere near  this
    level of involvement.  He submitted that there was no evidence  of  any
    outstanding arrest warrant and that the appellant simply does not  come
    under any of the risk categories identified.

 Discussion

15. The First-tier Tribunal set out in some detail the  background  to  the
    appellant's claim - from paragraphs 14 to 24.  The judge then  set  out
    the evidence from the appellant's uncle in paragraphs 26  to  30.   The
    judge also sets out at paragraphs 36  to  40  various  aspects  of  the
    evidence given during the course of the hearing and brief details  from
    the appellant's witness statement.

16. With regard to the  first  ground  of  appeal  the  judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 42:

         'First I address the medical evidence relating to  the  appellant's
         scaring. This informs my assessment  of  the  appellant...Professor
         Lingam said that, other than torture, the appellant had denied  any
         cause for the scarring. He assessed the scars. He states  that  the
         burn was inflicted in March 2013 and concluded that the  scars  and
         other injuries he saw were consistent with the history provided  by
         the appellant. Three points cause me concerns.

              1. The first is that Professor Lingam's  clinical  opinion  is
                 that  it  is  not   possible   to   differentiate   between
                 deliberately inflicted wounds (at a third party's  request)
                 and trauma inflicted wounds. Professor Lingam was unable to
                 rule out the possibility that the appellant's scarring  was
                 not wounds from a third party's request.

              2. Secondly Professor Lingam states that he  trusts  what  the
                 patient says and interprets this scientifically. He  states
                 that he  accepted  the  appellant's  explanation  that  the
                 scarring was two years old.

              3. Thirdly, the appellant was not found, as  might  have  been
                 expected,  to  be  severely   depressed.   Almost   as   an
                 afterthought, at the close of his report  Professor  Lingam
                 adds, 'I remain concerned that the patient may have  mental
                 health  issues  as  a  result  of  his  injuries  and  ill-
                 treatments'. In other words there is only a possibility  of
                 mental health issues. This put s  the  possibility  of  the
                 appellant having a mental health condition at a low level.'

17. At paragraphs 50 and 51 the judge set out:

         'I find that the appellant's claims are not plausible claims. I  am
         not persuaded that the appellant  was  tortured  and  acquired  the
         scars as he has claimed. Professor Lingam explains how  he  arrived
         at his conclusions. He relies on the history given to  him  by  the
         appellant. He goes on to state that he cannot differentiate between
         wounds deliberately inflicted at a third party's request. As I find
         the appellant's account that he was tortured in the manner  claimed
         in 2013 is not true it follows that I am not prepared to accept and
         rely on the opinion of Professor Lingam.

         Furthermore, as I cannot rely on the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
         credible or  trustworthy  considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
         including the background country  evidence,  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and his witnesses and the  medical  evidence,  I  am  not
         satisfied, even on the lower standard, that the appellant has  made
         out his claim.'

18. I accept Ms Allen's submissions that with regard to the first 'concern'
    raised by the judge - the inability of Professor Lingam to rule out the
    possibility that the appellant's scarring was not from wounds caused at
    a third party request - Professor Lingam gave  no  indication  that  he
    considered that this was a realistic probability.  This was  a  generic
    statement, as is clear from the medical report. It will be  likely,  in
    most cases, that it will  not  be  possible  to  differentiate  between
    wounds inflicted at the request of an appellant  and  trauma  inflicted
    wounds. Weight to place on an expert report is a matter for the  judge.
    Looking at paragraph 50, one reading is that the judge as part  of  his
    overall assessment placed little weight on the medical report  and  one
    factor he took into account when doing so was the  fact  that,  despite
    the presence of  scarring  that  may  have  been  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account, he Professor Lingam could not rule out  the  cause
    of the scarring as being a result of wounds caused  deliberately  by  a
    third party at the request of the appellant. This  is  not  an  unknown
    phenomenon. I cannot be sure, however, that that is the approach  taken
    by the judge in this case. My reading of the approach of the judge,  as
    set out in paragraph 42, is that he expressly considered that the  mere
    fact  that  Professor  Lingam  was  unable  to  rule  out  third  party
    infliction at the appellant's request, of itself, caused  him  concern.
    As I set out above the statement was a generic one and not specific  to
    the appellant and appears in most scarring reports. It is not clear why
    the judge found this concerning rather than being a factor he took into
    account when considering what weight to attach to the report.

19. I also accept, with respect to the second 'concern',  that  it  is  not
    clear why it should concern the judge that Professor Lingam states that
    he  trusts  what  the   appellant   had   said   and   interpreted   it
    scientifically.  The comments I make above in respect  of  the  concern
    the judge had regarding the cause of the scars apply  equally  to  this
    concern. Experts clearly rely on an  appellant's  account  but  do  not
    simply rely on the  account  without  exercising  some  judgement  when
    providing their expert evidence on the scarring. The judge is  entitled
    to take into account the fact that an  expert  places  reliance  on  an
    appellant's account and that it  is  not  the  role  of  an  expert  to
    determine if the appellant is telling the truth. That is a  matter  for
    the judge. It is not clear why the judge had 'concerns' with this point
    rather than taking it into account when deciding what weight  to  place
    on the medical report.

20. I also accept Ms Allen's submissions in relation to the  third  concern
    expressed by the judge.  The judge's conclusion, derived from the  fact
    that Professor Lingam mentions towards the close of the report that the
    appellant may have mental health issues, that this puts the possibility
    of the appellant having a mental health condition at a low  level  does
    not necessarily follow. This was a scarring report.   Professor  Lingam
    was not providing  a  psychiatric  report.    Further,  the  judge  has
    entered into speculation as to what 'might have been expected', namely,
    that the appellant would have been severely depressed.


21. However, whether or not this is a material errors of  law  have  to  be
    considered when looking at the conclusions of the judge overall.

22. With regard to  ground  2,  the  inadequate  reasoning  for  sur  place
    activities, the judge sets out at paragraph 45:

         "I  attach  little  weight  to  the  photographs  at  rallies   for
         Remembrance Day and Heroes Day.  I do not doubt that the  appellant
         attended and can  be  seen.   However,  I  am  satisfied  that  any
         involvement on these occasions was at a low level and that the main
         purpose was for the self-serving embroidering of his claims that he
         is politically  active.   The  appellant's  uncle's  oral  evidence
         confirms this.  The motive in participating in these  protests  'to
         be photographed' was to lay the ground for an  attempt  to  support
         for his asylum claim."

23. The judge also records in paragraph 48

         '...In my judgment the appellant's uncle makes clear that  when  he
         told me that the appellant's purpose in attending  events  such  as
         Tamil National Heroes Day and Remembrance Day in the United Kingdom
         was 'to be photographed'."

24. Further, at paragraph 49 the judge made a finding that "I am  satisfied
    that the appellant is not actively supporting the Tamil diaspora".  The
    judge has considered the likelihood of the appellant's being at risk as
    a result of his sur  place  activities  when  the  judge  considers  at
    paragraph 48(i) whether or not the appellant is a Tamil activist.   The
    judge considered:

          i) Is the appellant a Tamil activist? On the evidence, I find  as
             a fact that the appellant is not a Tamil activist.  He  claims
             to have passed some parcels and helped Tamils exist Sri Lanka.
             The details are woolly and in my judgment the appellant  makes
             the claim to embroider an attempt  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom and with a vain hope that they might  support  a  weak
             asylum application. In my judgment the appellant's uncle makes
             that clear when he told me that  the  appellant's  purpose  in
             attending  events  such  as  Tamil  National  Heroes  Day  and
             Reembrace day in the United Kingdom was 'to be photographed'.'



25. It is clear that the judge applied the guidance in  GJ  &  Others  when
    considering whether there was a real risk  to  the  appellant  of  ill-
    treatment or harm on return  to  Sri  Lanka.   As  set  out  in  GJ  at
    paragraphs 336, 351 and 352 in  order  to  give  rise  to  a  risk  the
    appellant would have play a significant role:

         '336.     The former Tamil  areas  and  the  diaspora  are  heavily
         penetrated by the security forces. Photographs are taken of  public
         demonstrations  and  the  GOSL  may  be  using   face   recognition
         technology: it is sponsoring a face recognition technology  project
         at the University of Colombo. However, the question which  concerns
         the GOSL is the identification of Tamil activists working for Tamil
         separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.  We  do
         not consider that attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the  diaspora
         alone is sufficient to create a real risk or a reasonable degree of
         likelihood that a person will attract adverse attention  on  return
         to Sri Lanka.

         351 Our overall conclusion regarding diaspora  activities  is  that
         the GOSL has sophisticated intelligence enabling it to  distinguish
         those who are actively involved in seeking to  revive  and  re-fund
         the separatist  movement  within  the  diaspora,  with  a  view  to
         destabilising the unitary Sri Lankan state. Attendance at  one,  or
         even several demonstrations  in  the  diaspora  is  not  of  itself
         evidence that a person is a committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to
         promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka. That will be a  question
         of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities  carried
         out by such an individual.

         352.     The evidence before us indicates that any Tamil who  seeks
         a travel document from the  SLHC  in  London  or  another  diaspora
         hotspot will have a file created in Colombo and will be interviewed
         in London before a decision is made to issue a TTD. By the time the
         DIE in Colombo emails a TTD to London  to  be  issued  to  such  an
         individual, the Sri Lankan authorities will know all they  need  to
         know about what activities an individual has undertaken outside Sri
         Lanka and, in particular, whether the returnee poses a real risk to
         the unitary Sri Lankan state or the GOSL on return.'

26. There was no error of law in respect of the judge's findings in respect
    of the appellant's involvement in diaspora activities in the UK or  his
    conclusion that as a  result  of  that  very  limited  involvement  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return

27. I accept Mr Allen's submissions that  the  judge  has  not  made  clear
    findings with regard to the appellant's first detention  in  late  2008
    and the letter from the Red Cross confirming that they had visited  the
    appellant whilst in detention on 20/1/2009. The judge found:

         'It is difficult to understand why the authorities might  have  put
         in so much effort with the appellant as he has claimed.  He  was  a
         full time student. He has little or no information on the  LTTE  or
         its members. He is not a LTTE member and there  must  have  come  a
         point when this was realised. I have substantial doubts  about  the
         explanations given by the appellant in his screening interview  and
         statements. I do not accept that the  appellant  has  ever  been  a
         supporter of the LTTE in the ways the appellant has suggested or at
         all,  or  that  he  has  ever  been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities  Immigration  Rules  that  the  authorities  have   any
         continuing interest in him.'

28. Whilst the findings of the judge were ones that were open to him it  is
    not clear what elements of the explanations given by the  appellant  in
    his screening interview and statements gave rise to doubts or why  they
    did so other than the judge considered that it was  unlikely  that  the
    authorities would have any interest in him given he  was  not  an  LTTE
    member. The judge has not referred to the letter  from  the  Red  Cross
    which on the face of it appears to confirm at least a  short  detention
    in 2009. It is also not clear that the  judge  was  referring  to  both
    claimed detentions.

29. In relation to ground 4 this was not pressed by Ms Allen at the appeal.
     However, the grounds do set out that the judge has failed to give  any
    reasons as to why there would not be very significant obstacles to  the
    appellant's reintegration into society in Sri Lanka.   The  judge  sets
    out in paragraph 52:

         "As I have indicated, the appellant's parents and  family  live  in
         Sri Lanka.  I accept that the appellant has an uncle - his father's
         brother - in the  United  Kingdom,  an  uncle  whom  he  sees  only
         infrequently.  I conclude that the appellant has no family life  in
         the United Kingdom."



30. Although the judge has erroneously considered family life and  has  not
    considered private life in accordance  with  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules or given any reasoning as to why there would  not  be
    very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  into
    society, no specific details as to why there would be  any  significant
    obstacles have been given by the appellant either.  In the  absence  of
    any specific details as to why the appellant, a Sri Lankan National who
    has family in Sri Lanka and spent most of his  life  there,  could  not
    reintegrate into Sri Lanka this aspect of the appeal is bound to  fail.
    Given the evidence of  the  appellant's  uncle  and  the  very  limited
    activities that the appellant was said to be involved in,  in  the  UK,
    the finding of the judge was one that was open to him.


31. Given the requirement to assess asylum claims  with  the  most  anxious
    scrutiny I cannot be  certain  that  the  judge  assessed  the  medical
    evidence appropriately. I find that the judge has erred  in  concluding
    that factors set out in Professor Lingam's report referred to above are
    matters that, of themselves, cause concern. The judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons and/or clear findings with regard to  the  appellant's
    claimed detention in 2008/2009. Although it is possible that the  judge
    may have nevertheless arrived at the same conclusion it  is  not  clear
    that  he  would  have  done  so  if   the   evidence   was   considered
    appropriately.


32. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.



Notice of Decision


33. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
    I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

35. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham) for  the  case
    to be heard before a judge other than Judge Heatherington  pursuant  to
    section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA. The case is to be listed  at
    Taylor House on the next available date.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 26 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

