
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01666/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 15 November 2013                           |on 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                         MOHAMED IRFAN MOHAMED HUSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms A Nisbet, of Morton Fraser, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  17  January  1986.   He
   appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  D'Ambrosio,
   promulgated on 5 August 2013, dismissing his appeal  against  refusal  of
   recognition as a refugee from Sri Lanka.




Grounds and submissions for appellant.

2) Ms Nisbet took grounds 1 and 2 together.  They complain  that  the  judge
   made inconsistent findings  on  a  medico-legal  report  by  the  Medical
   Foundation, dated 8 July 2013, and failed to give it adequate weight.  At
   paragraph 56(b) of the determination the judge notes  a  finding  in  the
   report that 3 scars to the appellant's fingers are highly consistent with
   the attributed cause of defensive wounds sustained during a sword attack.
    At paragraph 126 the judge returned  to  the  matter,  noting  that  the
   report  says  such  scarring  might  also  be  accidental.    The   judge
   overlooked the finding in the report that it would be highly unusual  for
   this to be accidental.  Ms Nisbet added that in  evaluating  the  report,
   the judge applied a standard of proof which was  "too  high"  or  "overly
   burdensome", and this was significant because the judge's  other  adverse
   findings were speculative.

3) Ground 3 is entitled "overly burdensome standard of  proof  and  unlawful
   treatment of documents", and complains that the judge failed to take into
   account, on the authority of RP (Proof of Forgery - Nigeria) [2006] UKAIT
   00086, that in judicial proceedings an allegation of forgery needs to  be
   established  to  a  high  degree  of  proof  by  the  person  making  the
   allegation.  However, I understood Ms  Nisbet  to  accept  in  course  of
   submissions that this is not a case  where  the  respondent  set  out  to
   establish that a document is a forgery.  She said next that even  if  the
   document was forged, the appellant's case should have  succeeded  on  the
   basis of the medical evidence and the "objective evidence".

4) Ground 4 complains that  the  judge  took  into  account  irrelevant  and
   irrational considerations in relation to the appellant's  delayed  asylum
   claim.  Ground 5 complains that the judge incorrectly found there to be a
   contradiction between accounts given by the appellant at asylum interview
   and for his medico-legal report.  Ground 6 complains that irrelevant  and
   irrational considerations were applied in assessing plausibility.

Submissions for respondent.

5) Mr Mullen said that the judge stated the standard of proof correctly,  in
   particular at paragraph 84, and there was  nothing  to  suggest  that  he
   applied any other standard.  The judge set out quite fully  the  findings
   and conclusions in the medical report at paragraphs 52-57.   He  did  not
   have to set them  out  again  when  reaching  his  conclusions.   He  was
   entitled there to note the report to the effect that such scarring  might
   be accidental.  Even if he at that stage overlooked the full terms of the
   report, that was not of real significance in the context of  his  overall
   conclusions.  The report at paragraph 58 did not  say  why  it  would  be
   "relatively unusual to sustain 3 separate scars to the same hand in  this
   way."  There was no obvious reason why it might be.   The  judge  reached
   his conclusion on the appellant's account in the  context  of  the  whole
   evidence and had generally taken a  correct  and  fair  approach  to  the
   medical report.  By  itself,  it  could  not  be  determinative  of  past
   persecution.  The grounds were misconceived in respect of questioning the
   amount of weight given by the  judge  to  that  item  of  evidence.   The
   relative weighing of items of evidence was very much the function of  the
   judge.  The third ground misconceived the issue about the documents.  The
   judge correctly directed himself at paragraph 91(i) that he was to assess
   the reliability of documents which the appellant  produced  according  to
   the well known approach explained in Tanveer Ahmed v  SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT
   00439.  At paragraphs 117 and 118 the judge applied  that  approach,  and
   concluded that the  summons  which  the  appellant  produced  was  not  a
   reliable and genuine document.

Reply for appellant.

6) Ms Nisbet said that the respondent's  refusal  letter  declined  to  give
   weight to the documents produced by the appellant, but there had been  no
   definite proof that the arrest warrant or summons was a forgery.

Discussion and conclusions.

7) The grounds of appeal do not accurately reflect the terms of the  medico-
   legal report.  The report is cited to the effect that it would be "highly
   unusual" for the scarring to be accidental, but what the report  actually
   says (paragraph 58) is "relatively unusual".  The  report  is  accurately
   summarised in the determination.  It is not shown  that  the  judge  made
   inconsistent findings on it.  The weight to be given to it was  a  matter
   for him in the context of the rest of  the  evidence  and  of  his  other
   findings.

8) The respondent's refusal letter says  at  paragraph  84  that  no  weight
   could be given to the appellant's documents, because he failed to provide
   properly certified translations.  At paragraph 85 it is said that by  the
   appellant's own account he had contacts in Sri Lanka who had been able to
   provide him with fraudulent  documentation  in  the  past  to  make  visa
   applications (as a student) and that the presentation and quality of  his
   documentation is damaging to his credibility.

9) It was for the appellant to establish his  claim,  to  the  low  standard
   applicable.  The real issue is  not  usually  whether  a  document  is  a
   forgery, but whether it is one upon which  reliance  should  properly  be
   placed.  Only where the Secretary of State makes a positive assertion  of
   forgery does she assume the burden  of  proving  that.   This  ground  of
   appeal was badly taken.

10)  The  remaining  grounds  are  only  re-statement  of   the   case   and
   disagreement with the judge's conclusions, dressed up partly in  language
   of legal error.

11) The determination read fairly and  as  a  whole,  more  than  adequately
   explains to the appellant and to any other reader why, for  a  number  of
   good reasons, the evidence for the appellant has  been  found  less  than
   persuasive.  The finding,  for  example,  that  people  carrying  cricket
   stumps towards a cricket ground are likely to have been ordinary citizens
   going to play cricket rather than government agents is common sense,  not
   speculation.

12) The appellant has not shown that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal errs in law in any such respect as  to  require  it  to  be  set
   aside, and the determination shall stand.

13)  No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                               [pic]
                                19 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
