
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2014                               |On 10 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             Suthahar Yogendram
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by Suthahar Yogendra against  a  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  refusing  his  asylum   claim   in   a
    determination dated 1 April 2014.
2.   The history is set out in the  determination  itself.   In  short,  the
    appellant came here as a student and was granted leave as such.  He was
    found in a shop belonging to his  uncle  in  South  East  London.   The
    suggestion was that he was working in the shop in breach of  his  leave
    to remain as a student.  Whether that is in fact the  position  is  not
    entirely clear. There was conflicting evidence about  it.   It  may  be
    that he admitted that he was working when interviewed, but on the other
    hand it was plain also that  he  denied  it  when  interviewed  by  CID
    officers.  The findings in connection with it are set out at  paragraph
    24 of the determination and it is not clear to us what  conclusion  was
    reached by the FtT.  We are not in a position  ourselves  to  make  any
    finding on the legality or otherwise of  the  original  detention,  not
    having the appropriate materials, but we leave that matter  aside.   It
    is not necessary for us to deal with that in any further detail.

3.    The  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  a  number  of  criticisms  of  the
    determination.  Broadly speaking, we think they can be categorised as a
    complaint that the judge failed effectively to engage with the evidence
    which was presented and  in  making  his  findings  failed  to  produce
    reasons for them.  He made a number  of  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant and quite why he did so is by no means clear.  In
    particular, in paragraph 25 of the determination he sets out  in  brief
    certain details given by the appellant about events in 2006,  2007  and
    2008.  He does not go into detail about  precisely  what  evidence  the
    appellant gave about them.  These matters go to the heart of his asylum
    claim and one would have expected an expansion of the circumstances  as
    given by the appellant to appear in paragraph 25.  The  judge  did  not
    accept what the appellant had  to  say  and  that  adverse  credibility
    finding was carried on into paragraph 26 and indeed,  we  think  it  is
    fair to say, pervades the determination.

4.   One matter which is of  particular  significance  is  that  the  judge,
    while referring to incidents in 2006, 2007 and 2008,  says  that  these
    led to him leaving in 2010, but he makes no reference anywhere, as  far
    as we can see, to a particular event about which  the  appellant  spoke
    and which triggered his leaving in 2010.  The judge's position was that
    it was incredible that the appellant simply stayed in the country for a
    number of years when he had the opportunity to leave and did not do  so
    until  2010,  for  no  particular  reason.   On  the  other  hand,  the
    appellant's position is that it was the event in 2010, with  which  the
    judge does not deal, which triggered his leaving the country.  That  is
    a major error in our opinion and is sufficient in itself to  amount  to
    an error of law requiring this decision to be remade.

5.   Furthermore, the judge did not  deal  appropriately  with  the  medical
    evidence which was produced.  He did not go into  any  detail  of  what
    that evidence was and did not even mention,  as  far  as  we  can  see,
    evidence from Dr Goldwyn of findings which were highly consistent  with
    the appellant having been tortured by being beaten on the soles of  the
    feet.  He finds that the psychiatric report is undermined  because  the
    qualifications of the author of it were not set out.   As  it  happens,
    not  only  is  the  psychiatrist  particularly  well  known   but   his
    qualifications were sent to the judge after the event, by  arrangement,
    so that he could take them into account. Furthermore the qualifications
    are set out in the body of the report at  the  beginning.   That  again
    undermines the determination and we conclude that he fell into an error
    of law in this regard also.

5.   Looking at the determination as a whole, there is  an  absence  of  the
    anxious scrutiny which we would expect in a determination dealing  with
    an asylum claim.  It is fair to record at this stage  that  Mr  Tarlow,
    for the Home Department, with  characteristic  fairness,  has  accepted
    that there are a number of errors, in particular  the  errors  we  have
    pointed out at paragraphs 25 and 26.  We are grateful indeed to him for
    making that concession.

6.   It follows therefore that the appeal must be allowed and  the  decision
    will require to be remade in this Tribunal on a date to be fixed.






                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                    Date:

