
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01121/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 September 2013                           |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                    A S M

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  us  to
    rescind the order and we  continue  it  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on  14  April  1941.
    He is, therefore, now 72 years old.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 11 September 2012 and claimed  asylum.   On  11  October  2012,  the
    Secretary of State refused his application for asylum and  humanitarian
    protection  under  the  Immigration  Rules   (HC   395   as   amended).
    Thereafter, on 25 January 2013, the Secretary of State refused to grant
    the appellant leave to enter and proposed  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions to  Somalia.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. Following a hearing on 8  March  2013,  Judge  Hart  TD  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. Judge Hart accepted that the appellant was a  member  of  the  majority
    Abgal clan and came from a village called "Warmaxan" which  was  around
    midway along (or near) the road  between  Wanlaweyn  and  Afgoye.   The
    village was approximately 60 miles from Mogadishu. The Judge,  however,
    rejected the appellant's account that he  had  been  attacked  and  ill
    treated by Al-Shabab on three  occasions  in  the  year  prior  to  his
    leaving Somalia and that, on  two  of  those  occasions,  he  had  been
    detained for four days (on the first occasion) and for three  days  (on
    the second occasion) when they took his money and claimed to have taken
    his farm to keep or sell.  Further, the Judge found that in  any  event
    Al-Shabab had  "most  likely  ...  abandoned  possession  of  his  home
    village".  As a consequence, the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was at risk  from  Al-Shabab  if  he  returned  to  his  home
    village.

 5. The Judge went on to find,  contrary  to  country  guidance,  that  the
    appellant could, in any event, internally relocate to Mogadishu on  the
    basis  that  he  would  not  be  at  risk  there,  in  particular  from
    indiscriminate violence falling within Art 15(c) of  the  Qualification
    Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC) and that it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to live there, given, in  particular  that  he  was  a  clan
    leader of the majority Abgal clan.

Error of Law

 6. On 4 April 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R C  Campbell)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  grounds
    argued that Judge Hart had erred in law in departing from the  relevant
    country guidance  case  of  AMM  and  Others  (Conflicts;  Humanitarian
    Crisis;  Returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00445  (IAC),  in
    particular in finding that the Al-Shabab were no longer in  control  of
    his home village of Warmaxan and consequently that  the  appellant  was
    not at risk in  his  home  area,  and  further,  in  finding  that  the
    appellant could safely relocate to Mogadishu  where  he  would  not  be
    exposed to a risk of indiscriminate violence contrary to Art  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC).   A  challenge  was
    also made to the Judge's adverse credibility finding.

 7. In a decision dated 3 June 2012 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb and  DUTJ
    J F W Phillips) set aside the decision of Judge Hart.  Whilst we upheld
    the Judge's adverse credibility finding, we concluded that the  Judge's
    finding that Al-Shabab were no longer in  control  of  the  appellant's
    home area (it having been accepted that they were in control until late
    2011) was not supported by the background evidence  before  the  Judge.
    Further, we concluded that the Judge was not entitled, on the  evidence
    before him, to depart from the country guidance decision of AMM and  to
    find that the appellant could safely relocate to live in Mogadishu.  We
    also concluded that the appellant had no basis for a claim under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

Re-Making the Decision

 8. The appeal was relisted before us on  5  September  2013  in  order  to
    remake  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  appellant's   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection claims.

    1. The Issues

 9. At the outset  of  that  hearing,  Mr  Richards,  who  represented  the
    respondent, indicated that he  would  invite  us  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance case of AMM on the basis of  the  background  material
    before us.  However, after a short adjournment  Mr  Richards  indicated
    that that was not, in fact, the Secretary of State's position  in  this
    appeal.  He accepted that on the basis of AMM the appellant  could  not
    internally relocate so as to live in  Mogadishu  given  his  particular
    circumstances including his age and (as it was now accepted)  that  the
    appellant had not previously lived in Mogadishu despite the  fact  that
    one of his former wives had lived there whom he had visited  from  time
    to time.

10. The issues  between  the  parties,  therefore,  can  be  summarised  as
    follows.

11. First, it is accepted that the appellant's home  area  is  Warmaxan,  a
    village located on or  near  the  main  road  from  Mogadishu,  passing
    through  Afgoye  and  subsequently  leading  to  the  inland  town   of
    Wanlaweyn.  From there, the road then goes on to Baidoa.   Mr  Richards
    did not challenge the appellant's evidence that before leaving  Somalia
    he had a farm at Warmaxan which was about one hour from  the  road  and
    that his house was about 30 minutes from the road.

12. Mr Richards accepted that the appellant would be at risk from Al-Shabab
    in his home area if they continued to control that area.  However,  his
    primary submission was on the background evidence  that  had  not  been
    established and therefore the appellant's asylum claim must  fail.   Mr
    Hodgetts' submission was to the contrary.

13. Secondly, it was accepted by Mr Richards that the appellant  could  not
    internally relocate to Mogadishu because of the risk of  indiscriminate
    violence falling within Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  That
    concession was limited to the appellant having  to  live  in  Mogadishu
    rather than merely pass through it.

14. Thirdly, therefore, Mr Richards did not accept that the appellant could
    succeed under Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive if he was not at
    risk in his home area because, he submitted, on the basis  of  AMM  the
    appellant would be able to safely arrive in Mogadishu, and having  made
    travel arrangements, return to  his  home  area  safely.   Mr  Hodgetts
    submitted that AMM was not so limited and the appellant could establish
    an Art 15(c) risk even if he was only  temporarily  in  Mogadishu.   He
    also submitted that, given the appellant's circumstances including  his
    age and lack of connection with Mogadishu, it would  in  any  event  be
    unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to live in Mogadishu.

    2. The Law

15. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish that there is  a
    real risk of persecution for a Convention reason or that  he  would  be
    exposed to serious harm falling within Art 15(c) of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

16. In relation to internal relocation, the appellant must establish either
    that there is a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  to  him  in
    Mogadishu or that it would be unduly harsh or unreasonable in  all  the
    circumstances for him to relocate (i.e. live) there.

    3. Discussion and Findings

17. The appellant briefly gave oral evidence before us in which he  adopted
    his statements of 16 July 2013  and  26  June  2013.   The  appellant's
    daughter also gave evidence and adopted her  statement  dated  16  July
    2013.  She was  not  subject  to  cross-examination.   In  no  material
    respect was the appellant's evidence  undermined  in  cross-examination
    and, despite Judge Hart's adverse credibility finding  in  relation  to
    the appellant's account of events that led him  to  leave  Somalia,  we
    have no reason to doubt the evidence he gave before us (orally  and  in
    his written statements) concerning his family circumstances and that he
    had never lived in Mogadishu but lived in Warmaxan.

18. We now turn to the  first  issue,  namely  whether  the  appellant  has
    established that  Al-Shabab  remains  in  control  of  his  home  area,
    Warmaxan.  It was accepted before Judge Hart and  before  us  that  Al-
    Shabab controlled the appellant's area until late 2011.

19. Mr Hodgetts (on behalf of the appellant) and Mr Richards referred us to
    a number of background documents  and  an  expert  report  prepared  on
    behalf of the appellant.  In particular, we were referred to the  UKBA,
    Country of Origin Information (COI) Report for Somalia (5 August  2013)
    at para 1.34.  A Joint Report for the Danish Immigration  Services  and
    the Norwegian Landinfo's Fact-Finding Mission  to  Nairobi,  Kenya  and
    Mogadishu, Somalia entitled "Security and Protection in  Mogadishu  and
    South-Central Somalia" dated May  2013;  the  Home  Office  Operational
    Guidance Note for Somalia  (September  2013).   In  addition,  we  were
    referred to an expert report by Dr Markus Hoehne, a Somalia  expert  at
    the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology in  Germany  dated  16
    May 2013.

20. As we have said, it was accepted before Judge Hart and before  us  that
    Al-Shabab was in control of the appellant's home area, Warmaxan,  until
    late 2011.  As we pointed out in our earlier decision,  the  background
    evidence before Judge Hart indicated that Al-Shabab had lost control of
    key towns in Somalia (see paras 22-24 of  our  decision  dated  3  June
    2013).  At para 23 we referred to an earlier Danish Immigration Service
    Report dated 4 January 2013 which stated that Al-Shabab had: "left most
    of the major cities but the movement is capable  of  infiltrating  many
    cities."  That report  then  continued,  however:  "The  situation  for
    civilians in the rural areas dominated by  Al-Shabab  in  S/Somalia  is
    somewhat different."

21. The evidence in front of Judge Hart, contained in a  BBC  News  report,
    stated that in October 2012 the  Al-Shabab  had  lost  control  of  the
    inland town of Wanlaweyn.  That is the town at  one  end  of  the  road
    beginning at Afgoye where the  appellant's  village  is  about  halfway
    along.  The Danish Service Report noted (at para 3.1.2) that  Al-Shabab
    had withdrawn from the cities but continued:

         "Instead Al-Shabab will be a major source of threat and  insecurity
         along the major roads connecting the major cities in S/C Somalia".

22. The evidence to which we were referred at  this  hearing  supports  the
    move of Al-Shabab's control from the cities to mainly rural areas.   Mr
    Richards referred us to para 1.34 of the COI Report which,  citing  the
    Danish-Norwegian Fact-Finding Mission Report of May 2013 states that:

         "Concerning the presence of  al-Shabaab  in  Lower  Shabelle  Peter
         Klansoe [Danish Refugee Council]  DRC,  explained  that  al-Shabaab
         controls approximately 50% of the rural areas in the southern  part
         of Lower Shabelle.  The cities and the main roads in this area  are
         however controlled by AMISOM and the SNAF.  Al-Shabaab's control in
         Lower Shabelle is based on fear and suppression, and the fact  that
         no one is fighting against it."

23. What is important to notice is, however,  even  where  control  of  the
    roads is no longer in the hands of Al-Shabab, the  background  evidence
    demonstrates that those travelling on the  roads  are  nevertheless  at
    risk.  The Danish Report at para 3.1.2 (page 41) notes that:

         "Kilian Kleinschmidt, OCHA, explained that in areas of S/C  Somalia
         influenced by al-Shabaab people travelling along the roads  are  at
         risk of extortion by al-Shabaab as it lacks sources of income after
         having lost Kismayo."

24. The report further notes at para 3.2 (page 41) that:

         "An international organization explained that al-Shabaab  does  not
         control any part of the cities in S/C Somalia which the  government
         and/or AMISOM have liberated from al-Shabaab.  However, control  is
         relative term in the sense that  al-Shabaab  is  still  capable  to
         undertake hit and run attacks.  The government and AMISOM have  put
         up a number of checkpoints, and they arrest suspects in relation to
         security issues and they  try  to  gain  control  over  main  roads
         connecting the cities."

25. Mr Richards referred us to the more recent Danish-Norwegian  Report  of
    April 2013 which deals with the reach of Al-Shabab to those  travelling
    along roads even where Al-Shabab are not in control of those roads:

         "Regarding overland travels in S/C Somalia  representatives  of  an
         international agency, Mogadishu, explained that ordinary civilians,
         i.e. people  not  working  for  the  SNG,  are  travelling  between
         Mogadishu and Kismayo, Baidoa, Jowhar and Afgoye.  They  mostly  go
         by bus and there are now fewer checkpoints along  the  Mogadishu  -
         Kismayo road.  There  are  no  checkpoints  between  Mogadishu  and
         Baidoa.  However, there is no guarantee against al-Shabaab ambushes
         along the road.  On the other hand, ambushes may also be  committed
         by ordinary criminals.  The  representatives  of  an  international
         agency, Mogadishu, confirmed that al-Shabaab will  kill  anyone  it
         suspects is working for the SNG or the international community.  It
         was added that the road between Mogadishu and Kismayo is  not  safe
         all the way.  However, ordinary people will travel along this  road
         anyhow as long as they know how to get by."

26.  The  dangers  of  travelling  are  identified  in  that  report  by  a
    representative of an NGO who states that:

         "She would never travel along the roads leading to  Baidoa  and  to
         Kismayo from Mogadishu.  This is due to the threat of al-Shabaab."

27. Specifically, dealing with the road between Mogadishu and Baidoa  along
    which the appellant's village is located, the Danish Report  says  this
    at para 6.2.2 (page 50):


         "Regarding the Mogadishu - Afgoye - Baidoa - Luuq  corridor  UNDSS,
         Mogadishu, explained that  al-Shabaab  has  no  permanent  physical
         presence along the road.  However one cannot say that  it  is  100%
         safe.


         An international  NGO  (B),  Mogadishu  explained  that  al-Shabaab
         operates along the road from Mogadishu to Baidoa,  but  it  has  no
         checkpoints along the road.  However, there is  reason  to  believe
         that it will be informed about government people who travel on  the
         road.  What it normally does, is that they stop cars and check  the
         people who are on board.  Then it will take out the ones it  thinks
         are working for the government or it for  some  reason  regards  as
         enemies.  Ordinary people with no issue with al-Shabaab go on  with
         no problems, and normally  it  will  not  ask  for  money  or  take
         valuables.  Such ambushes and checks happen more or less every  day
         on  the  road  from  Mogadishu  to  Baidoa.   This   is   why   the
         international NGO (B) will not go by road to Baidoa  and  therefore
         goes by plane.  If SNAF forces, AMISOM or SNG officials  are  going
         by road to Baidoa, they have to go in a convoy."

28. That final passage emphasises the danger from the  Al-Shabab  perceived
    by NGOs of travel along this road.

29. The Home Office's own Operational Guidance Note (September 2013) quotes
    at para 3.6.14  the  Amnesty  International  Report  for  May  2013  as
    follows:

         "Amnesty International reported in May 2013 that the risk of  human
         rights violations and abuses remains real in most  areas  of  south
         and  central  Somalia,  given  limited  government   control,   the
         significant continued presence of al-Shabab, and the ongoing  armed
         conflict.  Regardless of the recent gains of  the  government,  al-
         Shabab remains in control of large parts of  rural  areas,  and  of
         much of south and central Somalia.  The January 2013 report of  the
         Secretary-General on Somalia noted that outside Mogadishu guerrilla
         and terrorist tactics are frequently used in  the  areas  recovered
         from al-Shabab, including weekly in Baidoa (Bay) and  Kismaayo  and
         almost daily in the Afgooye and Merka areas."

30. Of particular relevance, is the recognition that "large parts of  rural
    areas" in south and central Somalia remain  in  Al-Shabab  control  and
    that Al-Shabab remain  able  to  engage  in  "guerrilla  and  terrorist
    tactics" in those areas which the report evidences  with  instances  of
    killings.

31. In his report, Dr Hoehne sets out the  current  situation  in  southern
    central Somalia.  He  notes  the  continuing  struggle  between  Somali
    government forces and AMISOM troops on the one hand  and  Al-Shabab  on
    the other.  He  gives  many  referenced  instances  to  the  continuing
    violent struggle.  At page 6 of his report Dr Hoehne refers to the most
    recent news item that he has found in relation to Warmaxan as follows:

         "Warmaxan is in the Lower Shabelle Region.  It is located along the
         road between Afgooye and  Balidoogle.   In  both  of  these  places
         AMISOM troops have a presence.  However,  inbetween,  including  in
         and around Warmaxan,  Al  Shabaab  still  has  a  presence.   On  5
         February 2013, a Somali  website  featured  an  article  in  Somali
         reading: Ciidanka AMISOM  Oo  Deegaanka  Warmaxan  Faarujiyay  (the
         AMISOM troops cleared the area of Warmaxan).  This article  reports
         that after  some  fighting  with  Al  Shabaab  forces  the  foreign
         troops/AMISOM retreated from the  area  of  Warmaxan  and  Islamist
         troops occupied the area.  This is the most  recent  news  I  found
         from Warmaxan in relation to the political situation."

32. That report, as it can be seen, notes that there was  fighting  between
    Al-Shabab and opposing troops which resulted  in  a  retreat  of  those
    forces with Al-Shabab occupying the area.

33. We note the appellant's evidence that his farm is about an hour's  walk
    from the main road and his home is about 30 minutes from that road.

34. In our judgment, on the basis of this evidence, we are  satisfied  that
    the appellant's home area of Warmaxan remains (as it was in late  2011)
    in the control of Al-Shabab.  In addition, although Al-Shabab may  well
    have lost control of the main road that passes near to Warmaxan and the
    appellant's home, that loss of control (perhaps in the sense of  having
    checkpoints etc. set up) has  not  prevented  Al-Shabab  continuing  to
    attack and put at risk travellers on that road.

35. As we have already indicated, Mr Richards accepts that if Al-Shabab  is
    in control of the appellant's home area then he is at risk on return to
    that area given  his  personal  circumstances  including  his  age  and
    background.  Thus, for the above reasons, we are satisfied  that  there
    is a real risk that if the appellant  returned  to  his  home  area  in
    Somalia, he would be persecuted for a Convention reason or at real risk
    of serious harm contrary to Art 3.

36. In the light of that finding, and  Mr  Richards'  concession  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of indiscriminate violence contrary  to  Art
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive if  he  lived  in  Mogadishu,  the
    appellant does not have the option of internal relocation to  Mogadishu
    which is the only place in Somalia where it is suggested that he  could
    plausibly relocate.  That latter finding is, in our judgment,  entirely
    supported by the country guidance decision of AMM.  It is perhaps worth
    noting that in the OGN at para 3.9.26(h) it is stated that:

         "For someone at real risk in  a  home  area  in  South  or  Central
         Somalia, an internal relocation  alternative  to  Mogadishu  is  in
         general unlikely to be available, given the risk of  indiscriminate
         violence in  the  city,  together  with  the  present  humanitarian
         situation."

37. And whilst the OGN goes on to require a  careful  consideration  of  an
    "individual's circumstances", given the appellant's age and lack of any
    roots or connection in Mogadishu we consider that Mr Richards' position
    was not only justified but is correct.  It is precisely the position we
    would reach having assessed the background evidence.

38. For these reasons, the appellant has established that he is  a  refugee
    and entitled to asylum in the UK.

39. In the light of that finding, it is not necessary for us to decide  the
    alternative basis upon which Mr Hodgetts  put  the  appellant's  claim,
    namely that even if not at risk in his home area, merely returning  him
    to Mogadishu to  live  would,  in  itself,  breach  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its decision  is  set
    aside.

41. We remake the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR.

42. The appellant's appeal in reliance upon Art 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

