
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01562/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2013                               |On 1  August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                   Mr U K

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 7 September 1983 and is  a  citizen   of  Sri
    Lanka. He arrived in the United Kingdom on  7  September  2008  with  a
    valid student visa which was extended until 2 February 2013.

2.   It was the case of the appellant that having returned to Sri  Lanka  in
    December 2012 he had been arrested by the CID  on  12  December,  being
    beaten and subjected to torture, being released on  24  December  2012.
    He returned to the United Kingdom  on  27  December  2012  and  claimed
    asylum on 4 January 2013.

3.   The respondent in a decision  made  on  4  February  2013  refused  the
    claim. Thus is it that the appellant  sought  to  appeal  against  that
    decision, which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet on
    11 April 2013.  The determination is a lengthy one but for the  reasons
    as set out therein the Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  in  all
    respects.

4.   Grounds of appeal were lodged against that decision and  permission  to
    appeal was granted on 31 May 2013.   Thus the matter comes before me in
    pursuance of that grant.

5.   Although there are a number of matters raised in the grounds of  appeal
    Mr Hawkin, who represents the  appellant,  relies  primarily  upon  the
    criticism made in those grounds concerning the approach which the Judge
    has taken to the medical evidence.  He invites my attention to the case
    of Francois Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and submits that  the  approach
    taken by the Judge to the medical evidence is  precisely  the  approach
    which was criticised by the Court of Appeal in that decision.

6.   The respondent in a written response of 14  June  2013  contended  that
    the reasoning of the Judge did not fall foul of the principles  as  set
    out in Mibanga.

7.    The  decision  in  Mibanga  is  well  known  to   this   jurisdiction.
    Essentially the Judge made a number  of  credibility  findings  arising
    from the facts of the case.  Having The made such findings of the Judge
    then went on to consider the medical report.

8.   The Court of Appeal held that a fact finder must not reach his  or  her
    conclusion before surveying all the evidence  relative  thereto.   What
    the fact finder does at his or her peril is to reach  a  conclusion  by
    reference only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be negative,
    to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the expert evidence.



9.   It was made clear particularly at paragraph  24 of  the  judgment  that
    where a report is specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor  relevant  to
    credibility, the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of
    the findings on credibility rather than just as an add on,  which  does
    not undermine the conclusions to which he would otherwise come.

10.  The error identified in Miganba was that the adjudicator addressed  the
    medical evidence only after articulating conclusions that  the  central
    allegations made by the appellant were not credible.  The court was  of
    the view that if the Judge had considered  the  evidence  more  in  the
    forefront of her mind, particularly given the nature  and  location  of
    the scarring, that may have led her to reach a different conclusion.

11.  To quote  Lord  Justice  Buxton  in  the  course  of  his  judgment  at
    paragraph 30,

         "The adjudicator's failing was that she artificially separated  the
         medical  evidence  from  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and  reached
         conclusions as to credibility without  reference  to  that  medical
         evidence; and then, no doubt inevitably on that premise, found that
         the medical evidence was of no  assistance  to  her.   That  was  a
         structural failing,  not just an error of application."

12.  Mr Hawkin on behalf of the appellant submits  that  is  precisely  what
    has been  done in this case.  He draws  my  attention  particularly  to
    paragraphs 69 and 77 of the determination.

13.  The relevant passage at paragraph 69 is as follows:

         "For the above reasons I do not find that the  appellant's  account
         of being arrested and detained to be credible. I do not  find  that
         he was arrested, detained and ill-treated  as  claimed.  However  I
         have given consideration to the events as described."

14.  This is a  comment  made  before  the  Judge  deals  with  the  medical
    evidence and having dealt with the medical evidence the  conclusion  at
    paragraph 77 is in these terms.

         "However in  considering  whether  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
         persecution, I do not find that the  fact  that  he  has  given  an
         account of his treatment  to medical personnel is evidence  per  se
         that it happened  as  claimed,  taking  into  account  my  previous
         findings."

15.  He submits that the Judge has made firm conclusions as  to  credibility
    in advance of considering the medical report.

16.  Mr Saunders, on behalf of the respondent, invites me  to  come  to  the
    opposite conclusion.  In that connection he  invites  my  attention  to
    paragraph 57 of the determination in which it is clear that  the  Judge
    is concerned as to the order in which the findings should be made.  The
    Judge says in terms:

         "In coming to my decision I have set down my findings in some  sort
         of order. The order does not indicate that some considerations  are
         more important than  others.   There  are  accounts  given  by  the
         appellant himself in his interviews, the statement,  oral  evidence
         and medical evidence."

17.  He submits that the Judge proceeds in a very detailed determination  to
    highlight matters of concern as they  arise  making  findings  on  such
    matters as she went.  When there are a large number  of  issues  to  be
    considered and factors which require some finding, it is  necessary  as
    the Judge had indicated, to adopt some order to express them. The  fact
    that the medical evidence was not considered first  was  no  indication
    that it was considered last.

18.  In that connection he invites my  attention  to  paragraph  78  of  the
    determination which reads as follows:

         "In respect of the scars, having considered the reports and all the
         evidence, I find that the scars on the back were done deliberately.
          However the appellant's case is so weak that I do not accept  that
         they were inflicted as claimed by the appellant.  Having considered
         the report in the round with all  the evidence and my  findings  in
         respect of this appellant's  credibility,  the  appellant  has  not
         satisfied me on the lower standard of proof that the injuries  were
         inflicted,  whilst detained by the authorities in December 2012."

19.  Mr Saunders invites me to find that that  passage  clearly  illustrates
    that the Judge has followed the advice as set out  in  Mibanga,  namely
    having taken a holistic view to the evidence as a whole but then making
    findings upon that evidence.

20.  Mr Hawkin also relies on that particular paragraph but to the  opposite
    effect, namely that reinforces the point which he wishes to make,  that
    the findings  of  credibility  had  already  been  made  prior  to  the
    consideration of the report.

21.  In the case of Mibanga it was said that a broad  and  not  a  technical
    approach should be taken to  the  adjudicator's  decision  and  to  the
    reasons that he or she sets out.

22.  The  fundamental  issue  is  of  course  that,  having  considered  the
    evidence, how should the findings upon that evidence be structured  and
    expressed.  Is it the case that the Judge first considered  credibility
    and thereafter rejected the report based upon such findings or was what
    the  Judge  was  seeking  to  say  little  more   than   a   sequential
    consideration of matters for and against  the  appellant.   Central  to
    such consideration was  a  medical  report  prepared  by  Mr  Martin  a
    consultant in emergency medicine conducted on 12 February 2013.

23.  The photographs of the appellant's back reveal long  scars  which  were
    said by the doctor to have  been  typical  of  injuries  caused  by  an
    intentional blunt trauma with a long narrow blunt implement.  The scars
    were immature and consistent  with  the  time  span  described  by  the
    claimant of injuries having been occurring in the last few months.

24.  Although the Judge makes  a  number  of  comments  about  that  report,
    comparing and contrasting it with a report of Dr Gram,  it  was  common
    ground that these were non accidental injuries intentionally  inflicted
    upon the appellant. The real issue in the case was  whether  they  were
    inflicted on the occasion that has been described  in  the  process  of
    being tortured or whether the appellant had those  injuries  made  upon
    him presumably in order to further an asylum  claim.   In  Mibanga  the
    question arose as whether the injuries were  accidental  or  from  some
    other cause.  It is not suggested  in  this  case.   It  is  the  sharp
    decision to be made as  to  whether  the  appellant  asked  another  to
    inflict those injuries upon him or whether it was done in the way  that
    he has described.

25.   In order to determine that issue the  overall  context  of  the  claim
    fell to be considered.

26.  Thus leaving aside words and phrases the task which I  have  before  me
    is to consider the determination  and  whether  the  findings  made  in
    respect of the medical evidence  are  more  an  afterthought  to  other
    findings or whether they are integral to the findings.  It seems to  me
    that the comment made by the Judge  herself  in  paragraph  57  fo  the
    determination is helpful.

27.  The evidence has  been  set  out  in  some  detail  in  the  paragraphs
    preceding paragraph 57.   There after the time has come for  the  Judge
    to express herself as to the findings which she makes and why.  She has
    to start somewhere.  She reminds herself that the order  in  which  she
    makes her findings do not necessarily indicate that some considerations
    are more important than others.

28.   At  paragraph  58  she  indicates  that  "There  were  a   number   of
    inconsistencies and implausibilities in his account  which have led  me
    to be unable to rely on the veracity of the  account".  Thereafter  the
    Judge at paragraphs 58, 59 and 60  considers  the  recruitment  of  the
    appellant and his claimed activities with the LTTE and finds that  they
    lacked credibility for the reasons as set out.

29.  At paragraphs 61,  62  and  63  the  Judge  goes  on  to  consider  the
    activities with the LTTE which he claims to have conducted and, for the
    reasons set out therein, concludes that they lack credibility.

30.  The Judge goes on at paragraphs 64 to 66 to  consider  further  matters
    in  connection  with  the  appellant's  circumstances  in  Sri   Lanka,
    particularly to the interview letter inviting him to the  interview  in
    Sri Lanka ,which for reasons as  set  out  in  paragraph  66,  was  not
    accepted as being credible or reliable.

31.  The Judge then moves on to  consider  how  the  appellant  came  to  be
    arrested and questioned, indeed how he came to be  released.   That  is
    considered at paragraphs 67 to 70.  She finds  inconsistencies  in  the
    account such as to lead to a lack of credibility.

32.  Mr Hawkin relies upon the first few lines of paragraph  69  which  have
    already been  quoted, to indicate that by that stage the Judge has come
    to the conclusion that the appellant's account of  being  arrested  and
    detained lacks credibility.  It seems to me however that that is not to
    do justice to the full text of paragraph 69 and in  particular  to  the
    expression "however  I  have  given  consideration  to  the  events  as
    described". The  Judge  then  goes  on  to  describe  those  events  in
    paragraphs 69 and 70, namely his escape and  in  paragraphs  71  to  78
    looks at the medical evidence and finds for various reasons  that  that
    cannot be relied upon to substantiate  the  truth  of  the  appellant's
    account.

33.  The Judge does not stop there  but  continues  upon  the  fact  finding
    programme at  paragraph  79  where  a  photograph  is  considered.   At
    paragraph 80 the nature of the airline ticket purchased was considered.
    At paragraph 89 the issue of the payment of a bribe was considered. The
    circumstances  of  the  time  spent  before  leaving  Sri  Lanka   were
    considered in paragraph 82 and  the  lack  of  an  arrest  warrant  was
    considered in paragraph 83. The  failure  of  the  appellant  to  claim
    asylum upon  arrival  as  undermining  credibility  was  considered  in
    paragraph 84.

34.  I find it significant that in all those aspects the Judge is  making  a
    finding as to credibility.  The findings of credibility did not stop in
    paragraph 69 but continued to be made with reference the evidence  that
    is then being considered.

35.  It seems to me and I so find that the  considerations  of  the  medical
    evidence was conducted as part and parcel of the overall  consideration
    of the many facts and issues.

36.  I find that that is what the Judge said in terms in paragraph 78.

37.  The methodology seemingly adopted by the  Judge is to consider an  area
    of evidence and come to findings upon it and move to another  and  come
    to findings upon that in a structure approach.  The  Judge  however  at
    paragraph 78 speaks of considering the medical report in the round with
    all the evidence and the findings in respect of  credibility.   For  my
    part it is difficult to  see  how  else  the  matter  could  have  been
    differently considered.

38.  The fact that the appellant has noticeable scars is not a matter  which
    stands upon its own right to trump all other considerations  but  falls
    to be considered with other findings taken as a whole.  At  some  stage
    the Judge has to express herself as to those findings and if there  are
    many findings to be made, the order in which they come to be made is of
    importance, as was recognised by the Judge in her self-direction.

39.  It is clear that the Judge has followed  a  chronological  sequence  of
    analysis of the evidence and  of  the  findings.  She  has  placed  the
    medical report within that chronology and has not sought to leave it to
    the end.  It is difficult to imagine how what was  a  complicated  fact
    finding exercise could have been done differently.

40.  It may be that other Judges would deal with the medical evidence  first
    but clearly whether or not the injuries were inflicted at  the  request
    of the appellant to deceive or were inflicted unwillingly upon  him  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities depends very much on the other  findings  in
    the determination concerning  credibility.   The  report  falls  to  be
    considered in the light of all findings and I find that  that  is  what
    has happened in this case.

41.  There are many specific challenges to  the  evidence,  particularly  to
    the fine distinction which the Judge seeks  to  make  between  the  two
    doctors, a distinction which it  is  submitted  was  one  without  much
    difference, namely  whether  the  distinction  between  "immature"  and
    "superficial" was very helpful.  What the Judge does say,  however,  in
    particular in paragraph 74 was that there was no explanation  of  there
    being a relatively small number of scars compared with  the  number  of
    claimed beatings.  It seems to me that it is that comment that is  open
    to be made.

42.  Whether the injuries  were  caused  by  wire  or  by  blunt  instrument
    perhaps is  of  less  significance,  given  the  conclusion  which  was
    accepted by the Judge that these were not accidental injuries but  were
    clearly injuries inflicted on the appellant by another. The  nature  of
    the report does not assist the  Judge  in  determining  how  they  were
    inflicted and by whom. It is  only  by  looking  at  the  circumstances
    overall in assessing the account  given  by  the  appellant  that  that
    answer could  be given.

43.  It  is  a  structured  determination  and  many  issues  are  made  and
    findings upon those  issues  expressed  with  reasons.   It  is  to  be
    acknowledged that certain of the findings  by  themselves  perhaps  are
    less strong  than  others  but  that  cumulatively  there  is  a  clear
    understanding as to credibility overall.

44.  A matter that lies behind the grounds of appeal is the suggestion  that
    the Judge was devoting her efforts to finding  reasons  to  reject  the
    appeal rather than finding reasons to accept it.  Clearly if that  were
    the case it would call into question the quality of  the  judgment  and
    fairness.  It seems therefore, that that is a matter which I must  take
    into consideration in my consideration of the determination.  I do  not
    find that to be reasonably likely in this case. The evidence  is  fully
    and fairly set out and considered in a structured way.   Understandably
    the grounds seek to suggest that an alternative viewpoint can  be  made
    on certain matters but that is not an error of law except  and  insofar
    that the view of the Judge was not Wednesbury unreasonable or  perverse
    in all the circumstances.

45.  I recognise that this is not a straightforward case  and  that  certain
    expressions by the Judge,  particularly  those  at  the  conclusion  of
    paragraph  77,  may  have  given  the  impression  of  a  Judge  having
    formulated certain views as to credibility long before the approach  to
    the medical evidence.

46.  For the reasons that I have set out,  however, I find that it has  been
    a structured approach in which findings of credibility are  being  made
    throughout on the basis of that consideration.

47.  That approach can be shown at paragraph 83 where  the  Judge  looks  at
    the issue of an arrest warrant and states:

         "There are no details of this. He submitted a letter purporting  to
         come from his mother stating  that  the  Kopay  police  came  three
         times, threatening  that  they  would  kill  the  appellant  if  he
         returned.  There is no envelope showing how the letter was received
         from Sri Lanka.  However considered the letter in  the  round  with
         all the evidence and the comments in Tanveer Ahmed, I place  little
         weight on it as evidence that  this  appellant  is  wanted  by  the
         authorities."

48.  It seems to me that that is suggestive of  a  holistic  approach,  that
    the mind is being focussed upon wider  issues  at  each  stage  of  the
    determination. Findings of fact have to be  expressed  and  it  is  the
    order and way in which they are expressed which  is  of  importance  in
    this case.

49.  For the reasons as set out above I do not find that   this  is  a  case
    which mirrors that of Mibanga.

50.  Accepting that some of the factual complaints made in the  grounds  may
    have some substance overall I find that the approach of the  Judge  was
    not unfair or unreasonable and that a proper balancing exercise  as  to
    what the evidence said and how it should be  interpreted  was  properly
    open to be made.

51.  In the circumstances therefore the decision of the Judge  shall  stand.
    The appeal of the appellant is thus dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
